a1 TRANSACTIONS 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


OF 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


JULY TO DECEMBER, 1919 


VOL. XXXVI, PART 


PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
33 WEST THIRTY-NINTH STREET 
NEW YORK, N. Y., U.S. A. 
1919 


= 


CONTENTS 


MEETING AT LAKE PLACID, N. Y., JUNE 27, 1919 
The Dielectric Field in an Electric Power Cable—By R. W. Atkin- 


son. (Lllustrated).. 971 
Problems of 220-Kv. Power ‘Transmission—By A. E. Silver. 
(Illustrated) . 
The Effect of Transient Voltages on Dielectrics T—By FL OW. 
Peek, Jr. (lilustrated) . wee 1137 


MEETING AT LOS ANGELES, CAL., SEPTEMBER 18-20, 1919 
Order and Amplitude of Harmonics in Voltage Wave Forms with 


Indicating Instruments—By Leslie F. Curtis. (Jllustrated).... 1179 
Theory of Probabilities Applied to Failures of Suspension Insula- 

tors—By L. M. Klauber. (Jilustrated).. 1199 
Predetermination of Synchronous Phase Modifier Performance— 

By Hubert V. Carpenter. (Illustrated) . Be TN alee 


California 220,000-Volt—1100-Mile—1,500, 000 Kw. Transmission 
Bus—By R. W. Sorensen, H. H. Cox fae G. E. carpe nue: 
(Illustrated) . . : 1237 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1919 


Transatlantic Radio eae Py E. F. W. Alexanderson. 

(Illustrated) . . bee ee at 260 
Telephone Repeaters—By ‘Bancroft Gherardi and Frank B. 

HE WED UCL USETALEL) Oe en cate: Ure teers Lee i aie its eeMeueee 1287 
Principles of Radio Transmission and Reception with Antenna and 

Coil Aerials—By J. H. Dellinger. (Iilustrated)............... 1347 


MEETING AT PHILADELPHIA, PA., OCTOBER 9-10, 1919 
The Piezo-Electric Effect in the Composite Rochelle Salt Crystal— 


By A. McL. Nicolson. (Jllustrated) . 1467 
The Vacuum Tube as a Generator of Alternating-Current Power— 
By John H. Morecroft and H. Trap Friis. (J/lustrated).. 1415 


The Positions of Atoms in Metals—By A. W. Hull. (J llustrated) . 1445 
A Report on Seas eas saga Induction—By 5S. J. Barnett. 
(Illustrated) . . Diep ieee et Ot Pa een ae eed ee eae LO 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 14, 1919 


Present Limits of Speed and Power of Single-Shaft Steam Tur- 
bines—By J. F. Johnson. (lilustrated)........... 020 cccneree 1515 

Present Limits of Speed and Power of Single Shaft Curtis Steam 
Turbines—By Eskil Berg. (Illustrated) .. 1527 

Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single Shaft Turbo Genera- 
tors—By F.D. Newbury. (lilustrated)..........-....++545. 1537 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, DECEMBER 12, 1919 
Applicability of Automatic Switching to All Classes of Telephone 


Service—By Arthur Bessey Smith. (Illustrated)............. 1567 
The Searchlight in the U. S. Ear ape are B llustrated).. 1605 
Report of Board of Directors. Teens. tok ag Morea WS 8 


MEETING AT SAN FRANCISCO, FEBRUARY 7, 1919 


Unification of the Manual and Automatic Telephone Systems— 
By D.E. Wiseman: (Illustrated) .......6. 020 cc eee ce eweees 1635 


ili 


iv 


MEETING AT PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY 11, 1919 


Some Problems in the Operation of Power Plants in Parallel— 
By. BACs Stones. (lilusirated).<. 2 cats hirakd or keer nate 1651 


PRESENTED BY PUBLICATION ONLY SEPTEMBER 1920 
Some New Formulas for Reactance Coils—By H. B. Dwight. 


(lustrated) O20. te os «ss Sree Sao ee ee 1675 
Inherent Limitations on Transformations Possible by Stationary 
Apparatus—By Joseph Slepian. (lllustrated)................ 1697 


PRESENTED AT CALCUTTA, INDIA, JANUARY 2, 1919 


Starting Conditions of Synchronous Machines—By Alfred Hay and 
EN: Mowdawalla. > (lustratéd) su... 2,..2e os ee ee i713 


Presented at the 35th Annual Convention of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Lake Placid Club, N. Y.,-June 27, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I.E. E. 


THE DIELECTRIC FIELD IN AN ELECTRIC POWER 
CABLE 


BY R. W. ATKINSON 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

The data given pertain particularly to the field of three-con- 
ductor three-phase cables when supplied with three-phase volt- 
age, and are primarily the solution by physical measurements of 
some of the geometric problems of the three-conductor three- 
phase cable. 

Data are given so that it is possible, from electrical measure- 
ments on three-conductor cable, to determine certain specific 
quantities as permittivity, resistivity, etc. of the dielectric of 
three-conductor cables in the same way as can readily be done for 
single-conductor cables, from geometric considerations. 

Also, there is shown the potential and stress distribution in a 
three-conductor cable. The most extensive data are based on 
measurements made with electrodes in an electrically conduct- 
ing liquid, thus simulating a homogeneous dielectric. Also ex- 
ploring electrodes were built into some actual three-conductor 
cable, and measurements were made when three-phase voltage 
was supplied to the conductors. 


N the case of single-conductor cable, by means of simple 
mathematical calculation it is readily possible to cal- 
culate from the fundamental data, the unit quantities of the 
dielectric, such as permittivity, thermal or electrical resistivity, 
the corresponding properties of the cable itself. Also the volt- 
age gradient at the conductor surface or elsewhere in the in- 
sulation may easily be determined in terms of the applied 
voltage and the cable dimensions, or the unit quantities may 
be determined from measurements upon cables. 

Very few corresponding data for three-conductor cable are 
available. The reason for this is the difficulty of the mathe- 
matical work required for this solution and also the complicated 
form of those results which have been obtained. By means 
of electrical measurements in a tank of conducting liquid con- 
taining electrodes representing the conductors and sheath of 
a cable a solution is obtained of many of the problems of the 
three-conductor cable. Also there are reported the results 


971 


972 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


of a few measurements of voltage gradients and of potentials 
in an actual three-conductor cable. 

A great many data are available regarding the effect of strand- 
ing of single-conductor cable upon the gradient and the dielec- 
tric strength. We have added somewhat to the data now 
available on voltage gradient. For various reasons, the prac- 
tical effect on dielectric strength of the increase of gradient 
due to stranding is not in proportion to that increase. Two 
reasons probably predominate: the change in gradient affects 
only a very small thickness of dielectric; it probably usually 
occurs that a better mechanical construction results when 
paper wrappings are applied to a stranded than to a solid con- 
ductor. Further data regarding this matter are of very con- 
siderable importance. 

It is intended to leave most of the application of these data 
for presentation at a later time, though some of the directions 
in which it is useful will be pointed out briefly. It is important 
to distinguish from the beginning between two distinct uses 
for the data given. First, there is the correlation of the capac- 
itance of the cable with the permittivity of the dielectric, 
the resistance of the cable with the resistivity of the dielectric, 
etc. Second, there is the determination of voltage gradient. 
Concerning the first there is a very definite and immediate 
application. The field of application of the second is much 
less definite though actually far more extended. The distribu- 
tion of the voltage gradient in various parts of a cable is one 
of the several fundamental considerations governing the voltage 
rating of the cable. 

Measurements of stresses and capacities, both three-phase 
and single-phase, were begun in the laboratory of the Pitts- 
burgh factory of the company with which the writer is asso- 
ciated, in 1918, under the direction of C. W. Davis. At this 
time were begun the experiments with a tank of liquid, or 
solid electrolyte similar to that hereinafter described, and the 
results obtained were substantially in accordance with the 
results herein published. Later experiments were made at 
Perth Amboy in 1917 and again in the spring of 1919 by the 
writer. In the successive series of tests some of the earlier 
measurements were repeated and the field of study was ex- 
tended, and apparatus was devised which would permit of a 
still more accurate measurement of the stresses than those 


/ 


- 1919} ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 973 


obtained in 1913. This paper deals largely with the actual 
measurements made in the last two series of tests, though a 
brief summary of part of the earliest series is added. 


DETERMINATION OF;CAPACITY RELATIONS 


The determination of capacity relations will first be de- 
- scribed. The experimental work consisted in the measurement 
of resistance between electrodes placed in a tank of electrolyte 
with the electrodes so arranged that they occupied the same 
relative position to each other as do the separate metallic 
parts of a three-conductor cable. 

The terms conductors and sheath will be applied to the elec- 
trodes representing them, and the terms conductor and belt in- 
sulation to that part of the electrolyte occupying the position 
that the conductor and belt insulation would occupy in a 
cable. Also the terms “filler” or “filler space’ will be applied 
to the part of the section corresponding to that part of the 
cable section usually occupied by jute or paper “‘filler.”’ The 
term cable will be applied to the complete set of electrodes 
and electrolyte in any one arrangement. 

The capacity relations were determined in the following 
manner. The conductors and sheath were arranged in their 
relative positions in a wooden tub containing fairly high re- 
sistance water. Measurements were made of the resistance 
between electrodes when they were connected in various ways. 
The following were the connections used. 

1. One conductor vs. another conductor. (Sheath and third 
conductor free). 

2. One conductor vs. two conductors. (Sheath free). 

3. One conductor vs. sheath. (Other conductors free). 

4, One conductor vs. one conductor and sheath. (Third 
conductor free). 

5. One conductor vs. the other two conductors and sheath. 

6. Two conductors vs. sheath. (Third conductor free). 

7. Two conductors vs. sheath and third conductor. 

8. All conductors vs. sheath. 

One of the same conductors was then placed in the center 
of the same sheath, thus forming the equivalent of a single- 
conductor cable, and a reading taken of resistance between con- 
ductor and sheath. The ratio of the resistances for the three- 
_eonductor connections to the resistance of the single-conductor 


974 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


to sheath gave the ratio of capacities for the three-conductor 
connections as compared to the capacity of a single-conductor 
cable having the same size conductor and sheath. The single- 
conductor capacity can easily be calculated. The matter may 
be explained in another manner. The measurement with 
concentric tubes furnishes data for ready calculation of the 
resistivity of the electrolyte. The three-conductor measure- 
ments thus are made with ‘“‘dielectric”’ of known resistivity and 
conductors of known dimensions. 

The above measurements were made with various propor- 
tions of belt to conductor insulation and with various ratios of 
conductor to sheath diameter. 

The resistance measurements were made using single-phase 
60-cycle current, by measuring the applied voltage and the 


Fig. 1—Wrrine Diacram ror DETERMINING Capacity RELATIONS 


energy consumed in the resistance of the electrolyte. For 
the latter measurement there was used the wattmeter connec- 
tion of a Rowland dynamometer, the connection being such 
that the resistance of the fixed coils was included in the measure- 
ments. Approximately two volts from an auto-transformer 
was applied to the tubes, and watt readings were taken for the 
various connections, from which the effective resistance be- 
tween the electrodes could be calculated. The dynamometer 
was calibrated by substituting a variable known resistance for 
the electrolyte. : 

The bottom of the tub was covered with a layer of paraffine 
which prevented end effect due to possible conduction in the 
water-soaked wooden bottom, and also served as a flat level 
bottom on which to rest the tubes. 


\ 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 975 


To check the general accuracy of the method and the ap- 
plicability of the results, a large number of measurements 
were made with concentric tubes. Resistance measurements 
were made between many combinations of pairs of different 
sizes. Also after a measurement was made between such a 
pair of rings, a third one was placed between the two and con- 


TABLE I. 
Ratio thickness belt 
insulation 
Sheath Diam. Cond. Diam. to thickness con- 
ductor insulation 
15:4 in. 3.62 in. 0. 
= = 0.25 
“ “ 1.0 
15.4 2.50 0. 
0,25 
“ “ a m0) 
15.4 1.90 0. 
“ “ 0.25 
“ “ 1 0 
11.8 2.5 0: 
i 3 0.25 
a“ « 120 
11.8 1.9 0. 
“ “ EF 0.25 
“ “ 1 0 
9.9 2.5 0. 
“ “ 0.25 
“ “ 1 #4) 
9.9 1.9 0. 
m be 0.25 
“ “ 1.0 


centric with them and measurements repeated. By this means 
it was shown that the resistances obeyed the theoretical law. 
These measurements showed that end effect actually had 
been eliminated by the initial arrangement. 
Another disturbing factor was detected and eliminated 
through the agency of these tests. The tubes or rings seemed 
to have a high surface resistance possibly due to polarization. 


976 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


Water of fairly low resistivity was being used (a very weak 
saline solution). The resistance was increased. largely by the 
use of distilled water mixed with a very small amount of tap 
water. This however only partly removed the difficulty, 
as the surface resistance, though relatively smaller, was larger 
absolutely, and large enough to cause the results to be slightly 
in error. It was found that if the tubes were thoroughly 
polished with fine sandpaper or emery cloth at sufficiently 
short intervals this resistance could be entirely eliminated. 
In measurements of stress, described later, even a much 
lower surface resistance would have been of importance, 
but careful tests showed it was possible to entirely free 
the results from this type of error. Attempts were made 
to use some rings made of galvanized iron, but this ma- 
terial did not give satisfactory results and was aban- 
doned. 

Measurements were made with the sizes and arrangements of 
electrodes shown in Table I. 

All tubes were of copper and 81% in. high. The readings for 
different connections for any one cable checked the relations 
given by Russell within 2 per cent. 

These relations are as follows; 


TABLE II. 
(1) Capacity between 1 and 2 = 1/2 (a — b) 
(2) - Land 2,3 = 2/3 (4 — bd) 
a—}b 2b) 
(3) A . 1 and S (2 and 3 insulated) = A ae 
a+b 
(a — 6 b 
@) dro acid igo Cotiawatatedy cv NE 
: a 
(5) - ef land S, 2,3 =a 
(6) J “Sand 1, 2 (3 insulated) = 2 (a — b) (a + 2b) 
a 
(7) 1,S,and 2,3 =2(a@ +b) 
(8) 3 “ 1,2,3,and.S = 3 (a +26) 


With each cable, actual measurements were made of all the 
8 combinations, though the tests on No. 1 and No. 5 were made 
with the greatest care. From these, the values of a and } 
were calculated, and following this, the values of the other six 


combinations. Check with measurements was made as in- 
dicated above. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 977 


APPLICATION OF DATA OF CAPACITANCE AND CHARGING 
CURRENT 
The data of these measurements are shown only in the final 
form, Fig. 2. Specifically, Fig. 2 gives the charging current 


CHARGING CURRENT 3 COND. TO SHEATH « 
MILIAMPS PER 1000 FEET PER KV.TO NEUTRAL AT 60~ 
S Fray Ss 


HA EEC BSA Tenor 
| | 


CHARGING CURRENT 2 COND. TO 1 COND. AND SHEATH 
MILIAMPS PER 1000 FEET PER KV.TO NEUTRAL AT 60~ 


NTL Aine z 


ea ] ik 
[ALL 1 ZA 


CHARGING CURRENT 1 COND, TO 2 COND, AND SHEATH 
MILIAMPS PER 1000 FEET PER KV.TO NEUTRAL AT 60~ 
s 2 


Ss 
Ge wn x 


ay | 4) ARIAL A 


MUTUAL OR 3 PHASE CHARGING CURRENT 
MILIAMPS PER 1000 FEET PER KV.TO NEUTRAL AT 60~ 
33 & S 2 
7] J [ i 
geo Y/J MVGt 
SE 04 7 
BS WU 
me UML | 
DET 2 2 
2/59 
0.60 —— } 
NE Se BEL ee aS eS ae a a Ae 
‘ | |S JJ TS { 
«050-1 a, oe SAV a Sf Kh 5 -otehta t 
S S7 ST Ss a deA_» Ss 
ih ie ee = Bo ea ee a pre er ren 
& 
= 0.40 —— 12, 
oF he in Ne 23 te Ne fig eG (gp | tee Bd 
= a iy Ip 
= FI 
FS 9, | Y%y 
‘S 2 a fe eo LNG ZA As ee Met ee dt ee ne ee 
5 030 -—- L Pot 
=> 
2 
[= sate OT ey, 
S 
= 0.20 | -¥ 
= hd 
= 
z Me 
= 0.10 
0 


Oe = 202 04 0.6 0.8 1.0 12 14 16 18 
‘INSULATION THICKNESS CONDUCTOR DIAM. 


Fig. 2—CuHArGING CURRENTS FOR RouND THREE-CoNDUCTOR CABLES 
BasEp on Specific INDUCTIVE CAPACITY OF 3.27 AND A FREQUENCY OF 


60 CYcLEs 
Note:—The abscissa shown applies to all 5 sets of curves. 


_of different sizes of-cable within the range of present practise. 
The values are based on a frequency of 60 cycles and a specific 


978 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


inductive capacity of 3.27, the latter being a somewhat arbitrary 
figure but actually about the normal value for impregnated 
paper.* By the use of constants given below, the chart may 
be used for the determination from unit quantities of the various 
other properties of a three-conductor cable. 

To find microfarads per mile multiply the values taken 
from the curves by 0.014. 

To find insulation resistance of any cable in megohm-miles 
divide the number of megohms resistivity (cm. unit) of the 
dielectric by the value obtained from the curve Fig. 2 and mul- 
tiply by 2.06 « 10-. 

To find the temperature rise across the insulation due to one 
watt per foot of copper J?R in a 3-conductor cable, divide 0.1097 
by the charging current given for three conductors to ground, 
and multiply by the thermal resistivity in watt-cm. units. 
(This is of the orderof 500 to 1000 for most insulating materials.) 

The number of milamperes per kv. to neutral per 1000 ft. 
is also equal to the number of volt amperes per 1000 ft. with 
one kilovolt of three-phase voltage between conductors. This 
forms a very convenient basis for comparison of dielectric loss 
data on cables of different size conductors and different thick- 
ness of insulation and with three-phase voltage supply.. When 
the power factor and specific inductive capacity of any in- 
sulating material are found by tests on one or more cables, the 
three-phase losses in kw. per 1000 ft. on any other cable 
with that insulating material may be determined by multiplying 
the volt-amperes per 1000 ft. as obtained from the chart, by 
the power factor, by the ratio of the specific inductive capacity 
to 3.27, and by the square of the number of kilovolts between 
conductors. , 

It will be observed that though all the capacity measurements 
indicated are with single-phase current supply, data are given 
for three-phase charging current. There is a very simple 
theoretical relation between the three-phase connection and 
single-phase connection No. 1, but we have not relied solely 
upon that. The measurements may be considered as supplying 
information as to charging current of the single-phase connec- 
tions only. By measurements on many cables it is known that _ 
the charging current per conductor with three-phase voltage 
is the same as that for single-phase voltage, connection No. ie 
se ee 


*See Appendix A for instructions as to how to use Fig. 2. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 979 


when the voltage from conductor to sheath is the same in each 
case. (In case of connection No. 1 the third conductor is at 
sheath potential, whether actually connected to sheath, or 
free). . This is the theoretical relation said above to exist. 

Sometimes it is important to know the charging current 
which may flow in the case of a system operating with un- 
grounded neutral, when one of the lines becomes grounded. 
The value of the current is of importance for various reasons 
external to the cable itself. Also, on account of large increase 
in the kilovolt-amperes of the charging current, there will be 
at least a proportionate increase of dielectric losses. These 
particular data are calculated from the other data given by 
the use of the same method Russell gives for calculating the 
relationship of the various single-phase capacities. The data 
follow: 

Let C; and C; represent respectively the single-phase charg- 
ing currents per kv. for one conductor against the other two 
and sheath, and for three conductors against sheath. For 
normal three-phase operation then, the charging current per 
ky. to ground on each conductor is equal to 1.5 C; — 0.167 C3. 
With a grounded conductor the charging current on each of 
the free conductors per kv. is equal to »/0.752 C;?+ 0.027C,?, 
which, for practical purposes is identical with 0.91C;. The 
charging currents per kv. on the grounded conductor and on 

‘the sheath, are, respectively, equal to 0.0866 C; — 0.288 C, 
and 0.577 Cs. With a given operating voltage H’ between con- | 
ductors, the charging current values are therefore as follows: 


For each conductor on normal three- 


phase operation.................H(0,.866C; — 0.096C) 
For each free conductor when one uf the 

conductors is grounded.......... 0.91EC; 
For the grounded conductor ....H(0.866C; — 0.288Cs) 
For the sheath when one of the con- 

ductors is grounded.............. 0.577HC 


The total volt-amperes due to the charging current will be, 
on normal operation ./3 EI, which is equal to 


E? (1.5C; — 0.167Cs) 
‘and when one conductor is grounded _ 
E£2(1.5C; + 0.167Cs) 


980 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


Let us take as an example a thrée-conductor cable with 4/0 
conductors, having 6/32 in. insulation on each conductor and 
6/32 in. on the belt, and at, say, an operating voltage of 11 kv. 


C; = 0.0202 amperes per kv. per 1000 ft. 
C; = 0.0365 amperes per kv. per 1000 ft. 


The charging current with ordinary operation is, therefore, 
0.154 amperes. 

With one of the phases grounded, the charging current for 
each free conductor is 0.203 amperes, for the grounded conduc- 
tor 0.077 amperes, and for the sheath 0.231 amperes. 

The total volt-amperes for the case where the neutral is 
grounded will be 2930, and for the case where one of the con- 
ductors is grounded 4400. On the basis of the same power 
factor, the dielectric loss, as well as the volt-amperes of the 
charging current, in the second case will be 50 per cent higher 
than in the first. 


EXPLANATION OF NATURE OF FIELD WITH THREE-PHASE 
VOLTAGE SUPPLY 


Fig. 4 is presented largely to illustrate the general nature 
of the field in a three-conductor cable upon which three- 
phase voltage is impressed. There are two sets of curves 
shown—one showing lines of equal phase, and the other 
showing lines of equal maximum potential. Each set, to | 
be complete, should comprise the entire 360 deg. of section, 
but, because of symmetry, the 120 deg. included by each set 
gives information which is exactly as complete. The method 
used for the determination of these data is not dissimilar 
to the one previously described in connection with the meas- 
urement of single-phase capacity relations. 

The isophase line shows the phase relations of the poten- 
tials existing in the cable section. Taking the phase of the 
potential of the left hand conductor as the basis of reference, 
and calling it 0 deg., the phase of the potential of the right 
hand conductor will be 120 electrical degrees away. The 
phases of the potentials at all points included by the 120 
geometric degrees between the radii through the centers of 
these two conductors are as indicated by the isophase lines. 
Another way of considering this set of curves is as follows: 
At some instant the 0 deg. line will be at zero potential. 
After the lapse of an interval of time represented by one 


1919} ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 981 


electrical degree, the 1-deg. line will be at zero potential; after 
the lapse of another, and exactly equal interval, the 2-degree 
line will be at zero potential; until, finally, after a total in- 
terval of time, represented by 120 electrical degrees, has 
elapsed, the 120-degree line will be at zero potential. It will 
be noted that the change of phase is much more rapid (that 
is, a given distance corresponds to much more phase change) 


Electrical Degrees 


- 2 8888885 8 
O, 1 = 
Ss 
We 
a, 


K FIELD DISTRIBUTION 3 CONDUCTOR CABLE 


3 8 
<P> 5 


Approximate Proportions 4/9 > 


l1g- 


6 5 
SY _ Isophase Lines 


Lines of Equal Maximum 
Potential in Terms Conductor Voltage 


Fig. 4—Linzs or IsopHasp AND Lines or Equat Maximum PoreEntiaL 


as the radius bisecting the center line of conductors (the 60- 
degree line) is approached. This difference is very pronounced 
at the sheath, less so at the conductors, and, as the center 
of the cable is approached, becomes nearly unnoticeable. 
_ At the very center the variation does not exist at all,—in 
other words, the electrical degrees coincide exactly with the 


geometric degrees. 


982 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


The lines of equal maximum potential are the loci of points 
having the same maximum potential above ground at some 
time during the cycle. These curves should not be con- 
fused with equipotential lines, which represent instantan- 
eous values of potential, and would be, for a three-phase 
field, different at each instant of time. Wide spacing be- 
tween the lines of maximum potential does not indicate low 
stress. Particularly is this true near the position midway 
between two conductors. Here the lines of maximum po- 
tential are rather widely spaced, but points a very short dis- 
tance apart reach their maxima at such different instants 
that the voltage gradient is actually very high. The curves 
for potentials very close to the maximum potential of the 
conductor are circular in form, and. concentric with the con- 
ductor. For lower potentials the lines are no longer circular 
but still completely surround the conductor. Finally, a 
value of potential is reached, below which there are two lines 
for each value of potential,—one coming within the space 
between conductor and sheath, and the other coming en- 
tirely within the space between conductors, and symmetrical 
about the center of the cable. As zero potential is ap- 
proached these lines becomes circles concentric with the 
cable. 

Hither set of curves taken by itself is useful as general in- 
formation, but nothing really definite can be deduced from 
it. The two sets taken together, however, completely spec- 
ify the three-phase field of the cable. By the use of the two 
sets, the potential above ground and its phase relation may 
be found for any point in the cross section of the cable at 
any instant of time. Stress data may be obtained by de- 
termining the voltages and their directions at two points 
which are close together. Stress data thus obtained, how- 
ever, would not be of a sufficient degree of accuracy to be of 
great value. - 

For accurate stress determination it is necessary to meas- 
ure the actual difference of potential between two points, a 
known small distance apart, rather than to correlate the 
voltages between the two given points and a given basis of 
reference. The method used for making these measure- 
ments is described in the next section. The data given in 
Fig. 4 might readily be calculated from the stress data 
recorded later, which were gotten by this method. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 983 


STRESSES AS MEASURED WITH ELECTROLYTE TANK 


The stresses in the three-phase field were measured in the 
following manner: An exploring device was 
made up as shown in Fig. 5. Two steel rods 
about 1/16 in. in diameter and 8 in. long 
were fitted into small hard rubber blocks so as 


to form a frame. Half way between the 
steel rods, and with their plane perpen- 
dicular to the plane of the rods, two 
No. 26 bronze wires were held taut. 
These bronze wires, which were approxi- 
mately 0.25 in. apart, served as the 
potential electrodes. The potential be- 
tween the wires divided by the distance 
apart is quite accurately equal to the 
stress at the point half way between 
them. 

The whole exploring device was freely 
suspended from the tracing point of a 
pantograph, Fig. 6, the drawing point of 
which indicated upon a representative 
drawing the position of the electrodes in 
the tank. 

Fastened. to the exploring device above 
the point where it was suspended was 
fixed a small pointer which indicated upon 
a circular scale the plane of the electrodes. 
The rigging of the pantograph, Fig. 6, was 
so arranged that any line on the circular 
scale always maintained a fixed angle 
with any line upon the representative 
drawing. 

In order to measure voltage between 
these points when they are in the field 
between the three conductors, upon which F1¢. 5—Exrorine 
is impressed three-phase voltage, it is Laue 
_ necessary to measure the magnitude and phase displacement 
with respect to a fixed voltage, and to do so without dis- 


984 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD (June 27 


tortion of the electrical field by the measuring current. The 
second requirement demands that a null method be used, or 
that the instrument for measuring the voltage be of sufficient _ 
sensitivity so that the current which it takes will distort the 
field by a negligible or a very small and known amount. It 
will be seen below that the latter arrangement has been used 
with very satisfactory results. To secure the correct measure- 
ment of the voltage regardless of its phase and to measure 
the displacement, it was first proposed to make use of a phase- 
shifting transformer, but the method to be described proved 
actually simpler in operation and fully as accurate in results. 
The potential across the electrodes was measured by means of 
a Rowland electro-dynamometer, the field of which was sep- 


| This Point is stationary in respect to the Table Exploring Device 
\ a Ne 
oe 


Fig. 6—PantToGRAPu 


arately excited with fifty amperes, as shown in Fig. 7. The 
connections were so arranged that it was possible to obtain 
currents in the field circuit that were equal and ninety degrees 
out of phase with each other by merely throwing a switch (No. 
1). These currents were obtained by taking taps from a 
star-connected three-phase transformer, one side of the switch 
being connected across one leg of the transformer winding 
and the other across approximately 58 per cent of the winds 
ings of the other two legs. The neutral of the transformer was 
grounded. The potential circuit contained 40,000 ohms non- 
inductive series resistance. 

The reactances of the fixed coil and of the auto-transformer 
were compensated by a capacity of 16 microfarads shunted 
across a variable resistance. The compensation was accomp- 


f 


, 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 985 


lished in the following manner: A voltage in phase with the 
voltage across one side of the main field switch was impressed 
on the moving coil circuit. When switch No. 1 was thrown 
on that side, the field current was approximately in phase with 
the current in the potential circuit, and a large deflection re- 
sulted. With switch No. 1 thrown in the opposite direction, 
the field current was nearly 90 degrees out.of phase, and a 
very small deflection resulted. The resistance which shunted 
the condensers was then varied until this deflection was zero. 

To insure that the voltages on the two sides of the switch were 
at the proper 90-degree relation with each other, the circuits 


200 Watt Lamp Bulbs 


93 
Supply Transformer, 3 
dy 

Wy 


q 
49 


Potentiometer 


16 Mfds, 


5 to 50 through 


= 2tol 
2 Auto Transformer 
= Type Transformer 


EA 


Fig. 7—Wirine DiaGRAM oF CONNECTIONS FOR STRESS MEASUREMENTS 


were then interchanged, so that voltage from the other side 
of No. 1 switch was required to produce zero deflection. It 
was found that the phase relation was correct within 14 per 
cent. 

The procedure of the stress measurements was then as 
follows: 

An accurate template was made of thin Bakelite fibre, so 
that the conductors and sheath always maintained the same 
relative position. 

A large circular piece of plate glass was placed in the bottom 

of the electrolyte tub and leveled by means of a spiri 


986 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


level. The electrodes were then placed in the tub and held 
in their positions by the template. The tub was then filled 
with water to within a half inch of the top of the electrodes. 

Three-phase voltage of approximately 50 volts to neutral was 
then applied to the three conductors and the exploring 
device suspended in the water. The measurements were made 
in the field surrounding conductor A, whose voltage was in 
phase with the field current when the field switch (No. 1) 
was closed to the left. 

A full size drawing was then made which exactly corresponded 


Approximate Proportions 


2.5 Tubes 
15.2°Ring 


Fig. 8—Cross-SecTion oF CABLE SHOWING RELATIVE POSITIONS OF 


ConpucTor AND SHEATH AND Points aT WuiIcH STRESSES WERE Mra- 
SURED 


to the template, and various circles and lines were drawn upon 
it as shown on Fig. 8, the intersections of this line indicating 
the points at which it was desired to measure the stress. 

The drawing was then lined up as follows: 

The exploring device was hung somewhere near the center 
of the cable. The two electrode-wires were short-circuited 
and the voltage between these and the sheath was measured 
_ by means of the dynamometer. At exactly the center of the 
cable the voltage to sheath is zero. The electrodes were moved 
about until the dynamometer indicated zero with the field 
switch on either side. The center of the representative drawing 


1919} ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 987 


was then placed exactly under-the drawing stylus and fixed to 
the board with a thumb tack. 

The exploring device was then placed between the two con- 
ductors B and C. At a point exactly half way between these 
conductors the potential to sheath is in phase with the voltage 
of conductor A to ground. The switch was then thrown on 
the side that is out of phase, and the exploring device moved 
until the deflection was zero. The drawing was then swung 
about with its center as an axis until the line half way between 
conductors B and C was under the stylus. The drawing should 
then be exactly lined up with the tank. Checks were made by 
placing the exploring device near one of the eonductors and 
visually comparing its position relative to the conductor with 
the position of the stylus to the conductor on the drawing. 

The circular scale for measuring the direction of the plane 
of the electrodes was then adjusted by measuring stress along 
the 180-degree line. The stresses along this line are in phase 
with the voltage of conductor A. Normal to this line there is 
a large phase change. With the field current out of phase with 
the potential of conductor A the dynamometer will read zero 
only when the plane of the exploring electrodes coincides with 
the 180-degree line. With the stylus on the 180-degree line 
near conductor A the exploring device was turned about its 
axis until the deflection became zero. The zero on the circular 
scale was then adjusted to coincide with the pointer. Check 
was made to insure that the actual position was as above 
stated. 

Readings were then taken by placing the stylus at the in- 
tersections of the radial lines and the circles shown in Fig. 8. 
Readings were also taken at the other points indicated. All 
readings were taken with the plane of the exploring electrodes 
radial to the conductor, except along the 180-degree line, where 
the stresses were also measured normal to the line. 

Stresses close to the conductor were found by measuring be- 
tween the conductor and a No. 40 wire fastened by hard rubber 
cleats 0.125 in. from the conductor. This conductor could be 
revolved in the template and the stresses on all sides of the 
conductor could be accurately compared. 

To take a reading, the stylus was placed on a point on the 
drawing at which it was desired to measure the stress. The 

exploring device was rotated until its electrodes were radial to 
the conductor. Readings were taken of voltage and dynamo- 


988 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


meter deflection with the main field switch first on one side and 
then on the other. This gives both components of the stress 
as compared to the voltage to neutral of conductor A. From 
these readings the stress and phase angle could easily be cal- 
culated. 

Voltage was read across the points indicated on Fig. 7. This 
voltage was frequently compared with the voltage directly on 
the conductors. The three-phase field would have been slightly 
distorted had it been attempted to keep the voltmeter connected 
to the conductor while making stress’ measurements, due to the 
slight additional drop across the series lamp bulbs. 

Calibration of the instrument was made by means of a po- 
tentiometer connected as shown in Fig. 7. A deflection of the 
dynamometer of 8.08 divisions per volt was obtained with 
40,000 ohms series resistance and 50 amperes field current. 
All results were placed on a common basis of field current and 
conductor voltage. 

The deflections along the 180-degree line were plotted, and 

the average of this curve between the conductor and center of 
cable was found. The average voltage between the conductor 
and center of cable was the voltage on the conductor divided 
by the distance. The average deflection divided by the cali- 
bration constant and by the distance between the exploring 
electrodes must exactly check the average voltage. From this 
relation it is possible to find the exact distance between elec- 
trodes. 

We have mentioned the possibility of field distortion due 
to the current taken by the apparatus used for measuring the 
potential difference of exploring electrodes. The effect of 
this upon the measurements described above was investigated 
in the following manner. With the exploring electrodes main- 
tained in a given electric field in the tank, the resistance in the 
metering circuit was varied through a wide range. The recip- 
rocals of the deflections were plotted as ordinates against the 
external series resistance as abscissas. The resultant ‘“‘curve” 
was a straight line cutting the axis at a negative value. This 
value is equal to the effective resistance between. the electrodes 
If this resistance be added to the external resistance in deter- 
mining the calibration constant, we fully correct for what- 
ever small distortion there may occur, for it follows from the 
above that the same voltage is obtained regardless of the 
series resistance, and therefore the value is the same as for 
infinite resistance, or zero current and distortion. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 989 


The calibration of the electrode fastened to the tube was 
found by measuring the stress in a single-conductor concentric 
field. The stress can here be quite accurately calculated and 
the distance between the No. 40 wire and the tube was found 
from the relation that the stress at a point half way between 
the wire and the conductor must equal the deflection divided 
by the calibration constant of the instrument divided by the 
distance between the wire and conductor. The internal resis- 
tance between this electrode and the conductor was found in 
the same way as for the other. The calibration constant to 
be used for any given condition is that given above, which 
applies to 40,000 ohms total resistance, divided by the ratio 
of the actual total resistance of the potential circuit (including 
internal resistance between electrodes) to 40,000. This ratio 
does not exceed 1.02 or 1.03. 

All deflections were put on a common basis by dividing by 
the average deflection between the conductor and center of 
cable along the 180-degree line, thus giving the stresses in 
terms of the average along the 180-degree line from conduc- 
tor to center of cable. 

The two components of the stresses were added at right 
angles, and the angles by which the stresses lead the voltage 
of conductor A to ground were calculated. 

The values were plotted in Figs. 9 to 18 inclusive, which will 
be described in detail below. 

The field between the conductor and the sheath was next 
investigated. The electrodes were placed on the shortest 
line between conductor and sheath, and the deflection read. 
The other two tubes were then removed without disturbing 
the position of the remaining electrode or its voltage to ground. 
The deflection was not changed by the removal of the other 
conductors. Other spacings and sizes of tubes were used, but 
never did the removal of the two tubes change the amount 
of the deflection. From this, we can draw the conclusion that 
the field on the shortest line between the conductor and sheath 

is a single-phase field and is independent of the presence of 
the other two conductors. 

Determination was then made of the effect of the amount 

- of belt upon the stresses on the inside of the cable. Read- 
ings were taken with the tubes so arranged as to simulate 
a cable with equal belt and conductor insulation. Then with- 
__ out changing the position of the conductors, the sheath was 


990 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD (June 27 


replaced by a smaller one. This new ring was even smaller 
than one that would correspond to the sheath of an unbelted 
cable. Most of the readings were then repeated. The change 
in sheaths produced practically no change in stress within the 
portion of the field bounded by the three lines joining centers 
of conductors. 


DESCRIPTION OF Fics. 9 TO 16 
Fig. 9 shows the stresses along the line joining the center of 
conductor A and the center of cable in terms of the average 
stress between the conductor and the center. This average 
represents the total voltage of conductor A divided by the 
distance between the conductor and center of cable. 
In all the following curves, as well as most of the subsequent 


pada 


‘_| Center of Cable 


RELATIVE STRESS 


Surface of Conductor‘‘A” 
| 


1 2 3 4 5 
INCHES FROM CONDUCTOR"A” 


Fig. 9—Srtresses ALONG 180-Drecrer Line or Fic. 8 iN TERMS OF 
AVERAGE BETWEEN ConpDUCTOR AND CENTER OF CABLE (SMALL TUBES) 


Curve A—Stresses in direction of 180-degree line 
Curve B—Stresses normal to 180-degree line 


discussion, stresses are given in terms of this same unit. For 
a round conductor, this distance between conductor and center 
is equal to 1.154 times the conductor insulation (half the 
distance between surfaces of conductors) plus 0.077 times the 
conductor diameter. 

Curve B shows the stress normal to the line of centers of 
conductor A and cable. Here the maximum stress occurs 
near the line joining the centers of conductors B and C. 

Fig. 10 shows the stresses around circle a, which is 1/16 in.. 
away from the conductor. All stresses were measured radial 
to the conductor. It will be noticed that the maximum stress 
occurs on the line which passes through the center of the cable, 
though there is very little difference along the are inclosed by 
the center lines of conductors. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 991 


Another maximum occurs at the outside of the conductor 
on the shortest line between the conductor and sheath. This 
maximum is dependent upon the total thickness of insulation, 
including conductor and belt. 


3 
15} = 5 
a | | @ EN 33 L 3 
atte Hee 
ieee —S, = 
8 lil si 7 [2 
Lv. > . = 
= at x : ie 
= ib lh Oy ats 
g 515] esis 2 | 
- = , = ~KI—- 131.60 
g | Le vals & | 2 
= 8 rN ! i 3 zg z a 
4 | top co pre (2 
2 5} — 8] Pe =. 5 
ae Fe ld a A a ak te loge 
| i] o i= is oe E 
Hh Paar 
10 Ta | mia il (2 
3S t 0.4 
al{*l Pp [| 
15 : : 


Oo 20 


40 60 
POSITION IN DEGREES 


Fic. 10—StTRESSES ON CIRCLE (A) oF Fia. 8 


Curve A—Stresses in terms average stress between conductor and center of cable along 
186-degree line (Fig. 8) 
Curve B—Angle by which stress leads voltage of conductor A to neutral 


Figs. 11, 12, 18 and 14 show the stresses on the various 
other circles shown. It will be noted that as the distance 
between the conductor and circle increases that the point of 


SEnEEEE LCs 
Hf 
iam oat i 


Z 


Cond."*A”& Center of Cah) 


RELATIVE STRESS 


ai 
0 he “ 


Center Line of Conductofrs “A"&"B”\ 


Center Line of 


0 20 40 60 


180 
POSITION IN DEGREES 


: Fig. 11—SrreEsses oN CircLE (B) oF Fic. 8 
Curve A—Stresses in terms average stress between conductor and center of cable along 
180-degree line (Fig. 8) 

Curve B—Angle by which stress leads voltage of conductor A to neutral 
maximum stress moves toward the line joining centers of con- 
ductors. Also the point of maximum phase difference moves 
farther past the line joining centers of conductors. 


992 ; ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD (June 27 


Fig. 15 shows the stresses on the outside of the conductor 
along the shortest line from the conductor to sheath. Thisisa 
single-phase field and the maximum stress can be calculated by 


ANGLE 


RELATIVE STRESS 


180 
POSITION IN DEGREES 
Fig. 12—Strress ALONG CIRCLE (c) oF Fie. 8 


Curve A—Stresses in terms average stress between conductor and center of cable along 
180-degree line (Fig. 8) 


Curve B—Angle by which stress leads voltage of conductor A to neutral 


a formula given by Russell, as shown below. The value ob- 


tained from the curve checks within 2 per cent the calculated 
value. 


Fig. 16 is given in this paper because of its value in sup- 


F 
4 


v 
a 
rs ee | Ls Lotatls 
ana oe hw bo a 8 s 
SLi ¢ 
20; a. 3 ral 3 B = 
e+} Sma Sas Tag 10 
10ks —+ 1 SS 8 
oes a =f 
5 Pies | sil g| 34089 
3 J Ais lg 
2 Ss Sn a: 5 
= te = S 0.6u 
re 4! t & = 
A 2 ‘3 A = 
“te at ie 2 ~ 5 
e+ \e a - ‘a Se am rs04e 
al i = a) 8 A 
: Js oeneoe 
0.2 
0 20 40 60 18 360 


0 
POSITION IN DEGREES 


Fig. 13—Srress ALONG CrrcLe (Dp) oF Fie. 8 


Curve A—Stresses in terms average stress between conductor and center of cable along 
180-degree line (Fig. 8) 


Curve B—Angle by which stress leads voltage of conductor A to neutral 


plying data outside the range of the experimental values. 
The lowest curve gives the maximum stress toward the sheath 
of a three-conductor cable in terms of the average stress 
between conductor and sheath. The middle curve give j 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 993 


for a single-conductor cable the maximum stress in terms of 
the average. The upper curve simply gives the ratio be- 
tween the maximum stress of a single-conductor cable and 
that towards the sheath of a three-conductor cable having 


{. 


20 


Cond.“A"& Sheath 
E10") 


A 
a+ 
‘A’ & Center of Cable! 


10 


mal! 
Ie 


n |Cond.“A”& Sheath 


z al =f 08 
2|| oy = 
z “ S rs) ay g 
S Ef Z iA] 
3 = 3 0.6 
10} is) oy =i & 
3 b= 5 2 ws 
z a St Hose 
| & x! RT bea 
-20\S fet 9 laa 
g fa bes {- | [& 
S| 8 5 ar = 5 02 
a = ne} | a 
| cr 
Sa | 
0 20 40 60 180 360 


POSITION IN DEGREES 


Fig. 14—Srress atone Crrcue (£) or Fia. 8 
Curve A—Stresses in terms average stress between conductor and center of cable along 
180-degree line (Fig. 8) 
Curve B—Angle by which stress leads voltage of conductor A to neutral 


the same size conductor and the same distance between 
conductor and sheath. The ordinates for this last curve 
are obtained by dividing the ordinates of the middle curve 
by those of the lower curve. For the solution of all prob- 


RELATIVE STRESS 


Surface Conductor'‘A” 


3 


0.49 


1 2. 
INCHES FROM CONDUCTOR“A” 


Fig. 15—Srresses atone 0 Decrees (Fic. 8) In TeRMS AVERAGE BE- 
TWEEN CONDUCTOR AND CENTER OF CABLE ALONG 180-DreGrREeE LINE 


(SMALL TUBE) 


lems to which Fig. 16 is applicable, any two of the three 
curves shown give the complete data. 

The middle curve is a graphical solution of the common 

formula showing the relation between maximum and average 


7 


994 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


stress of a single conductor cable. This is 


maximum stress __ | a 
average stress r = log K/r 
r being the radius of the conductor, R the radius of the cable 
(=log) being natural logarithm, = 2.303 times the common 


logarithm). 

The lowest curve is a solution of the rather lengthy for- 
mula given by Russell for the maximum stress between ec- 
centric cylinders. Since we have-found that this maximum 
is unaffected by the presence of the other two conductors 
of a three-conductor cable, we may expect our values to 
check a solution of this formula, and, as stated, have found 


~ 
_ 
Oo 


3.0 


Ratio of Single Conductor Stress to 
Three Conductor Stress 


nd 

Ore 
ya 
f=] 
e) 


SAME TOTAL’ INSULATION 


THREE CONDUCTOR CABLE HAVING THE 


w 
9g 
<x 
c 
ui 
> 
=< 
re 
o 
na 
= 
ce 
wi 
e 
= 
na 
Bul: 
uw 
ox 
= 
n 
= 
— 
= 
= 


eH 
[=] 
So 


28 


TO MAX.STRESS BETWEEN CONDUCTOR & LEAD OF 


04 0.8 12 1.6 2.0 24 
TOTAL INSULATION THICKNESS IN TERMS 
OF CONDUCTOR DIAMETER 


“RATIO OF MAX.STRESS OF SINGLE CONDUCTOR CABLE 


~ 


Fig. 16—Curves SHowina RELATION BETWEEN STRESS OF THREE- 
Conpuctor CaBLE AND STRESS OF SINGLE-ConpUCTOR CABLE AND BE- 
TWEEN MaxIMUM AND AVERAGE STRESS OF HAcH 


they do so. There are several variables in this formula, 
and an exact solution for all conditions would require a series 
of curves. However, the use of the coordinates taken has 
enabled us to plot a single curve which is correct within about 
one per cent for any point. 
_ Fig. 17, Curve A, gives the stresses between the conductors 
on the line joining their centers. Curve B gives the angle by 
which the stress leads the voltage of conductor A to neutral. 
The vector diagram, Fig. 18, was drawn primarily as a 
check on the method used for obtaining stresses. Inciden- 
tally, from it may be determined voltages between a conductor 
or the center of the cable, and any point on the line joining 
the centers of the two conductors. 


Na \Y 


eatOT9 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 995 


The horizontal line A X is drawn to represent the direc- 
tion of the voltage of conductor A to neutral. The are 
A ZBB was obtained by the addition of potential differ- 
ences obtained by the integration of stresses (shown in Fig. 17) 
along the line joining the centers of the conductors A and 
B. 

The potential at a point along the center line A B, ashort dis- 
tance from conductor A, was determined, being proportional 
to the area included below curve A of Fig. 17. The vec- 
tor representing this potential was plotted as the first step 
of the arc A Z BB, Fig. 18, the angle with the horizontal being 
determined by curve B of Fig. 17. Next, the voltage between 
this first point and a second was obtained in the same manner 
and a new portion of arc drawn in. (It will be noted that 


50 eateal ale 2.0 
ai ed I = — 
| B 
40 2| =A 160 
wn 
| Bit pad E f 
er ‘ Olg es) a 
230 x ie ref [lew 
=< “1 ole S — 
Sts J| 3 
20 Ts | za e} 108 
acces 
Ss 
10 be e| iz! 


w 
o 
> 


1 2 
INCHES FROM CONDUCTOR“A” 


Fic. 17—Stresses ALONG Line Joininc’CENTERS OF CONDUCTORS IN 
TrRMSs OF AVERAGE BETWEEN CONDUCTOR AND CENTER OF CABLE ALONG 
180-Dearee Line (15.2 In. RING—2.5 IN. TUBE) 


Curve A—Stresses 
Curve B—Angle by which stress leads the voltage of conductor A to neutral 


the individual sections of arc are actually drawn as chords). 


This process was continued for the entire line between con- 
ductors A and B. 

The vector represented by any of the lines drawn from A 
and terminating on the arc A Z B B is the difference of voltage 
between conductor A and some definite point on the center 
line of A and B, but, since both the abscissa and ordinate of 
the point on the arc are used to represent potential, it is not 
possible to show on that curve alone the location of the point . 
on the center line of A and B. Therefore, the line A B is 
drawn so that if a vertical line is drawn from any point on the 
arc to the line A B, the intercept between A X and A B repre- 
sents the distance from the conductor A to the point the po- 


tential of which is represented by the chord drawn from A to 


996 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


the said point on the are. Thus, the distance B X represents 
the distance of the conductor B from the conductor A, the 
potential of B being represented by A B B. 

Also the line W Y is equal to half the line B X, and thus the 
chord A Z represents the voltage from conductor A to a point 
on the center line of A and B, and halfway between them. 

The line A O represents the voltage between conductor A 
and center of cable, or ground. Also, the voltage to ground 
of any other point is represented by a line to the point O, thus 
BBO represents the voltage to ground of the conductor B, 
as determined by the measurements of stress given in Fig. 17. 


Distance from Conductor "A” 


B 


Fie. 18—Vercror Diagram OBTAINED BY SUMMATION OF STRESSES ALONG 
Ling Jorning Centers or Conpuctrors 


The value obtained from the mathematical integration of the 
stress along the line joining the centers of conductors A and B 
was found to be 1.72 times the voltage of conductor A to ground 
and at an angle of almost exactly 30 degrees from this voltage, 
a very satisfactory agreement with the actual values of 1.73 
and exactly 30 degrees. 

The voltage O Z is found either from this diagram or by the 
integration of the stresses along the line joining the center 
of the cable and the mid-point of the line joining the centers 
of conductors B and C. The values obtained by these two 
methods are 0.325 and 0.355, respectively, in terms of 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 997 


voltage of conductor A to neutral, and at an angle of 60 
degrees from that voltage. 

The voltage from conductor A to the point midway between 
conductors A and B on the line joining their centers is the 
chord A Z, and is equal to 0.87 times the voltage of conductor 
A to neutral, and is at an angle of 18.6 degrees from this voltage. 

Data given thus far have applied to measurements on a single 
“cable.’’ Similar measurements were taken of stresses with’ 
a different size of conductor. A sheath 15.2 in. in diameter 


1.0 


ors B& C\ 


oO 
o@ 
Se ea 
torA'! 
ors 


f Condlic 


Oo 
foal 


RELATIVE STRESS 


——-. 


e 0 


04 


Surface 


0.2 


RELATIVE STRESS 


% 1 2 3 4 5 6 () OF GSOo melon 
DISTANCE IN INCHES FROM CONDUCTOR‘A” INCHES FROM CONDUCTOR"A" 

Fig. 19—Srressres atone 180- Fig. 20—Srtresses AxLone 0- 
Deeree Line In TERMS AVERAGE Decree Linge IN TERMS AVER- 
BETWEEN CoNDUCTOR AND CEN- AGE BETWEEN CONDUCTOR AND 
TER OF CABLE (LARGE TUBES) CENTER OF CaBLE ALONG 180- 
Curve A—Stress along 180-degree line Dearee Line ror 15.2 1n Rina 


Curve B—Stress normal to 180-degree line AND 3.82 IN. TUBES 
( 


was used and 5.82 inch conductors were so placed that the con- 
ductor and belt insulation were equal. 

Not as many readings were taken for this “cable,” Enough 
were taken however to show that the maximum stress occurred 
at the conductor on the line towards the center of cable and to 
determine stresses at the points of maximum importance. 
Stresses were taken all along the lines joining be center of 
conductor A and center of cable. - 

In Fig. 19, curves A and B, respectively, are shown the 
stresses along (parallel to), and normal to, the line joining 
center of conductor and center of cable. 

Fig. 20 shows the stresses on the shortest line between the 


~ 


998 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


conductor and sheath. The maximum of this curve checks 
within 2.5 per cent the value calculated from Russell’s formula 
as shown in Fig. 16. 


USE OF SOLID ELECTROLYTE 


In the Pittsburgh experiments of 1913 and 1914 use was made 
of solid as well as liquid electrolytes. Cable cross sections were 
’ prepared of solid electrolytes with cast-in exploring electrodes 
in which the specific resistivity of the electrolyte occupying 
the filler space differed from that of the electrolyte representing 
the conductor and belt insulation. The extreme limit of 
range of resistivity for the fillers was obtained first, by using 
solid insulators, and second, by making the fillers of copper. ~ 

Also, thermometers were cast into the solid electrolyte so. 
as to note the change in temperature in the cross-section due 
to the energy loss. One of the solid electrolytes used melted | 
at a relatively high temperature and it is of interest, in passing, 
to note that after three-phase voltage had been applied for a 
short period to the tank, filled with such solid electrolyte, 
all of the electrolyte in the triangle formed by the straight lines 
connecting the centers of the conductors became molten, thus 
giving a direct analogy to the over-heating of ordinary 3-core 
cable, as indicated by the characteristic charring of the central 
filler space, when going to destruction by overheating under 
three-phase voltages. This phenomenon has been noted by 
Mr. C. W. Davis as early as 1911. 

The characteristic charring of three-core cable was observed 
by Hochstadter on what we understand was mineral base 
compound about the same time, although not reported to us — 
until about 1913. It has also been noted on vegetable com- 
pound cable by Clark and Shanklin and by Bang and Louis, and 
reported by them in the A. I. E. E. TRANS. 1917, p. 431 and 447 
and for some time engineers of operating and manufacturing 
companies have generally recognized. this condition. 

The electrolyte experiments of 1913-1914 were part of an 
investigation into the causes of this type of failure of three- 
core cable. Supplementing those experiments, covering the 
same period approximately, a comprehensive set of dielectric 
loss measurements were made at high and low voltage, 
both single-phase and three-phase, on mineral compound and 
vegetable compound three-core cable. As a result of these 
experiments, the opinion was reached that the arrangement 


= Ue) ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 999 


of conductors and insulation in any ordinary three-core cable 
is such as to make it inherently weak, the tendency of the center 
to overheat being increasingly difficult to overcome the higher 
the operating voltage. 

From the user’s standpoint especially, however, it is very 
desirable to retain, insofar as possible, the advantages and econ- 
omy resulting from having the three conductors under one lead 
sheathing rather than the more costly alternative method of 
using three single-conductor cables, each separately lead cov- 
ered, with attendant disadvantages of extra cost due to the 
increased amount of lead sheathing, and the larger ducts or 
greater number required. 

M. Hochstadter (London Electrician, May 19, 1916) has 
described a way to avoid the disadvantages of the ordinary 
three-conductor type of cable by converting the cable into what 
is substantially three single-conductor cables without the at- 
tendant disadvantages of disproportionate increase in cost. The 
conductors may be made sector shaped so that all the space 
within the single lead sheathing is economically used, thus secur- 
ing a still further gain in economy, since it is obvious that three 
single-conductor cables separately sheathed could not conven- 
iently be made in sector form and installed in such a way as 
_ would permit of their fitting together in order to occupy mini- 

mum duct space. The thin metal foil or tape suggested by 
M. Hochstadter is preferably made of copper, thus securing 
the most effective dissipation of heat. 

As part of the characteristic charring of the central portion 
of a three-conductor cable of normal type is due to internal 
corona, it is obviously desirable to prevent this as far as possible, 
and what appears to be one of the most effective methods of 
preventing the occurrence of minute air or gas spaces in the 
highly stressed portions of cable dielectric is the suggestion 
of H. W. Fisher in 1911 to apply the previously dried and 
impregnated tape to the conductor while the conductor itself 
is submerged under oil. The adoption of this method should 
make internal corona, or ionization, of relatively little import- 
ance-even at the highest voltages likely to be reached for many 
years to come. 

Numerous tests were also made with the electrodes repre- 
senting the conductors, of different shapes. Certain advan- 
tages were found as regards distribution of stress and dielectric 
loss with a conductor of approximately semi-circular form with 


\ 


1000 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


slightly rounded corners, and with the approximately flat side 
toward the sheath. It is conceivable that sucha special form 
would be available in special cases where large conductors 
are involved, but on account of the constructional difficulties 
and larger diameter of this form, a modified sector conductor 
is the most suitable practical alternative for regular use. 
Referring again to the use of solid electrolytes, it may be 
of interest to report the use of such electrolyte in the form of 
pieces simulating simple forms of solid insulators, such as those 
made of porcelain, in use in certain types of cable terminals. 
By immersing such molded solid electrolyte in liquid electro- 
lyte of higher resistivity there was obtained a direct represen- 
tation of a porcelain insulator surrounded by air, and we were 
thus enabled to plot the equi-potential lines from the point where 
they leave the surface of the solid electrolyte. This method 
may be of interest to the designers of porcelain insulators, 
although complicated forms may prove themselves difficult 
to cast and make self supporting without undue deformation. 
Using the same electrolyte method, and following the analogy 
of heat flow, isothermal lines for various shaped conductors 
in three-conductor cables were plotted in the Pittsburgh ex- » 
periments of 1918-1914. These show that under the J?R loss 
alone the center of a three-conductor cable will be lower in 
temperature than the temperature of the conductors by a 
small relative amount. In a cable using three sector shaped 
conductors, less relative difference was found between the 
temperature of the center of the cable and the temperature 
of the conductors than where round conductors were used. 
Thornton has explored the field of a three-conductor cable 
by means of the Hele-Shaw method. He suggested the exis- 
tence of a triple-frequency field at the center of the cable. 
In the same series of Pittsburgh experiments data were also 
secured regarding this point, and also later in measurements 
with actual cable, at Perth Amboy. All of the measurements 
made failed to show any such effect as described by Thornton. 
It is to be expected, however, that. measurements carried on 
with cable at voltages above the ionization point would 


show pronounced harmonics in the potential wave of stresses 
at different points. 


MEASUREMENT OF STRESSES IN ACTUAL CABLE 


For this test a specially constructed cable was used. This 
cable was in nearly every way like a commercial three-con- 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1001 


ductor cable with round conductors. Its main differences 

‘were that at definite points very thin wires (No. 40 A. W. G.) 
were laid parallel to the conductor, and that the cable was 
assembled without “‘lay’’. 

The cable consisted of 4/0 stranded conductors with 
9/32 in. of paper insulation on each conductor and 5/82 in. 
on the belt. The separate conductors were made up as follows: 
Insulation was first applied to a thickness of 1/32 in. Eight 
No. 40 wires were then placed at equal intervals around the 
conductor, and parallel to its axis. 'The same was done after 
a total insulation thickness of 3/32 in., 6/32 in., and 9/82 
in, had been applied. This madea total of 32 wires per conduc- 
tor, or 96 for the cable. Immediately over each set of eight 
wires two layers of paper were applied by hand. The rest 
of the insulation was applied in the ordinary manner by machin- 
ery. 

A three-conductor sector cable with the same size conduc- 
tors and the same thickness of insulation as the other was also 
constructed in exactly the same manner. The number of 
No. 40 wires per layer, however, instead of being eight were 
only six,—one at each corner of the sector and one half-way 
between each pair of corners. The total number. of wires 
for each conductor were then 24, and for the cable 72. 

The small wires were placed where they were so as to furnish 
a means of measuring the potentials at these points. Here- 
after, then, they will be termed “potential wires.”’ The points 
at which the potential wires were placed will be termed “‘po- 
tential points.” The three conductors of the cable will be desig- 
nated as I, II, and IIJ. The four layers of potential wires of 
each conductor, starting at the layer nearest the conductor, 
will be called, respectively, A, B, C, and D. 

Potential data were obtained, in both the circular and the 
sector cable, on all four rows. Measurements of voltages on 
A and B were taken between each potential wire and its con- 
ductor, while values on C and D were taken between potential 
wire and sheath. Chiefly because data on B and C would give 
relatively little additional information, only results gotten on 
A and D are given in this paper. 

The problem of measurement of the voltage of the potential 
wires in the three-conductor cable with three-phase voltage 
applied is quite similar to that encountered in the measurement 

of potentials and stresses in the electrolyte tank. As before, 


x 


1002 ATKINSON: TDIEHE LECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


there is the problem of measuring voltages of various unknown 
phase relations. This was accomplished in a manner somewhat 
similar to the one previously described. The current which 
could be taken without field distortion was much smaller, so 
small that only a null method seemed available. Also, it was _ 
desirable to keep the detecting apparatus at ground potential. 


Fig. 21—Dracram or ConNECTIONS FOR DETERMINATION OF POTENTIAL 
INSIDE oF CABLE 
S—three-phase supply 
Ti— three-phase transformer supplying cable 
Tz and Ts—single-phase balancing transformers ~ 
V—Voltmeter for T: 
C V—crest voltmeter for Te and Ts 
Ci and C2—condensers used with C V 
D—detecting device 
K—rectifier (Kenotron) 
R—20 megohm resistance shunting K 
A S—Ayrton shunt for G 
G—d-c. galvanometer 
P—potential wire 


This explanation will make clearer the reasons for the methods 
adopted. 

Fig. 21 shows the diagram of the connections used. The 
current supply was taken from a 40 kv-a. three-phase trans- 
former, the primary being delta connected. The secondary is 
star connected and gives a rated voltage of 95. There are taps 
on each leg, of 21 per cent and 42 per cent of the full volta6e. 
The delta primary of the three-phase high-tension transformer, 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1003 


T,, was connected to the 42 per cent taps, and as the normal 
rating of this transformer per phase is 440 to 25,000 volts, this 
gave a voltage per phase of approximately 2300, ora voltage 
between conductors of about 4000. This voltage was impressed 
on the cable. 

The balancing voltages were obtained from two single-phase 
transformers, T, and T';, each equipped with a regulating trans- 
former, thus allowing a selectivity of voltage. The primary of 
T, was connected to the 21 per cent taps of the two phases of 
the supply which supplied phase A of transformer T,, thus 
putting T, in phase with phase A. The primary of 7’; was 
connected between the 42 per cent tap of the third supply 
phase and neutral, thus making the voltage of 7; 90 degrees 
away from that of T,. The normal rating of T, is 440 to 62,500 
volts, with a capacity of 300 kv-a. There are 480 steps in the 
regulator, so that, with a primary voltage of about 20 volts 
there are six volts per step. The normal rating of T; is 440 
to 50,000 volts, with a capacity of 200 kv-a. There are 400 
steps in the regulator, so that, with a primary voltage of about 
23 there are about seven volts per step. The secondaries of 
T, and T; were connected in series, the free end of T'; being 
connected to one of the phases or to the neutral of 7, and the 
free end of JT; grounded. TJ is not grounded at any point, so 
that the potential above ground of the phase of 7, or of the neu- 
tral, to which the large transformers T, and 7’; are connected, 
is governed entirely by the voltage of these. This arrangement 
enables the detecting device to be always near ground potential. 

To determine the potential at any point P., proceed as 
follows: Connect the potential wire at P to the detecting device. 
Connect the conductors of the cable to 7; and the balancing 
transformers to either the conductor of P or to the sheath. 
Raise the voltage of T, and 7; in the proper direction until the 
detecting device shows minimum deflection, which indicates 
that P isat ground potential. The voltage produced by T, and 
T; will then be accurately the difference of potential, in direc- 
tion as well as in magnitude, between P and its conductor or 
sheath. This being a null method, the stress distribution, 
when balance is obtained, is in no wise altered by the measuring 
apparatus. 

The detecting device consisted of a rectifier for which a 
100,000-volt, 0.1-ampere kenotron was used in connection 
with a galvanometer equipped with an Ayrton shunt. The 


1004 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


rectifier was shunted by a water resistance of the order of 
twenty megohms. ‘The rectified current is necessarily uni- 
directional, and so the proper balance was considered obtained 
when an increase or decrease in voltage on either T, or 7’; in- 
creased the deflection. The minimum reading of the gal- 
vanometer was not zero, due doubtless mainly to the thermo- 
electric (Seebeck) effect between the plate and filament of 
the kenotron, but this did not alter the point of balance. 

Voltages were measured as folows: The voltage of T; was 
measured by a voltmeter connected to a tertiary coil of the 
transformer. The voltages of JT, and of the combination of 
T, and T;, were measured by means of a crest voltmeter. 
By separate measurement the voltage per step of the regulator 
of T’; was found to be quite uniform, and its value determined. 
The voltage of 7’; was therefore calculated from the number of 
steps on its regulator. Thus, the actual potential difference, 
as well as its two components, was accurately measured. 


ACCURACY CHECKS ON MEASUREMENTS ON ACTUAL CABLE 


To determine what error, if any, was due to end effect, the 
connector of the rectifier was brought within a quarter of an 
inch from the end of the cable and the full voltage applied to 
the cable by means of T';, 7. and 7; being at their zero position. 
The galvanometer showed a deflection which would be ec used 
by less than one step on either controller, indicating that the 
maximum error is less than 2 per cent in the measurement 
of the smallest voltage read. 

The sensitivity of the detecting device was such that after 
balance was obtained, an unbalance of one step (6 or 7 volts) 
on either transformer would definitely increase the galvano- 
meter deflection. 

The voltages on T, and T; should be at right angles to each 
other. To check this point, both transformers were raised to 
the same potential and readings taken of the separate voltages 
and of the hypothenuse voltage. This check was made at 
several different values with the reversing switches of both 
transformers in the up position, with both in the down position, 
and with one up and the other down. 

The measured. and calculated values checked exactly in some 
cases, and in others varied by as much as 8 per cent. This 


variation probably accounts for some small poe angle errors 
in the results. 


wy 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1005 

A_single-conductor cable was prepared with potential wires 
in the same manner as the three-conductor cables, and was sup- 
plied with voltage from phase A of 7,, JT, and T; were used 
as balancing transformers, and the potentials determined at 
various distances from the conductor. In the ideal case T, 
should have been exactly in phase with phase A, and so the 
balance point should have been with zero voltage on T;. How- 
ever, 7; was required to the extent of changing the phase of 
T, about 14% degrees on all the measurements. Correction 
was made for this error in plotting the curves. 

‘The balancing transformers were connected successively with 
the three phases of T,, the balancing transformers being 
grounded directly and 7, being grounded through a condenser 


a 


Line Between Condfuctor I] & Sheath _ | 


Ee 


Sheath 


Te 


| 
| 
| 
fe 


ofrs| of Conds, “Te TIT? —} 


PHASE ANGLE, DEGREES 
wm 
between Conductor 


o 


| 
np 
Oo 


Line | between|Centers|f Cond.“‘I& Cable 


A-| Potential 
-B-|Phase: 
as 
90 180 270 
POSITION- OF POTENTIAL POINT, DEGREES 
Fig. 22—Puase AnD Porentiat AT Layer A, Conpucror I, CircuLar 
ConpucTor CABLE 


D.P. BETWEEN POTENTIAL POINT & CONDUCTOR IN 
PERCENT OF D.P. BETWEEN CONDUCTOR & SHEATH 


Shortest Line 


0 45 


and the detecting circuit. The voltages were then balanced 
and readings taken on V and CV. These readings checked 
each other as closely as the instruments could be read. 

After the three-phase tests were performed, the cable with 
circular conductors was dissected, and one of the insulated 
conductors wrapped ‘with foil, and measurements were made 
with single-phase on layer A of potential wires. Calculation 
from values thus gotten indicated these potential wires to be 
0.031 in. away from the conductor. Micrometer measurements 
indicated this distance to be 0.032 in. The dissection also 
showed that the potential wires were quite uniformly spaced 


around the conductor, but that they were not absolutely parallel 


with its axis, the rotation in the entire length being not more 
than half the distance between wires. 


1006 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD {June 27 


Dissection of the sector cable showed layer D of potential 
wires to be placed quite closely to their proper position, but 
that layer A was altogether misplaced. The actual positions 
were therefore accurately measured and used in Fig. 265. 
Micrometer measurements indicated the insulation thickness 
between the conductor and the first layer of potential wires to 
be 0.325 in. at the small diameter and 0.335 in. on the long 
diameter. 

The curves, Figs. 22 to 25 inclusive, are, as far as possible, 
drawn from values obtained on one conductor only. The 
circles indicating the points for this conductor have been filled 
in solid. On all curves except Fig. 22 points also have been 
shown which were gotten on the other conductors. 


L| 


E 
Heath 


°& Sheath 7] 
! 

> 

oO 


ween |Cond.1 


— 
oO 
= 


Shortest Line between\Cond{“I’& S 


Cerlterslof Conds. "I" &“Il" 


w 
o 


D.P. BETWEEN POTENTIAL POINT & SHEATH IN PER- 
CENT OF D.P. BETWEEN CONDUCTOR & SHEATH 


nN 
Oo 


a 


= 


POR FE SS 
° 


a 


HLine/between— Centers of Conds."‘I)'&“ III” 


So ee 
A- Potential] 
—=| 8 = Phase 

ee | 


Shortest Line Yet 


uz 
Line between 


:— 
ee 


L 


1 


w 
ron) 
oO 


5 30 180 70 
POSITION OF POTENTIAL POINT, DEGREES 


Fig. 28---PHase AND Potentiat aT Layer D, Conpuctor I, Crrcunar 
ConpucToR CABLE 


In the case of the circular conductor cable, the relative posi- 
tions of the potential points were found by dissection, but the | 
exact, location of the group with reference to a fixed line of 
the cable, such as the line between conductor center and cable 
center, was found from preliminary plotting of the phase 
measurements. It was known that the zero of the phase curve 
must occur at the point nearest the center of the cable and 
again at the point nearest the lead. For the final curve the 
reference point of scale of abscissas was so taken that the phase 
curve would pass through zero on the said line. 

In the case of the sector cable, the relative positions of the 
potential points were, as in the other case, found by dissection. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1007 


However, since the shape of the cable furnishes a reference 
point, there was no difficulty in determining the reference point 
of the scale of abscissas from the measurements of the dissected 
cable. The zero of the phase curve is here seen to pass zero 


we 
So 


Shortjest Line between Chpnd.}'1” 
—}—}—+ & Sheath—\— 


w 
i=) 


[=] 


a 
So 


ny 
(=) 


t Cor 


PHASE ANGLE, DEGREES 


ny 


——}-—— 


ntial 


Cond, “I''& [Sheath 


—}. heares: 


Line|through 


~,[Line/through Cornler of Cond.“I’ 


D.P. BETWEEN POT. POINT & COND. IN 9% 
OF D,P. BETWEEN COND. & SHEATH 


bees 50 as 100 
POSITION OF POTENTIAL POINT IN PERCENT OF PERIMETER 


Fig. 24—Puase anp PorenTiAL at Layer A, Conpucror I, Sector 
CABLE 


on the line of centers of conductor and cable, as was assumed 
in the case of the round conductor. 

Curves were drawn of phase and of potential on layers A 
and D of both the circular conductor (Figs. 22 and 23) and 
sector (Figs. 24 and 25) cables. The ordinates of the phase 


60 + 
th 


& Cable 
4 
' 


{| 
ia 


“nearest Cond.“1I" 
w 


4 
ie 
ip 


1 
P= 
oOo 


D.P. BETWEEN POTENTIAL POINT & SHEATH IN PER 
CENT OF D.P. BETWEEN CONDUCTOR & SHEATH 


WT" & Sheath 


id 


"Comer fof Cond."I"nearest Cond." IIT’ 


Ww 
o 


| 

Centers of | Cond “J 
| 
2 


nm 
S 


PHASE ANGLE, DEGREES 
2 


nN 
oO 


AN S 
‘ Shortest Line between 


oC 
Line through 


Bp 
= 
i} 


- Potential 
- Phase 


Line through Corner of} Cond." 


Line between 


1 


s 


Shortest Line between Con 


ant 


o 


25 50 
POSITION OF POTENTIAL POINT IN PERCENT OF PERIMETER 


Fig. 25—PuHaAse AND PoTENTIAL AT Layer D, Conpucror I, Srcror 
CABLE 


curves are in electrical degrees, positive and negative; positive 
representing out of phase in one direction and negative in the 
other, asin similar curves from the tank experiments. The 
ordinates of the potential curves are in per cent of the voltage 
- between conductor and sheath. The abscissas of the curves on 


7. 


1008 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


the circular-conductor cable are in circular degrees, starting 
with 0 degrees at a point nearest the sheath, thus making the 
point nearest. the center of the cable 180 degrees. In the case 
of the sector cable the zero is also taken at the point nearest 
the sheath, but the abscissas are in per cent of the perimeter 
at the layer of potential wires concerned. These curves should 
be symmetrical about their middle point, and any slight 
discrepancy may be attributed to non-symmetry of the three 
phases. 


EFFECT OF STRANDING UPON STRESS 


The data here recorded on the effect of stranding on voltage 
gradient are not extensive but supplement previous data. 
Tests were made on a seven-strand and a nineteen-strand con- 
ductor, that is one containing six wires and one containing 
twelve wires in the outer row. The ratio of the stress in the 
case of the stranded conductor to that with a round conductor 
of the same area of section and with the diameter of the sheath 
the same in each case, is given to compare with the value de- 
termined mathematically by Jona. The value 1.23 found for 
seven-strand conductor checks exactly with the value given by 
Jona. We find the same value for the 19-strand, though Jona 


states the value will be larger, but he does not solve his equation 
for this case. 


TABLE II] 
SHOWING EFFECT OF STRANDING UPON VOLTAGE GRADIENT 


No. of Strands Insulation thickness Ratio of stress with stranded con- 
of conductor Conductor diameter ductor to that with round conductor 
A B 
7 1.47 1.23 1.26 
te 0.50 1.23 1.18 
19 1.07 Leek 1,22 
19 0.71 1.22 1.20 


A. Same outside diameter over insulation, area round solid equal to total area of strands. 


B. Same outside diameter over insulation, same diameter of solid and stranded conduc- 
tor. 


The most generally useful basis of comparison is the ratio 
of the stress of the stranded conductor to that of a round con- 
ductor of the same outside diameter and with the same insula- 
tion thickness. These values are given in the last column of 
the table. Little difference between the two styles of a strand- 


“USI ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1009 


ing is apparent, though the data are not on exactly the same 
basis. On ordinary thicknesses of insulation the increase of 
stress due to stranding is roughly 20 per cent. For very thick 
insulation relative to conductor diameter, the increase is greater, 
and for thin insulation the increase is less. 

Whitehead has shown that the effect of twisting the strands, 
as is actually done in cable practise, is to decrease the effect of 
stranding upon the gradient. Though his tests were with’ 
insulation thicknesses very great as compared to cable insula- 
tions, doubtless there is an important effect of this kind for 
thinner insulation. The data here given are upon untwisted 
strands, and should be supplemented by determination of the 
effect of twisting. Data here given are for single-conductor 
cables in a single-phase field. 


PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF DATA 


A brief outline of the manner in which the accompanying 
data may be applied to important problems is given. 

The application of the resistance in electrolyte tank measure- 
ments has been indicated in the data given in connection with 
Fig. 2. This curve has been in use for some time in our 
laboratory and serves admirably to link together measurements 
of capacity, energy loss, etc. on different sizes, three-conductor 
cable as well as single-conductor cable. An interesting and 
important fact has been learned by the comparison thus allowed 
between the permittivity of the dielectric of three-conductor 

-and single-conductor cable. It has been found that there is a 
definite difference, greater than the possible error of the curves, 
in the direction of lower permittivity for the dielectric of the 
three-conductor form. This is attributed to a low permittivity 
of the filler material in actual three-core cable as compared 
with the uniform permittivity of the dielectric occupying the 
filler spaces in the tank of electrolyte, as we know that the filler 
of an actual cable may have lower permittivity than the paper 
on the conductor, under certain conditions. A more compre- 
hensive investigation of this has been begun. The bearing 
of this upon the stresses in the cable is apparent and will be 
discussed further. 

-The application of these data to temperature rise measure- 
ments of three-conductor cable is similar and of corresponding 
convenience and value. 

A table is given comparing the stresses of a three-conductor 


1010 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


cable under three-phase voltage with the stresses of single-con- 
ductor cables of certain specified insulation thicknesses. ‘Tests 
are reported on two sizes, one with relatively thin and one with 
relatively thick insulation. It will be observed that the 
maximum stress next the conductor, toward the cable center, 
is so close to that in a single-conductor cable having the same 
insulation thickness as the distance between conductor and 
center of cable, that quite accurate calculation of the maxi- 
mum stress of any three-conductor cable may be made readily 
from these data. 


TABLE IV.—STRESSES AT IMPORTANT POINTS IN SECTION 


Yr A B Cc 
Max. stress at conductor surface on 0.625 g Nar eo 1.01 2.65 
line toward center of cable.............. 0.288 1.43 1.04 1.88 
Stress at center of cable.............. 0.625 0.65 — 0.385 1.01 
0.288 0.685 0.496 0.902 
Stress at mid point between conductors 0.625 0.92 0.545 1.42 
on center line of conductors in direction of 0.288 1.18 0.855 1.55 
Genter Line t¢, ces siascaranyadaeisis teres 4s. rece 
Stress at edge of conductor insulation 0.625 Ors, 0.455 1.19 
on center line of conductor and center of 0.288 0.83 0.602 1.09 
Caller canis ofc tess stew hele aruthate mio ¢ 
Ditto but normal to thecenterline... . 0.625 0.51 0.302 0.790 
0.288 0.52 0.277 0.685 


A. Stresses in terms of average stress between conductor and center of cable along line 
joining these points. 

B. Stresses in terms of maximum stress of single-conductor cable having the same in- 
sulation as the distance between the conductor and center of three-conductor cable. 


p This distance\is equal to 1.154 times the conductor insulation plus 0.077 times the con- 
ductor diameter. 


C. Stress in terms of minimum stress of single conductor having same insulation as B. 
r. Ratio of conductor insulation to conductor diameter. 


Data have been given showing the agreement between values 
determined from Russell and those measured, for maximum 
stress between conductor and sheath. A curve (Fig. 16) con- 
stituting a solution of Russell’s formula is given. 

Stresses at and near the center of the cable and at various 
points on the surface of the conductor insulation are seen to 
bear a fairly definite relation to the stress at the sheath of the 
same single-conductor cable. At the center, the stress is quite 
closely the same as that at the sheath of the single-conductor 


cable, though the stress at the other points is considerably 
greater. 


1919 | ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 101] 


When the stresses of the three-conductor cable are compared 
with those of a single-conductor cable, it should be remembered 
that in many parts of the three-conductor cable there is not a 
simple alternating field, but it may be considered to consist of 
two alternating fields superimposed at right angles and produc- 
ing a rotating electric field somewhat analogous to the rotating 
magnetic field of an induction motor.* : 

We have also summarized in Table V the data on the 
actual three-conductor cable so that they may be compared 
with those given in Table IV, as the result of the measure- 
ments with the conducting liquid. ; 


TABLE V 
MEASURED STRESSES AT IMPORTANT POINTSIN ACTUAL CABLE 
The data here given are for the circular conductor cable for which curves have been 
shown. For this cable r= 0.532. 


AA A B 
Stress at conductor on line joining From 
center of conductor and center of cable. data 87 170 1.05 
From 
; 1.4 90 
Stress at conductor on shortest line ph ie 2 
between conductor and sheath..... prasive 
Formula .70 wee .84 


A, B and r—same as table above. 

- AA, Stress in terms of maximum stress of single-conductor cable with insulation thick- 
ness equal to conductor insulation of the 3-conductor cable. 

Note. Data shown in column AA were obtained by comparing the three-phase stresses 
with stresses obtained by actual single-phase measurements on one of the conductors of 
the three-phase cable after it had been dismantled. Data shown in columns A and B were 
derived from the values in column AA, 


It wili be seen that the stresses next the conductor are some- 
what greater than those determined by the previous method. 
Weare not able to state with certainty the reason for the differ- 
ence, though we believe it too great to be accounted for by inac- 
curacy of measurements. If the permittivity of the filler 
material were higher rather than lower than that of the main 
insulation, it would result in giving such a result. As stated 
previously, it would be expected that this effect would be in 
the opposite direction, since for the low voltage at which 
measurements were made the filler was that thought to have 


*For instructions as to the use of Table IV in connection with Fig. 16 
for obtaining stresses at different points in the section of a 3-conductor 
cable, see Appendix B. 


1012 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


a low permittivity. It is possible that the presence of the 
potential wires, due to the fact that they were not exactly 
parallel to the axis of the cable, distorted the field sufficiently 
to cause the increase of stress above the value found by the 
other method. 

It is important to consider the data on stresses in connection 
with the paper given before this Institute in February, 1919, 
by Shanklin and Matson. They conclude that. the maximum 
allowable operating pressure for a given cable occurs at a certain 
gradient that is very definite for a given insulating material. 
If we accept this conclusion, we have at once from the data 
presented herewith a basis for the relative rating of cables with 
different sizes of conductor and different thicknesses of insula- 
tion. However, the application of the data by one of the same 
authors indicates that important modification of the said conclu- 
sion must be made. In the 1917 paper, a cable, No. 1/0 with 
9/82 in. insulation on the conductors and 7/32-in. insulation 
on the belt, is mentioned as having operated successfully at 24 
kv. for some years. The maximum voltage gradient in this cable 
- Is more than 27 ky. per cm.—much in excess of 22 kv., which 
they conclude in the 1919 paper to be the limit for that class 
of material, as based on experiments on cable presumably of 
much more recent manufacture, and therefore not of poorer 
construction. Of course, also, there are many other cables 
operating successfully at gradients much in excess of 22 kv. 
per cm. 

In bringing out this point in connection wth the paper of 
Shanklin and Matson, I do not want to be misunderstood, as I 
consider their paper an important contribution to the problem 
of cable insulation; and though I feel that the theory offered 
must be subjected to material modification, yet it may be part 
of the foundation upon which may grow a material evolutio 
in the cable industry. 

While considering this paper by Messrs. Shanklin and Mat- 
son, it may be well to call attention to the possibility that, in 
some cases, the ionization which they found, occurred actually 
in the filler spaces rather than next to the conductors. It: is 
not possible to give specific figures, as we do not now have 
sufficient data of stresses in the filler space with single-phase 
voltage, which is the condition under which their measurements 
were made. 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 10138 


SECTOR CABLE 


We are not attempting to give as specific data on sector cable 
as have been given for round. Time and space makea barrier, 
and furthermore, specific data will have less general application, 
for the terms “sector” and “modified sector’ as applied to 
cable conductors are given to shapes differing quite widely in 
form and thus in characteristics, and presentation of complete 
data on even one specific form of conductor would require even 
more space than for round conductors. Some approximate 
general statements will however be of value. 

To determine capacitance of cables with conductors of sector 
shape, take the data for a cable with the same insulation thick- 
ness and with round conductors of about 50 per cent (two 
sizes A. W. G.) greater area than the sector conductor. Actu- 
ally, for different insulation thicknesses relative to conductor 
sizes, and for capacities of the different combinations listed, 
there is much range in the ratio of areas of round conductors 
and sector conductors having the same capacitance, the range 
of this ratio being from about 1.2 to 2.0, hence the rule just 
given is not more than a first approximation though it will 
seldom give capacities greatly in error. 

The measurements made on the sample of actual sector cable 
indicate that the maximum stress is somewhat lower.than that 
for the corresponding round conductor cable, but tests in the 
electrolyte tank indicate that relatively slight change of shape 
can influence the value of maximum stress sufficiently to vary 
it from lower to higher than for round conductor. The stress 
on the outer surface next the sheath was in all cases much 
less than for the round conductor. 

Attention has been called above to the fact that these data 
throw much light on the inherent weakness of the ordinary 
form of three-conductor cable. The stresses in the filler spaces 
and tangential to the layer insulation are somewhat less than 
the maximum, which occurs at the conductor surface. However, 
because of the weakness of the filler insulation and the weakness 
of the conductor insulation for tangential stress, these stresses 
become of great importance. Other stresses in the filler space 
are very large as compared with the average stress throughout 
the insulation, and large even as compared with the maximum 
values at the conductor surface. Improvement in this portion 
of the dielectric has not in the past kept pace with improvement 
in the insulation near the conductors and probably can still not 


1014 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


do so in the future. Doubtless, therefore, stresses in this 
portion of the cross section will become more and more the 
limiting condition in cables of the usual three-conductor form. 
Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that the stresses given 
are for the condition of dielectric of uniform. permittivity. 
The stresses in the filler space will exceed materially the values 
here found, where the permittivity of the filler material is lower 
than that of the remainder of the insulation. 

These experiments were carried on in the factory of the 
Company with which the author is associated, and the 
writer wishes to express appreciation for the facilities extended 
by his Company, and for-the cooperation of various individuals. 
Thanks are due Mr. C. W. Davis and Mr. H. W. Fisher for 
many valuable suggestions and comments, to Mr. Donald 
Simons in connection with the early work done in the Pittsburgh 
Laboratory, and to Mr. A. M. Hagen and Mr. L. Meyerhoff 
for their faithful and valuable assistance in the performance 
of experimental work and in the preparation of this paper. 


APPENDIX A. 


To obtain the charging current for any desired connection 
of a three-conductor cable from Fig. 2, proceed as follows: 

On the lowest set of curves follow the horizontal line repre- 
senting the value of total (belt plus conductor) insulation, 
until the curve for the given size conductor is intersected. 
This will give the ratio of total insulation thickness to con- 
ductor diameter. Now calculate the ratio of belt to con- 
ductor insulation for the given cable. From the point of 
intersection gotten above go vertically upwards until the 
horizontal line representing the calculated ratio of belt to 
conductor insulation, on the set of curves for the particular 
type of charging current desired, is reached. This point of 
intersection gives the value of charging current sought in 
terms of milliamperes per 1000 ft. at 60 cycles and a permit- 
tivity of 3.27. 

For example, let it be required to find the charging current 
3 conductors to sheath on a 3-conductor cable, having 4/0 
conductors with 10/32 in. insulation on each conductor and 
4/32 in. on the belt. The total insulation here is 14/32 
in. and following the 14/82 in. line on the lowest set of curves 
we find that it intersects the 4/0 curve at a ratio of total in- 
sulation thickness to conductor diameter of 0.83. The ratio 


1919] ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD 1015 


of belt to conductor insulation is 0.4. On the 0.4 line for 3 
conductors to sheath we find that an abscissa of 0.88 corre- 
sponds to a charging current of 34.3 miliamperes per 1000 
ft., which is the value sought. 


APPENDIX B 


The values given in Table IV puts us in position to deter- 
mine stresses at various points in the cross-section of a 3-con- 
ductor cable when operating 3-phase. We will here outline 
the method for obtaining the stress at one particular point 
by the use of Table IV in connection with Fig. 16, but prac- 
tically the same method can be used for obtaining stresses at 
other points in the cable section. 

The particular point chosen is that point on the conductor 
surface which is nearest to the cable center. As stated in 
the paper, this stress is approximately equivalent to the stress 
of a single-conductor cable having the same conductor diam- 
eter and an insulation thickness equal to the distance from 
the conductor surface to the center of the cable. After find- 
ing this distance, the maximum stress at the surface of the 
conductor for this equivalent single-conductor cable may be 
found by the usual formula, or more conveniently by the 
middle curve of Fig. 16. As shown, however, in Column B 
of Table IV, this value is not absolutely correct, and a slight 
correction must be made depending upon the ratio of con- 
ductor insulation to conductor diameter, as shown in the 
above table: The correction for values of the ratio between 
those given in Table IV may be found by interpolation. 
Great care however must be used in exterpolating from these 
values, but, as very few commercial cables have ratios ex- 
cept between these limits, the question will ordinarily not 
arise. 

To illustrate the above by example, let us consider a 3-con- 
ductor cable, No. 1 A.W-G. strand, 9/32in. x 7/32 in. Putting 
sizes into decimals, we have a 0.328 in. diameter conductor, 
with insulation 0.281 in. plus 0.219 in. Obtain the equivalent 
single-phase insulation 1.155 x 0.281 plus 0.078 x 0.328 
= 0.350. The ratio of equivalent insulation thickness to con- 


ductor diameter is ee — 1.07, and from the middle 


~ 


1016 ATKINSON: THE DIELECTRIC FIELD [June 27 


curve of Fig. 16, for 1.07 we find the ratio of maximum to 
average stress is 1.88. The average stress with say 14 kv. 


. 14 
between conductors is Vex 2.54 x 3.50 = 9.08 kv. per cm. 


The maximum stress is therefore 1.88 x 9.08 = 17.01 
kv. perem. To make the final corrections referred to above, 
divide the actual conductor insulation bythe conductor 


diameter, ee = 0.856. This is a higher value than 


either of the values given in the top of column B, Table IV. 
The correction is less than 1 per cent therefore and can be 
neglected. 

To find the maximum stress in the direction of the sheath, 
for a three-conductor cable, either under three-phase voltage, 
or as is done in cable testing, under single-phase voltage, the 
method is very similar. Find the average voltage stress per 
em. of the insulation between the conductor and the sheath. 
Find the ratio of the total insulation thickness (7.e. conduc- 
tor insulation plus belt insulation) to-conductor diameter and 
find the value corresponding to this ratio in the bottom curve 
of Fig. 16. Multiply the average stress by this figure and 
maximum stress at the surface of the conductor is obtained. 

As illustration, let us take the same cable. The total in- 
sulation is 0.281 in. plus 0.219 in. = 0.500. The average 
gradient with 14,000 volts three-phase between conductors 


14 


0.500 X2bix ve ~ oO 


is 


eee = 1.52, and the ordinate corresponding to this in Fig. 


16, bottom curve is 2.02. 2.02 x 6.85 = 12.7 kv. per cm., 
which is the maximum stress at the surface of the conductor 
toward the sheath. 


‘ ee 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1017 


DISCUSSION ON “‘HIGH-TENSION SINGLE-CONDUCTOR CABLE 
FOR POLYPHASE SYSTEMS” (CLARK AND SHANKLIN) AND 
“THE DIELECTRIC FIELD -IN AN ELECTRIC POWER 
CABLE”’, (ATKINSON), LAKE PLACID, N. Y., JUNE 27, 1919. 


H. W. Fisher: The paper of Messrs. Clark and Shanklin 
takes me back to the year 1907 or 1908 when I had been making 
some experiments to determine the change of impedance on 
single-conductor lead-covered cables with and without lead 
cover short-circuited. I found in some cases the impedance 
was greater with the lead cover short-circuited; in other cases 
it was less. I discussed this matter with some of our very 
prominent engineers at the time and they said my experiments 
must be wrong as they would expect the impedance to decrease 
as it does in a transformer with the secondary short-circuited. 

About that time, I spent a considerable time in trying to find 
a competent young man to take charge of the Experimental 
Dept. of my Company and I selected Mr. R. W. Atkinson 
whom I asked to give a solution of the above mentioned prob- 
lem. In a paper which I read at Frontenac, in the year 1909, 
I presented Mr. Atkinson’s graphical and mathematical solu- 
tion of the problem with which the solution, in the paper we 
are discussing, is in accord. 

Just about that time we were asked to quote on a 60-mile 
transmission in South America where it was very advisable to 
install cables instead of aerial lines on account of tropical 
conditions, and as we had previously been making experiments 
on dielectric loss, commencing about the year 1907, we were 
prepared at that time to discuss the problem fully. 

The problem was as follows:—Frequency, 25 cycles; pro- 
posed transmission voltage, 42,000; power factor of load, 80 
per cent; system operated with grounded neutral; number of 
circuits, 2 at least, and line loss to be 5 per cent. 

Our calculations very soon showed we could not use three- 
conductor cables for the service and therefore we had to figure 
on single-conductor cable. We considered 60,000-volt and 
42,000 volt transmission, and owing to the very much higher 
cost of 60,000-volt cables, we found that 42,000 volt-transmis- 
sion was the more economical. It was impossible to operate 
at 5 per cent loss and the figured loss was between 12 and 15 | 
per cent for the different kinds of cable. ; ‘a: ui 

The recommendation that stresses in the insulation of com- 
mercial high-voltage paper insulated cables made under present 
day conditions be limited to so low a value as 19.5 kv. per cm. 
is not in accordance with our experience. I know 
of a number of cases in operation where the stress at the surface 
of the conductor is considerably more than that, and I do not 
think that there should be a limit in the stress specified, be- 
cause this would tend to curtail development in the art by 
manufacturers who might be able to improve their products so 


1018 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


as to furnish cable which could be operated at a considerably 
higher stress at the surface of the conductor. 

C. W. Davis (read by H. W. Fisher): Héchstadter in his 
paper of 1910, published in the FE. T. Z., discusses at length 
the merits of single-conductor and three-conductor cables and 
gives a large.amount of data on dielectric loss measurements 
up to 40 kv. or 50 kv., both single-phase and three-phase cur- 
rent. The results of this work induced German engineers to 
use single-conductor cables on the Prussian-State Railway 
as described by Pfannkuch in EF. T. Z. of 1913. — 

Klein’s careful tests on single-conductor cables at stresses at 
surface of conductor up to 60 kv. per cm. reported in E. T. Z. 
for 1913. show for the first time in published data, so far as we 
know, the effect of ionization, although the significance of this 
was not apparently known to Klein at the time. 

In 1913, from the tests he made on four out of six cables, I 
found that ionization or internal corona began at from 25 kv. 
to 30 kv. per em. in solid insulation or about 75 kv. to 90 kv. 
in air spaces. At that time (1918) I suggested a law of loss for 
evenly distributed air spaces including a term (based on the 
proof of Monash in 1907) varying as the square of the voltage - 
and representing the inherent loss in the solid insulation as 
well as another term based on Peek’s law of corona for the loss 
in the air spaces at voltages above the start of ionization or 
internal corona. 

Wm. A. Del Mar: Messrs. Clark and Shanklin assign 

much importance to the tangential stresses pointed out by 
Hochstadter. These stresses occur in a three-conductor cable 
because at any instant the drop of potential between any 
conductor and the outside of the insulation surrounding it, is 
unequal along different radii from the center of the conductor, 
due to the different voltages between that conductor and the 
other conductors and sheath. This variation of potential 
along the surface of the insulation of the conductor gives rise 
to circumferential leakage currents and dielectric losses. All 
this is based on the assumption that the spaces between the 
insulated conductors are filled with a relatively imperfect 
insulating material, such as impregnated jute. If paper fillers 
are used there will be no well defined surface on which this 
phenomena can occur, and the limitation pointed out by 
Héchstadter will not directly apply. 
_ The remarks by Messrs. Clark and Shanklin regarding the 
impracticability of grading cables are much to the point. It 
has long been known that it is commercially impracticable to 
accurately predetermine the specific capacitance of varnished 
cambric or rubber insulation. 

The general proposition of using single-conductor cables in 
place of triplex cables offers an interesting field for speculation. 
I am of the opinion, however, that single-conductor systems 
will not come into extensive use because of the failure of triplex 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1019 


cables at 30,000 volts. I believe that future development will 
result in raising the voltage limit for triplex cables. 

Like Mr. Fisher, I am rather surprised at the limiting stresses 
which the authors give for paper insulated cables and I can’t 
help wondering whether a fallacy has not been introduced by ~ 


Fie. 1.—EquipotentiaL Lines anp Lines or Exectric Stress IN 
Rounp Conpuctor CABLE 


basing these stresses upon the results of tests on concentric air 
films, as it is possible that air bubbles near the surface of the 
conductor will not break down as easily as flat films. 
Referring to Mr. Atkinson’s paper, I wish to state that 
for several months the Research Laboratory of the’ company 


Fig. 2—EquiroTentiaAL Lines AnD Linus oF HLEcTRIC STRESS IN SECTOR 
d CABLE 


with which I am connected has been carrying out a series of 
tests, similar to those recorded by the author, and using sub- 
stantially the same methods. The primary purpose of the 
tests recorded in this discussion was to determine the best 


form of sector cable from the point of view of reducing di- 


1020 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


electric stresses and dielectric losses to a minimum, and 
increasing the heat dissipation to a maximum. 

Mr. Atkinson states that tests in the electrolyte tank indicate 
that relatively slight change of shape of sector cable can influ- 
- ence the value of the maximum stress sufficiently to vary it 
from lower to higher than for round conductors. This agrees 


Fig. 3—Lines or Evecrric Stress In A RouND ConpucTOoR CaBLE 


with our observation, and we therefore, made tests on various 
modified sectors for the purpose of ascertaining the best form 
of sector cable from the electrical point of view. A close 
approximation to the ideal form thus found, being easy to 


Fie. 4——Lines or Exvecrric Stress 1n a Sector Conpuctor CaBLn. 


manufacture, subsequent tests. were made upon conduc- 
tors of this form. 

Figs. 1 and 2 show the equipotential lines and stress lines in 
three conductor round and sector cables, respectively, and 
Figs. 3 and A show the stress lines without the equipotential 
lines. It will be noted that the maximum density of stress 
lines is about 15 per cent greater in the round than in the 


- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1021 


sector cable. Furthermore, the stress along the line joining 
the centers of round conductors, checks Mr. Atkinson’s curve 
A, Fig. 17, very closely, while in the case of the sector cable, the 
corresponding curve would have only about one-half the sag. 


RT 


« nl el nut 
Fig. 5—Lrnes or Heat Fiow rn a THerMauyy [pba Sector CABLE 


Mr. Atkinson mentions the application. of the electrolyte 
method for the determination of lines of heat flow in cables. 
Fig. 5 shows the lines of heat flow for a thermally ideal sector 
cable. Such a cable is electrically impracticable, due to the 
high stresses that would occur at the sharp points. Fig. 6 


Fig. 6—Lrvnes or Heat Fiow 1n a Rounp Conpuctor CABLE 


s corresponding lines for a round conductor cable and it is 
eel Ae ataat e much greater average length of path 
that the heat must travel in flowing from conductor to sheath. 
Fig. 7 shows the heat flow from a sector cable, indicating that 
an electrically good sector cable is intermediate between a 
thermally ideal sector cable and a round-conductor cable. The 
relative heat conductance from conductors to sheath are as 


follows: 


1022 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


Thermally Ideal Sector Cable............. 100 
Electrically Good Sector Cable............ 110 
Round-Conductor Cable (Stranded)........ 120 


Figs. 8 and 9, are similar to Figs. 6 and 7 except that iso- 
thermal lines are added. It should be noted that these curves 


Fic. 7—Linns or Heat Fiow In AN ELECTRICALLY Goop SECTOR CABLE 


apply only to cables wherein the dielectric loss is negligible and 
therefore, do not represent conditions in a 60-cycle high- 
voltage cable at normal operating temperature. 

The method of test differed from that used by Mr. Atkinson 
in the employment of 300-cycle current in conjunction with a 


Fie. 8—IsorHerMaL Lines anp Lines or Heat Fiow in a Rounp 
Conpuctor CABLE 


telephone receiver and resistance bridge. The ratio of the 
bridge resistance, when balance is obtained, is equal to the 
ratio of the potential drops between the movable contact 
needle and each of the two electrodes. A diagram of connec- 
tions is shown in Fig. 10. 

_The tests recorded above are from a general research on 
dielectrics, which is now being carried out under my direction 
by my associates, Mr. C. F. Hanson and Mr. L. Cockaday. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1023 


Mr. Atkinson states that the dielectric losses in a cable may 
be taken to be proportional to the charging current. This is 
practically true for cables having conductors of similar form. 
It is not true when comparing round conductor with sector 
cables, as the effect of increase of charging current in the latter 
may be neutralized by the elimination of spots wherein dielec- 
tric stresses are excessive. As the dielectric loss, at any point, 
is proportional to the square of the dielectric stress at that point, 
it is obvious that making the stress more uniform will have a 
marked effect in decreasing the dielectric loss. 


DETAILS OF TEST 


1. Electrolyte =Hydrant water. 

2. Depth of electrolyte = 1.5 in. (6 em.). 

3. Size of tank =36 in. by 42 in. and 6in. deep, (914% em. x 107 x 
15.2 em). Painted white with lines ruled 1 em. apart on the 
bottom. Plate glass placed on bottom for insulation. The 
numbers on the lines could be read clearly through the electrolyte 
and glass. : 


Fig. 9—IsoTHERMAL Lines anp Lines or Heat FLow IN A SECTOR 
CABLE 


A chart ruled to be a duplicate of the bottom, of tank was used 
in plotting the readings taken with the exploring needle. 

Size of model round conductor = 6.70 in. (17 em.) diameter. 
Size of model cable = 28.0 in. (71 cm.) diameter. | 

Exploring needle = 0.4 mm. platinum wire sealed in end of glass 


ere gcse al 


tube. , ‘ ’ ; 
Model conductor represents a 350,000 cir. mil cable, insulation 


GARG 
kD igs 


8. R, and R, are resistance boxes, R, and Rz = 10,000 ohms. 
9. Rand 2 R, a 3220-ohms rheostat. 

10. KR, and K R, a 52-ohms rheostat. ; 

11. The observer’s stand and telephone receiver were kept at the 
same potential by varying K R, and K R:. This balance was 
obtained by disconnecting telephone from exploring needle and 
connecting it on to the slider of the rheostat K R; — R, which 
was adjusted to obtain a minimum in the telephone receiver. 


1024 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


This prevented current from passing from telephone receiver 
through the observer, thereby eliminating any error due to the 
highstrequen ey, current producing an error in balancing with the 
xploring needle. : 

12s Balatiée with needle point was obtained with 300-cycle current. 
Practical silence was obtained in the telephone on balance. ; 

13. Asa bridge method was used, readings are independent of varia- 
tions of line voltage. 


D. W. Roper: Referring to the paper by Messrs. Clark and 
Shanklin in which they suggest the use of a sectional sheath on 


two-conductor cables, this may be all right for normal operating 
conditions but I think it would be.a little awkward for some of 


\expLORING NEEDLE 


lO A-C 


Fia 10—Bripck Connections ror FINDING EQuIPpoTENTIAL LINES 


the abnormal conditions such as the failure of the cable. In 
the earlier years in Chicago, when the Fisk St. Station had 
just started and there was no problem regarding electrolysis, 
the lead sheaths connecting the transmission lines were not 
bonded together and it was discovered that when we had a 
transmission line burnout that the voltage of the lead sheath 
was raised to such an extent that there was arcing and burning 
of the lead sheath wherever there was actual contact with the 
manhole brackets or where the sheaths were in contact. 

It would seem, therefore, very probable that in the case of a 
burnout of one section of a single-conductor cable with a 
sectional lead sheath, that this portion of the sheath, in spite 


of the fact that there was a ground connection, would be raised 
to such a point as to cause arcing or pitting or perhaps thejump- 
ing of the insulation between sections. 


The paper speaks of hot spots, apparently referring to hot 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1025 


spots in the conduit due to local heating conditions, but slurs 
over the fact that there are also hot spots in the cable entirely 
independent of the hot spots in the conduit. In other words, 
although a cable appears to be of quite uniform construction 
throughout, as a matter of fact the construction is not uniform 
—far from it! So that the dielectric loss, particularly in the 
resinous compound cables, is far higher at some points than at 
others, so when you approach the limiting temperature at which 
the cable can be safely operated or if that temperature is 
exceeded, then breakdowns in the cable will occur due to the 
dielectric loss being higher in some points of the cable than in 
others although the surrounding conditions may be identical. 

That might be thought to be a disadvantage but in some 
respects it might be considered a safety valve because experi- 
ence has shown that when breakdowns occur at that point due 
to overloading of the cable, that the damage to the cable is 
entirely local and that there is no sign of charring or injuring 
in any way of the paper insulation at other points between the 
point of breakdown and the source of supply. It is entirely 
possible that as we get into the use of cables with lower dielec- 
tric loss that this question of the local hot spots may not be so 
important and if that actually results, then it is equivalent, 
you might say, to screwing down the safety valve that you have 
with the present compound cables. 

The question of heating of the cables and the limiting of the 
load is an interesting one but as a matter of fact the company 
with whose operation I am familiar has never yet pulled a 
switch on a transmission line that was overloaded. The fact 
that the line is overloaded is an indication that some emergency 
has arisen so that it is more important than ever that the cable 
be maintained in service as long as possible and it is their uni- 
versal practise on such occasions not to pull the switch but to 
allow the load to be carried until other arrangements can. be 
made to carry the load or until the cable fails and the switch 
thereon opens automatically. 

In the case of the dielectric loss, I think the shape of the 
curve is just as important as the value of the dielectric loss at 
some particular temperature. The thing that is desired is 
that the dielectric loss should not increase at or near the 
maximum loads which are likely to be carried in emergencies 
and that the resulting hot spots which result, will not cause 
breakdowns at too low loads. ; 

With regard to the statement on page 959, I think that is 
made a little bit too rigid where it says, at the top of the page, 
“Eddy currents in stranded-cable conductors have been shown 
both theoretically and by actual measurement to be negli- 
gible.” This is the case, I believe, for ordinary values of cur- 
rent but under exceptional conditions it is quite possible to 
get kinetic current loss, which is very important and serious. 

_ We recently had a case of trouble in Chicago, an excess 
current for some eighteen minutes on a stranded-cable con- 


7 


4. 


1026 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


ductor which made up a reactance coil between sections of the 
bus. That was an eight hundred thousand~circular mils, 
stranded-cable conductor, barrel wound in three layers. After 
the trouble was over it was found on examination that the top 
and bottom turns of the reactance coil was still bright but 
that the turns in the middle had been oxidized by the heating 
and there were places four inches away from the conductor in ~ 
the middle of the coil where the varnish on the wood adjacent 
had been blistered by the heat. 

Referring to the diagrams which have been passed around 
by Mr. Del Mar showing the isothermal lines and the relative 
heat conductivity of round and sector cables, it would be very 
interesting if he could add to his discussion some figures which 
would indicate the relative carrying capacity of round and 
sector-shaped conductors of the same size. 

Philip Torchio: Iam very glad to have a paper like the 
one of Mr. Clark and Mr. Shanklin on record, especially with 
the further comments which Mr. Shanklin has made that 88,000 
volts operating voltage can be used. However, I would like to 
say a few words on the plan of the paper to prevent confusion 
and, perhaps, misconstruction of the intent of the writers. I 
believe that the writers have gone a little too far in showing the 
advantages of the single-conductor cables. 

The comparison is made between a three-conductor cable 
versus the single-conductor cable, using three three-conductor 
cables compared with one circuit of three single-conductor 
cables. Also the comparison is made, I believe, for three- 
conductor cables, round conductor. If they had used the 
sector cable they would have had a smaller diameter; also, as 
the thermal characteristics of the sector cable would be better 
than those of the round conductor cable, these changes would 
have, to a large extent, modified the relative values, as arrived 
at.in the paper, of the saving due to the use of single conductors. 

In practical application, I would not consider the installation 
having three independent circuits, each consisting of a three- 
conductor cable as merely equal to a three-phase circuit consist- 
ing only of three single-conductor cables. 

I think in the first layout with one cable out you still hav 
two-thirds, with two cables out you still have one-third, but in 
the ame Spe cables if you lose one you lose the whole 
circuit. ; 

The object in making these remarks is not in any way to 
detract from the value and the essence of this paper. ‘The 
paper gives a limit of construction for three-phase cables of 30 
kv., which, possibly, if the sector cable had been considered, 
_ Mr. Clark and Mr. Shanklin might have raised to 40 kv., but 

anyway we are limited in the three-phase cable while we have 
a much wider range in the single-conductor cable. : 

That is the essential and important value brought out by the 
paper. But we must not conclude that perhaps we can accom- 
plish similar results at lower voltages. Although | single- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1027 


conductor cables are used for the lower voltages, as we have 
been using them quite generally in this country in central 
station work for wiring up generators to the switchboard, the 
single-conductor leaded cable has many disadvantages. If you 
keep the lead sheath open-circuited, high voltages are caused 
on the sheath and if you ground the sheath then you have large 
currents flowing in the lead sheath. 

Another point is that when you use low-voltage cables where 
the currents are high, in case of short circuits, the mechanical 
stresses areenormous. As a matter of fact, in our own genera- 
ting stations we provide frequent supports, say four feet apart, 
throughout the run of the cable unless it is in pipe. 

__ Difficulties with these stresses would be serious in manholes 
if such cables, for general distribution, were not properly planned 
and properly protected against these stresses. 

_ H.L. Wallau: I have a few figures here that may be of 
interest. They refer to a test made on two lengths of one 
million cir. mil conductor,~61-strand, low-tension cable, 
separated 26 in. (67 cm.) center to center. The cables were in 
a dry subway and each cable was 1,140 feet (347.4 m.) long. 
The far ends of the conductors were sweated together, the near 
ends of the sheaths permanently bonded, and the far ends of 
the sheaths cross connected through cables with bolted lugs so 
that the sheath circuit might be opened or closed. 

One hundred and twenty volt, 60-cycle current was applied 
to the conductors. The current in the conductor was 650 
amperes. With the sheath circuit closed the sheath current 
was 225 amperes; with the sheath circuit open the induced 
voltage was 95 volts. This shows that the induced current for 
distances of 1,000 ft. (304.8 m.) between bonds is apt to be 
material and add quite some to the heat generated in the cable. 

In fact in our own station, where we have long (500 ft.) runs 
between generator terminals and switches, the use of leaded 
cable was found to be objectionable and a cambric, non- 
leaded, single-conductor cable used instead. 

However, we did look into the question of grounding the 
sheaths of leaded cables at the middle of the run and inserting 
a limiting resistance in the ground connection, to prevent an 
abnormal flow of current in case of breakdown. 

Such an installation was found would be satisfactory, but in 
the particular case in mind the resistance required would have 
been about 0.3 of an ohm and of large physical dimensions. 
There was no space available in the manholes, for a resistance 
of this size, so the plan was not carried out. 

R. W. Atkinson: -The paper by Messrs. Clark and Shank- 
lin contains much of value, as is to be expected from investi- 
gators of their standing. It is, therefore, with some hesitation 
that I venture to point out where they have fallen into error in 
making some assumptions and in drawing conclusions from 
their data not borne out by careful investigation. Attention 


1028 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


is drawn also to the importance of data already on record con- 
cerning matter for which formulas are developed. im 

From reference to Fig. 16 and Fig. 19, it seems that dissipa- 
tion characteristics of duct systems have been given and 
assumed without regard either to the number or kind of cables 
involved. Fig. 16 is given as showing “representative heating 
characteristics in conduit lines.”’ For example, in the right 
hand curve, 10 watts per foot of cable is considered to give 57 
deg. cent. rise of temperature above the surrounding soil 
temperature. No distinction is made, as to the size or con- 
struction of the cable or its insulation, and no allowance is 
made for the fact that much higher temperature rises are 
found where cables are grouped. It is most unfortunate that 
data should appear in this form with the weight of the authority 
of these authors. 

Furthermore in the application of these data, as given in 
Fig. 19 in the comparison of single-conductor and three- 
conductor cables, conclusions are drawn which are very seri- 
ously in error. In Fig. 19, it is stated that a final temperature 
of 82 deg. or a temperature rise of 57 deg., is attained with a 
loss per foot of cable of 10 watts, with either of the two described 
systems. One of these systems consists of three single-con- 
ductor cables, the other consists of three three-conductor cables. 
In order to determine the probable error of the assumption that 
the temperature rise of the two would be the same, and would 
be that assumed by the authors, calculation was made from 
our own data, as to the probable temperature rise, basing these 
calculations on fairly average duct conditions, and on fairly 
representative thermal resistivity of the insulating materials. 
On the basis of the relatively small amount of duct rise which 
there would be with only one cable instead of three, I calculate 
that the rise for the three-conductor cable would be 53 deg. and 
for the single-conductor cable 79 deg... With a greater relative 
rise of duct-structure, there will be less relative difference 
between the three-conductor and the single-conductor cable, 
but it is immediately obvious that the particular single- 
conductor cable will rise to a very much higher temperature for 
_ the same amount of loss per unit length, than will the three- 
conductor cable. Furthermore, where three cables of either 
type are involved, it seems thatthe estimate of temperature 
rise for even the three-conductor cable is too low. Thus, the 
rating even for the latter is too high and that for the single- 
conductor cable is not only altogether too high, but is out of 
proportion to and not comparable to the rating given for the 
three-conductor cable. . 

In the last paragraph, beginning on page 951, it is apparently 
assumed by the authors that where there occurs a loss in the ~ 
sheath equal to 28 per cent of the conductor loss, this can be 
fully compensated by an increase of conductor area of 28 per 
cent. This is erroneous as it will actually require about 39 
per cent more copper, as presently will be explained. This is 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1029 


of comparatively little consequence, but on page 953, reference 
is made to an increase in copper of from 50 per cent to 100 per 
cent for two certain cables. Apparently these are the two 
cables on page 943 where about 50 per cent in one case is the 
Increase in loss and about 100 per cent is the increase in loss in 
the other case. Now if there is 50 per cent loss in the sheath, 
that loss in the sheath is not going to be affected by changing 
the size of the conductors. Thus in order to have the same 
total loss as without the sheath loss, the loss in the conductor 
must be reduced by 50 per cent, that is its area increased by 
100 per cent. Where the sheath loss is 100 per cent, the con- 
ductor loss would need be reduced to zero. It seems therefore, 
that large sheath losses become prohibitive at much lower 
values than indicated by the authors. The situation is not 
materially different for very small sheath losses, than is indi- 
cated by the authors. 

In their sentence at the top of page 937, I believe the authors 
have underestimated the value of previous work that has been 
done, in determining the voltage or current, or loss produced in 
the sheath of single-conductor lead-covered cables. The 
formulas of Berg, which they mention, are approximate as 
said, but do give results which apply fairly well within the 
range considered in the paper now under consideration. 

In 1909, in a paper presented at Frontenac by Mr. Fisher, 
a solution appears which gives results in agreement with the 
formulas developed by the present authors, within a fraction 
of one per cent. Of the two formulas which are necessary for 
this solution, one is identical with the corresponding formula 
given in the present paper. The other formula is very much 
shorter and simpler than the corresponding formula which is 
now given; in fact, it is as simple as the formula of Berg. The 
simplicity of the older formula is due to the fact that the calcu- 
lation is made on mean instead of outside diameter, thus elimi- 
nating all that part of formula 6, page 962, contained in the 
bracket following the minus sign. With this omission and 
the substitution of mean for outside diameter formula 6 
becomes identical with the older formula. 

Besides the approximation mentioned by the present authors 
at the bottom of page 959, another approximation was used in 
deriving the older formula, the assumption that the sheath 
could be considered as the equivalent of a thin shell of the same 
resistance and of a diameter equal to the mean diameter of the 
actual sheath. This latter approximation is even closer than 
the other. On the whole there seems no warrant for using the 
long formula on page 962 instead of the older and simpler one. 

Solution of these problems of voltage, or current induced in 
lead sheaths is greatly facilitated by a set of curves presented 
by the writer in the discussion of a paper by Mosman presented 
before the Institute in 1913. 5 Fats 

A very interesting and important commercial application of 
single-conductor cables for carrying alternating current is the 


1030 HIGH-TENSION CABLES (June 27 


use by some operating companies, of two, three, or four such 
cables in a single duct on 2200-volt distribution. Such cables 
are used instead of multi-conductor cables on account of the 
greater facility of splicing while the conductors are “alive’’. 
It is interesting that the losses with any size of conductor usual 
for this construction are of small consequence and do not reduce 
the carrying capacity. That the loss is small is due to the very 
short spacing. Where the spacing is so short, neither the 
formulas given by Messrs. Clark and Shanklin, nor the older 
formulas mentioned above, are strictly applicable. They do 
serve, however, to show that the losses are comparatively small, 
and actual measurement of these losses confirms this. 

W. A. Del Mar: Referring to the relative carrying capacity 
of round and sector cables, the curves of heat dissipation which 
I showed this morning indicate that the heat resistance from 
the conductor to the sheath of a sector cable is about 10 per 
cent less than that of a round-conductor cable. The heat 
resistance from the conductor to the air is made up of two 
important parts, that from the conductor to the sheath and 
that from the sheath to the air. 

Mr. Atkinson, in ‘a previous paper, has shown that the total 
heat resistance of a triplex cable is divided approximately in 
the proportion of two-thirds from conductor to sheath and 
one-third from sheath to air. Suppose we take the heat resis- 
tance from conductor to sheath as 662/;, and from that from 
sheath to air as 3314, a total of 100. If we decrease the heat 
resistance from conductor to sheath 10 per cent, making it 60, 
and if we increase the heat resistance from the sheath to air, by 
about 10 per cent, making it 3862/3, which would correspond 
approximately to the lesser diameter of the sector cable, the 
total heat resistance would be reduced to about 962/; per 
cent. Now the current causing a given temperature rise is 
inversely as the square root of the heat resistance, so that a 
simple calculation shows that a sector cable of the type des- 
cribed will have a carrying capacity of something like one to 
two per cent greater than that of a round-conducter cable. 
Substantially, they are equal. ; 

E. B. Meyer: The paper by Messrs. Clark and Shanklin 
on high-voltage single-conductor cables for polyphase installa- 
tions is a step in the right direction toward solving the problem 
of underground cable construction, where the transmission of 
large blocks of power at high voltage is under consideration. 

The use of three-conductor cable as pointed out by the au- 
thors seems to be limited to about 30,000 volts on account of 
the properties of the insulating material and the unwieldy size 
of the cable itself. iq 
_ Three-conductor cables as at present manufactured are 
limited in capacity to about 12,000 kv-a. and if the operating 
voltage is to be increased materially, the use of single-conductor 
cables appears to be the readiest solution unless some radical 


= SHES) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1031 


Improvement in three-conductor cable construction can be 
effected. 

On the other hand, opinion as to the desirability of concen- 
trating heavy loads in a few large cables, is by no means’ 
unanimous and as I have some doubt as to the safety of such a 
course, I would be glad to hear some discussion on this point. 
_ The question with which most central station companies are 
interested at this time is the problem of reducing failures in 
underground cables, as with the increase in capacity and exten- 
sion of electrical systems, disturbances are more destructive, 
and it will be interesting to know whether by the use of single- 
conductor cable the maintenance cost per mile of circuit will 
be materially reduced. 

I question whether the maintenance cost of a single-conductor 
installation would be as low as that of a three-conductor 
installation. 

Probably the most serious objection to the single-conductor 
installation would be the necessity of splitting up the cable 
sheath into sections and installing grounded bonds. This 
would introduce troublesome complications and would prob- 
ably add materially to the cost of cable maintenance. 

I am heartily in sympathy with the authors comments 
regarding the methods of determining the maximum safe 
loading of a cable system. It appears that the strictly logical 
way to arrive at the proper loading of any cable is to determine 
by actual temperature survey what may be called the constants 
of each main duct line. With this information available the 
rating of cables based on maximum allowable operating tem- 
peratures is comparatively simple. ; 

A large amount of data is gathered each year by operating 
companies relating to temperature rises of conduit systems 
under different conditions of installation and it would be of 
extreme value to the industry as a whole for such data to be 
‘made generally available. It is only in this way that the rule- 
of-thumb methods of rating cables can be discarded for a more 
logical method based on an accurate knowledge of conditions. 

In Mr. Atkinson’s paper on the dielectric field in three- 
conductor cables, I am pleased to note the author’s statement 
that the maximum stress in sector cable is lower than for a 
corresponding round-conductor cable, the stress in the outer 
surface next to the sheath being in all cases much less than for 
round conductor. This seems to offset the erroneous theory 
which has been advanced by a number of engineers that sector 
cable is not desirable for transmission at voltages above 15,000. 

It is to be regretted that time did not permit the author to 
include the subject of dielectric losses in three-phase cables, as 
this subject isa very live one at the present time. It is known 
that the magnitude of these losses and their variation with 

‘temperature has a very marked effect on the operating charac- 
teristics of the life of a cable. This subject is a most vital one 


1032 HIGH-TENSION CABLES (June 27 


and is receiving considerable attention by a number of central 
station engineers and while it appears that no fixed rules can be 
formulated at present, it is desirable that this subject begiven 
careful consideration. : 

G. B. Shanklin: Mr. Del Mar’s discussion of our paper 1s 
much to the point. I am in full accord with the sentiment 
expressed in his belief that future development will result in 
raising the voltage limit for multi-conductor, cable possibly as 
high as 40,000 volts. This goal may ultimately be reached, but 
it is a development that must be approached with caution. It 
is one of those developments whose factor of safety cannot be 
even approximately determined until it is actually tried out 
under operating conditions, at least with the knowledge we 
have at present. 

For some time past our laboratory has been investigating 
dielectric losses in three-conductor cable, hoping to throw some 
light on the causes of the excess loss and deterioration in the 
central triangle of the cross section, a factor that plays a big 
part in limiting the voltage rating of this type of cable. Our 
work has consisted mainly of comparing actually measured 
3 @ losses with those calculated from measurements with 1¢ 
voltage. These measurements were made on cables whose 
cross section were at uniform temperature. Now, the only 
difference between 3 ¢ and 1 ¢’stresses occurs in the central 
triangle and if the loss in this section was an appreciable part 
of the total then it would be expected that the 3 ¢ readings 
would give higher values than the 1 ¢ calculations. We have 
tested cable from the very: best grades to those so poor in 
quality that they could hardly be classed as insulated cable but 
we have never found any difference between the measured and 
calculated 8 ¢ losses, provided the temperature conditions were 
exactly the same. 

_I have come to the conclusion that the generally accepted 
view of an inherent excess 3 ¢ loss in this central triangle is, in 
the sense as usually interpreted, not strictly true. The 
deterioration of this section under actual operating conditions 
is found only infrequently and in extremely poor grades of 
cable.: This leads me to believe that it is primarily caused by 
an accumulative heating action that renders the central triangle 
much hotter than the rest of the cross section, and that without 
this accumulative heating action there is no more deterioration 
in the central triangle than in the rest of the cross section. 

With the cross section at uniform temperature we have never 
found any indication of ionization starting in the central 
triangle at a voltage lower than that required to start it at the 
surface of the conductors, where the stress is greatest. It is 
probable that when the central triangle becomes excessively 
hot there is a tendency for the stresses to re-distribute them- 
selves, and in doing so to concentrate at certain points, causing, 
ionization at a lower voltage than otherwise. This, of course 
would cause deterioration but it should be classed as an effect 


_ 1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1033 


of the accumulative heating mentioned above and not as a _ 
cause. 

It is consideration of these factors that encourages me to 
believe that higher voltage ratings of three-conductor cable 
will ultimately be reached. The main requirement will be the 
lowest possible dielectric losses, generally throughout the cable 
cross section, but particularly in the central triangle. The 
fact remains, though, that we are rapidly approaching the upper 
limit of voltage rating for three-conductor cable. Whether the 
final goal will be 35, 40 or even 45 kv. we must if we wish to go . 
beyond this goal resort to single-conductor cable. 

Messrs. Fisher, Del Mar, Atkins on and several other gentlemen 
have criticized the limiting stress of 19.5 kv. per em. recom- 
mended in our paper. I will confess full responsibility for this 
recommendation. Mr. Clark has always been skeptical of this 
limit and agreed to its inclusion in the paper more for the sake 
of having a target to be shot at than anything else. He thinks 
it ultra-conservative in view of the fact that three-conductor 
cables have in some cases operated satisfactorily for years at 
maximum stresses as high as 28 kv. per cm. 

Different types and-makes of cable, like all other apparatus, 
have their own individual merits and peculiarities. It was a 
mistake, perhaps, to select an arbitrary value of maximum 
stress and I feel that an explanation is due. In the first place, 
it was not proposed for general application and I think it was 
made clear in the Institute paper, “Ionization of Occluded 
Gases in High-Tension Insulation,” page 489, that it repre- 
sented a minimum value. 

We have tested many types of cable and have found that 
their limiting safe stress as far as ionization is.concerned, has 
_ varied from 10 to 40 kv. per cm. The reasons for selecting 
19.5 kv. per em. (which is only an average of the range from 19 
to 20 kv. per cm., as first recommended) were: 

a. A start had to be made some where. It is difficult to form 
a judgment of performance without some criterion or basis to 
estimate from. 

b. As far as we could judge our data seemed to indicate 
19.5 kv. per cm. as a fairly good dividing line between accept- 
able and unacceptable grades of paper cable, that a cable 
showing ionization at an appreciably lower stress than this 
could hardly be considered as satisfactory. 

ce. When a cable is highly stressed we have not only ioniza- 
tion to consider but also high dielectric losses with consequent 
reduction in safe current carrying capacity and greater possi- 
bility of accumulative heating at “hot spots.” This is the 
more pronounced the higher the voltage rating and certainly 
when we approach 40-kv. ratings we must pay more attention 
to this factor than we have in the past. Quite often it will be 
found more economical to operate a high-tension cable at a 
stress of, say, 19.5 kv. per cm. than at 28 kv. per cm. because 


1034 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


of the greater carrying capacity and factor of safety. When 
the thickness of insulation is increased the question of heat 
dissipation introduces another factor. Obviously, the econom- 
ical balance between dielectric and copper losses, heat dis- 
sipating ability of the cable, and possibility of ionization will 
be governed by the grade of insulation, the thermal conditions 
of the duct line and the relative costs of the materials used in 
the cable. No set rules can, therefore, be applied. __ 

We agree with Mr. Roper in his criticism~of sectionalized 
sheathing for single-conductor cable. He is right in stating 
‘that it would, “be a little awkward for some of the abnormal 
transient conditions, such as failure of the cable.” Throughout 
the paper we have tried to make it clear that short-circuited 
continuous sheathing is much superior to sectionalized sheath- 
ing. 

Tt is quite difficult to answer the many points in Mr. Atkin- 
son’s discussion. He has apparently misintrepreted and taken 
issue with practically every thing in our paper. Some of his 
criticisms are really helpful and add to the paper in throwing 
light on a very difficult problem. I will attempt to answer a 
few of the main issues. 

Fig. 16 is given as showing representative heating charac- 
teristics in conduit lines. Mr. Atkinson does not think Fig. 16 
is representative and says: ‘No distinction is made as to the 
size or construction of the cable or its insulation, and no 
allowance is made for the fact that much higher temperature 
rises are found where cables are’ grouped.’’ We purposely 
avoided, for the sake of simplicity, any detailed discussion of 
the theory of heating in duct systems, but simply assumed the 
thermal conditions as such that Fig. 16 held for our particular 
problem. Incidentally, Fig. 16 is, as far as our experience 
shows, fairly representative of the heating conditions met with 
in the average duct system. I believe our assumptions would 
have been made clearer to Mr. Atkinson if we had represented 
the temperature in Fig. 16 as that of the duct air and then 
added’ on the temperature drop through the cable insulation 
but that would have involved complications that would have 
made our paper uselessly long. 

The greater part of Mr. Atkinson’s discussion is a detailed 
criticism of our assumption that the temperature drop through 
the insulation of the single- and three-conductor cables com- 
pared in Fig. 19 is approximately the same. Now, anyone who 
studies this problem carefully can see that it is impossible to 
deal with it theoretically unless certain approximations are 
| accepted. To begin with it must be assumed that the cable 
cross sections are at uniform temperature, that is, the copper 
and lead sheath are at the same temperature. Obviously, this 
assumption gives approximately correct results only over that 
range of heating conditions where the cable takes up only a 
small part of the total temperature drop. In water-cooled or 


~ 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1035 


forced air-cooled duct systems or with buried cable it would 
not, of course, apply very well but in the ordinary still-air duct 
systems, and especially at “hot spots’? where poor heat con- 
ductivity of the soil is encountered, it applies much better. 

I am sure that our assumptions have not led to any such 
grave errors as Mr. Atkinson’s discussion would seem to indi- 
cate. For instance, he states in reference to Fig. 19 and cables 
(a) and (c), “assuming a loss of 10 watts per duct foot for each 
of these two cables and fairly average duct conditions, I 
calculate that the rise for the three-conductor cable (a) would 
be Be deg. cent. and for the single conductor cable (c) 79 deg. 
cent. 

Now, let us see if his calculations are correct. Instead of 
assuming “fairly average duct conditions” let us assume that 
the total temperature drop is between copper and-lead sheath, 
as would be the case if the cables were immersed in water. For 
the same heat dissipation the temperature drops of the two 
cables will be inversely proportional to their thermal conduct- 
ances between copper and sheath. The thermal conductances 
are directly proportional to the electrostatic capacities so we 
need only to find the ratio between their electrostatic capacities. 
This is easily obtained from Formula 6 (bearing in mind that the 
total capacity between copper and sheath is 3 C), and the 
ordinary formula for concentric cylinders. The ratio found in 
this way is; 

thermal conductance of cable (a) _ 1.40 
thermal conductance of cable (c) = 


In other words, the three-conductor cable has 40 per cent 
better heat conductance. With the cables immersed in water 
and dissipating equal quantities of heat let us assume the drop 
through the three-conductor cable as 53 deg. cent. The drop 
through the single-conductor cable will be, 53 « 1.4 = 74.2 
deg. cent. This agrees so closely with Mr. Atkinson’s value of 
79 deg. cent. that it shows the fallacy of his assumption of 
‘fairly average duct conditions.” 

Under average still-air duct conditions the drop from copper 
to sheath can be roughly assumed as 20 per cent of the total 
drop. Then, if the total drop of cable (a) is 53 deg. cent the 
drop between copper and sheath is 10.6 deg. cent. With cable 
(c) in a similar duct and dissipating an equal quantity of heat 
the total drop will be 57 deg. cent. and the drop between copper 
and sheath 14.6 deg. cent. The difference is only 4 deg. cent. 
and our assumptions, therefore, hold reasonably well. 

Messrs. Torchio and Meyer both express the same thought 
in a different way in their comparison of the merits of single- 
and three-conductor cable. It is true that in the case of single- 
conductor cables the failure of one cable throws three times the 
carrying capacity out of commission than in the case of equival- 
ent three-conductor cables. It is partly for this reason. that 
single-conductor cable shows promise of the greatest usefulness 


1036 HIGH-TENSION CABLES [June 27 


only where there are such large blocks of power to be trans- 
mitted that the temporary loss of three cables instead of one 
will not prove serious. ; ; 

R. W. Atkinson: This use of paper filler instead of jute has 
been mentioned. This, however, can only partly overcome the 
weakness of that portion of the ordinary three-conductor cable 
which is occupied by such filler. This is because paper is 
better than jute to an important extent, only for stresses nor- 
mal or nearly normal to the surface of the paper... Most of the 
paper of the filler will be subject to stresses tangent or nearly 
tangent to its surface, and thus the-important weakness of the 
jute filler is also shared by the paper filler. 

Mr. Del Mar takes exception to the statement concerning 
the proportionality between charging current (volt-amperes) 
and dielectric loss. It is worthy of special comment that this 
proportionality exists only where the dielectrics are actually 
identical in properties. There may exist wide variations of the 
dielectric properties though the same grade of paper is satu- 
rated with compound of the same ingredients. It should 
further be noted that such a dielectric as paper will have 
different properties according as to whether the stress is per- 
pendicular or parallel to the direction of the layers. 

Also if the stresses in any specimen are beyond the range 
where the losses vary as the square of the voltage, then as 
indicated by Mr. Del Mar, that specimen cannot be compared 
directly with another specimen having lower stresses. 

Study of the effect of these factors is facilitated by the data 
reported in the paper of the author. That is, effects of change 
of shape and dimensions may be differentiated from effects of 
differences in the properties of the material. 

Mr. Roper has described an exceedingly interesting and 
important viewpoint concerning emergency overloading of 
cables. I refer to the fact that his company has never yet 
pulled a switch on a line because of overload. His arguments 
against doing that particular thing are very forceful and it may 
be recognized that the operating engineers have a real problem 
to solve to take care of such emergencies. 

I wish to point out however that unless some provision is 
made, high-tension cables, as compared with most other 
electrical apparatus, are made to occupy an extremely hazard- 
ous position. Thus, a generator (or the turbine which runs it) 
sets for itself a very definite limitation of load which cannot be 
exceeded. To some extent most other apparatus does this in 
one way or another. Thus the low-tension cable does so by 
voltage drop; or its short-time overload capacity may be 
greater than that of its switches, unless these are very liberally 
rated. But a high-tension cable with very low dielectric losses 
will have no limitation short of destruction of the cable. Thus, 
if the policy be carried to the limit, we have, to use Mr. Roper’s 
simile, a case of firing a boiler without a safety valve and with 
no regard to the steam gauge. EL 


Presented at the 35th Annual Convention of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
Lake Placid Club, NY., June 27, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A.I.E.E. 


PROBLEMS OF 220-KV. POWER TRANSMISSION 


BY A. E. SILVER 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The dependence of industrial progress upon an adequate 
supply of electrical power, together with the vital need for a 
rational policy of conservation of the country’s fuel resources, 
points to a probable early demand for transmission of large 
blocks of power from distant energy sources—coal fields and .~ 
water powers. Two hundred and twenty kv. is suggested as a log- 
ical voltage for such high-capacity, long-distance transmission, 
and the important problems introduced by large concentrations 
of power, high voltage and high service standards are discussed. 
The economic and technical considerations underlying design 
of a 220-kv. system are outlined, and general designs are devel- 
oped for a typical 220-ky. transmission line. 

The studies made establish confidence in the conclusion that 
220-kv. transmission is feasible as an immediate commercial prop- 
osition. Established principles of design and present types of 
equipment, with proper adaptation to the new conditions, are 
applicable to 220-kv. service. While all essential problems seem 
assured of acceptable solution, attention is directed to certain 
points as to which further investigation and experimental re- 
search are needed to determine most effective designs. 

It is hoped that the paper may in some measure aid in the work- 
ing out of this advance in the art by promoting constructive 
discussion and stimulating the needed investigations. 


INTRODUCTORY 


CONOMIC development of the country’s power resources 

is fundamental to the industrial progress of our national 
life. The growing recognition by our economists, engineers 
and industrial leaders, and even by the public, of the signifi- 
cance of the power supply problem must soon result in an 
insistent demand upon the engineering profession for large and 
bold strides in the solution of the attendant engineering prob- 
lems. 

The vital dependence of industrial advancement upon an 
adequate power supply has been strikingly illustrated in our 
struggles to meet the industrial demands of the war emergency. 
The experiences of this trying period have resulted, also in a 
quickened understanding of the need for conservation of our 
natural power resources. The labor and commodity situation 


1037 


1038 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


accentuates the demand for greater unit productiveness, 
possible only through greater use of power in industrial opera- 
tions, and for prompt progress toward broadly economical 
methods of power supply. A major step toward conservation 
of fuel resources and general commercial economy is recognized 
to lie in gradual substitution of electric transmission of energy 
for railroad transportation of fuel to be used in local generation 
of power. Interconnection of electric power systems, both 
prior to and during the war, has demonstrated the marked 
benefits obtainable by taking advantage of diversity of loads 
and other attendant economies and the well established move- 
ment toward general and extensive interconnection is still 
gathering-headway. The relation of the railroad elect’ ification 
problem to fuel conservation is well recognized and for years 
has been consistently expounded by able engineers. 

These influences lead directly toward large scale develop- 
ment, at the source, of our natural energy reservoirs, the coal 
fields and the potential water powers. An essential feature of 
such development will be the transmission electrically of great 
blocks of power, over increasingly great distances, to strategic 
centers of distribution in or near present and future industrial 
districts. This trend of the power industry has long been 
recognized, and important steps toward its realization are a 
certain and not distant eventuality. Further elaboration of 
the subject is unnecessary to the purposes of this paper. 


THE FIELD FOR 220-KV. POWER TRANSMISSION 


Visualization of the demands of this evolution points to the 
need of trunk electric transmission service of a capacity and 
range of greater magnitude than thus far developed or required. 
Increasing distances and increasing quantities of power require 
an increasing voltage for economic transmission. The quanti- 
ties and distances involved in-the broad field outlined in the 
preceding paragraph pass beyond the economic range of existing 
transmission voltages. The practical working out of this next 
step in the transmission art is a problem now definitely facing 
the engineer and manufacturer. 

Scarcely more than ten years ago an operating voltage of 
100 kv. was remarkable; today 180 kv. may be considered 
standardized and 150 kv. is in sufficiently extensive use to 
have established its reliability. 


Two hundred and twenty kv. appears a logical choice for the 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1039 


next step in the transmission voltage schedule. Why 220 kv., 
it may be asked? Because, from an appraisal of the general 
situaticn, a voltage of this order is considered adequate for the 
immediately pending needs of the industry and commensurate 
with expected growth in transmission service demands for a 
considerable period. Its suitability to a variety of conditions 
and the probable extent of its use would assure it a place in the 
schedule of transmission voltages which commercial needs are 
rapidly standardizing. Furthermore, such a voltage, while 
representing a step beyond present usage sufficient to afford a 
distinct: economic advantage, does not reach so far into unin- 
vestigated fields but that the problems of development and 
design can be approached with full confidence of early com- 
mercial solution. 

The particular numerical value of 220,000 is in accord with 
the well established practise of standardization in multiples of 
11,000. In some instances, it may be an incidental con- 
venience that this voltage is the double of the extensively used 
110 kv. 

An illustration of the advantage for long transmission dis- 
tances of 220 kv. over the highest present system voltage, 150 
kv., is given in Figs. 1 and 2. This comparison is based. upon 
a transmitted load of 500,000 kw. The same relative advan- 
tages will obtain for larger loads, and, above a certain minimum, , 
for smaller loads. 

The field of 220 kv. is not broad. Its economic application 
is primarily to large blocks of power and long transmission 
distances. It is in no sense a panacea for transmission prob- 
lems generally. It presumably will infringe to some extent 
upon the present fields of the lower transmission voltages, but 
will by no means tend to supersede their use, in fact it will 
considerably enlarge the field of usefulness of such secondary 
transmission voltages as 66 kv. and 110 kv. It is not a uni- 
versally suitable medium for extensive interconnection of 
power systems. ; 

Power from steam-electric stations in the coal fields or from 
large hydroelectric stations would advantageously be trans- 
mitted over 220-kv. lines to terminal substations at important 
load centers or at the hubs of secondary transmission networks 
serving industrial areas. The introduction of transmitted 
- power, in amounts limited only by the load demands, will 
constitute a strong stimulus to expansion of these networks. 


1040 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


Power equalization between load centers might frequently best 
be accomplished through extension of these secondary trans- 
mission lines. Interconnection at 220 kv. would be expected 
only where the equalizing duty reaches a large magnitude, 
where there is no existing secondary transmission system 
suitable to serve as a basis for inter-connecting lines, or where 
interconnecting 220-kv. lines might-function also as a supple- 
mentary or important reserve link in a main 220-kv. trunk 
transmission system. 


CONSTRUCTION COST, DOLLARS 
™ PER KW - MAXIMUM LOAD 


50 100 150 200 250 
LENGTH OF TRANSMISSION LINE - MILES 


Fig. 1—Economic Comparison or 154-xKv. AND 220-xv. TRANSMIS- 
SION—CoNnsTRUCTION Cost—Srven Lines 154 xv. anp Four Lines 
220 xv.—500,000 kw. DELIVERED 


Costs include those of lines, step-up and step-down substations and synchronous con- 
densers. 


Costs of line per mile 154 kv. $20,000, 220 kv. $23,500—all costs based on early 1919 
prices. 


Size of conductor 92,900 cm. steel—716,000 cm. alumin 


um. 
Voltages high side of transformers, receiver end 150 ky. and 200 kv., sending end 170 kv. 
and 225 kv. 


To a marked extent, and especially in the earlier stages of 
its introduction, power transmitted at 220 kv. will be high 
load-factor power. The initial investment in a 220-kv. system, 
including as essential elements the step-up and step-down 
stations, will be of such magnitude that there will be a strong 
inducement to utilize the investment as nearly continuously as 
practicable, thus reducing the unit transmission cost of energy 
supplied. The natural economic tendency in introducing 
power transmitted from distant energy sources will be to 
supply base load, leaving the peak loads to existing local 
generating stations. It is to be expected that high-voltage 
transmission from energy sources, fundamentally economic as 
it is believed to be, will in general for years contribute only a_ 
part of the power supply of any district. The relegation of 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1041 


existing stations to partial operation or reserve service will be 
gradual, and, even when transmitted power becomes the main 
reliance, presumably it will usually prove more economical to 
maintain local stations for reserve and short peak load service 
than to provide necessarily expensive transmission capacity 
for such short periods of actual use. 


ep down 
| Station 


rig qe 


FIXED CHARGES AND OPERATING COSTS 
MILLS PER KW. HR.LOAD 


“0 50 100 150 200 250 300 
LENGTH OF TRANSMISSION LINE — MILES 


Fie. 2—Economic Comparison or 154-xv. AND 220-xv. TRANSMIS- 
SION—FIxED CHARGES AND OppraTING Costs—Srven Lines 154 xv. 


AND Four Lines 220 xv.—500,000 kw. DetiverEpD 


Costs and losses include those of lines, step-up and step-down substations and syn- 
chronous condensers. 

Costs of line per mile, 154 kv. $20,000, 220 kv. $23,500—all costs based on early 1919 
prices. 

Size of conductor 92,900 cm. steel—716,000 cm. aluminum. 

Losses based on 0.95 load factor and 0.85 power factor delivered load, 

Cost of energy 5-mils per kilowatt-hour. , ; 

Fixed charges and operating expenses of transmission lines 13 per cent, substations 15 
per cent. : , P 

Voltages high side of transformers, receiver end 150 kv. and 200 kv., sending end 170 kv. 
and 225 kv. 


A characteristic of the field of 220-kv. transmission which 
exercises a determining influence upon designs and costs is that 
it is a field of high service standards. A 220-kv. system, with 
the generating stations for which it would be the outlet, would 
represent a tremendous amount of power. The economic 
importance of reliability and continuity of this power, in view 
of the great volume of industrial enterprises and public utilities 
which would be dependent upon it, is of so high an order that 
new standards of care in design and conservatism in construction 
are imposed. The aim, and a not unrealizable aim, is to make 
high-voltage, large-capacity transmission for all practical pur- 
- poses equal in dependability to local generation of power. 


1042 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


SCOPE OF PAPER 


Based upon such a conception of the field of 220-kv. trans- 
mission, it is the aim of this paper to carry through an analysis 
of a typical transmission problem, sufficiently specific as to 
assumptions to afford a basis of designs, but not limited to any 
exact geographical location. Conditions underlying designs 
are analyzed, certain salient features of the design of lines and 
apparatus are discussed, proposed types of construction are 
considered and an effort is made to point out the problems of 
the designer and the manufacturer, particularly in those 
applications where there is apparent need of more thorough 
investigation and research before particularized conclusions 
can be drawn with confidence. It is not intended that the 
paper be in any sense exhaustive as to completeness of conclu- 
sions or solution of details of the problem, which for any specific 
case will involve extensive and thorough studies and investiga- 
tions based upon specific load characteristics, geographical 
conditions and other basic considerations. 

The studies have been guided by the desire that any recom- 
mendations should be capable of prompt commercial execution. 
In other words, it has been the aim to outline a type of con- 
struction built up essentially of established factory products in 
such way as to insure initially successful results. At the same 
time an attempt has been made to point out the short-comings 
which must be tolerated and the apparent opportunities for 
more efficient solutions. 

It is the desire and hope that this tentative development of 
the problem in outline will afford a basis and incentive for full 
and constructive discussion by those interested in the advance- 
ment of the art of power transmission. It is hoped also that it 
may encourage designing engineers and manufacturers to 
undertake needed investigations into insufficiently explored 
fields as the foundation for developing designs for suitably 
improved apparatus and line materials. There would seem 
to be promising opportunities for distinct and beneficial de- 
partures from prevailing practises. 


\ 


DESIGN FEATURES OF 220-Kv. TRANSMISSION LINES 
General Assumptions. Before considering the specific de- 
signs which are suggested for 220-kv. transmission lines, a brief 
statement will be made of the basic underlying assumptions as 
to loads to be transmitted, as to frequency and type of system 


be 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1043 


to be adopted and as to climatic loadings and corona conditions 
to be assumed. 

As to amount of load to be transmitted, it is assumed that 
even an initial 220-kv. system would be laid out on a basis of 
two or more main generating stations connected to load centers 
by a number of circuits. The load per 220-kv. circuit has been 
assumed to be from 100,000 kw. to 125,000 kw. A lower load 
per circuit than 100,000 kw. would entail a considerable 
sacrifice of the economy obtainable through use of 220 kv. No 
discussion is offered as to the maximum economic load per 
220 kv. circuit, 7. e., as to the point above which additional 
circuits should be provided, since in any initial system the 
number of circuits would be determined from considerations 
rather of reliability insurance or load distribution than of 
maximum inherent economy. Where the studies involve a 
specific transmission distance, 250 miles has been assumed for 
purposes of illustration. The economic range of 220 kv. as to 
distance is very large. 

The frequency of a 220-kv. trunk transmission system should 
be 60 cycles. For a general power distribution system furnish- 
ing lighting and power service in cities and industrial centers, 
the superiority of 60 cycles over 25 cycles has been well estab- 
lished, and for a transmission system delivering power to such 
a distribution system, the decision as to frequency unquestion- 
ably must follow the requirements of the load. In some 
districts, for which 220-kv. transmission may come up for 
consideration, it presumably will be found that both 60 cycles 
and 25 cycles are in use, possibly that 25 cycles in amount of 
load is still predominant. Even in these cases, however, the 
tendency in new development will be found away from 25 
cycles, and it would be serious economic error to compromise 
so important an undertaking as a 220-kv. transmission system 


~ with a frequency approaching obsolescence. 


High-capacity long-distance transmission will inevitably 
play a significant part in electrification of main line railroads. 
In instances where alternating-current electrification is an 
important factor in a project, there may be greater seeming 
inducements in favor of 25 cycles, but even in such cases it is 
believed that consideration of the general and industrial por- 

‘tions of the load, of the probable tendency of future growth 
and of the trend toward wide-spread interconnection will lead 


to a decision for 60 cycles. 


1044 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


From the standpoint of line performance alone, use of the 
lower frequency would afford better conditions of voltage 
regulation, but with synchronous condensers, which must be 
regarded as an integral part of a modern high capacity trans- 
mission system, the problem of satisfactory regulation at the 
higher frequency is not serious. Incidental considerations, 
none of them relatively important, are greater cost of 25-cycle 
equipment, lower reactance of a 25-cycle system and hence, 
heavier circuit breaker duty, and lower corona loss for 25 cycles. 

The step to 220 kv. will by no means be the ultimate develop- 
ment in power transmission. Eventually a demand may be 
expected for transmission capacities and distances beyond the 
economi¢ range of this voltage, and the advance then to be 
evolved may conceivably abandon 60 cycles for some very low 
frequency, for direct current or for some other revolutionary 
change in the transmission art. Such remote eventualities, 
however, do not affect the considerations governing the step to 
220 kv. 

Transformer connections, at all installations, should be 
grounded Y for the 220-kv. windings. The question of Y vs. 
delta connections has in the past evoked considerable discussion 
for each new undertaking, whatever the specific requirements 
of the system, and debate may arise in connection with pro- 
jected 220-kv. transmission. Modern thought and experience 
shows a consistent: tendency toward the use of grounded Y 
connections over the whole range of higher voltages. For a 
220-kv. system, in addition to a distinct gain in dependability 
of operation, the requirements for line and equipment insula- 
tion, with their attendant effect upon the size and cost of 
equipment, particularly transformers, gives the grounded Y 
arrangement a marked advantage. 

The simultaneous conditions of maximum climatic conductor 
loading used as a basis for line design have been assumed as 
follows: 

a. Wind pressure of 8 lb. per sq. ft. of projected area, cor- 
responding to an indicated wind velocity of 72 mi. per hr.; 

b. Ice of 114 inches radial thickness on all wires; 

ce. ‘Temperature of 0 deg. fahr. 

For checking clearances of conductors a maximum temperature 
of 120 deg. fahr. has been assumed. 

These loadings are, of course, far in excess of those used as a 
basis for ordinary transmission line design. It is not believed - 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1045 


that there is any reasonable likelihood of the line being sub- 
jected to such a simultaneous combination of conditions. 
From the standpoint of vertical tower loads; there is a real 
possibility of occasional ice loadings as heavy as or even heavier 
than assumed, and accordingly a reasonable margin of excess 
vertical strength is called for. Justification for these appar- 
ently extreme loading assumptions is found in the high service 
standards which, as noted, must in general apply in 220-kv. 
service. In view of the economic importance of continuity of 
service, it is considered that this basis is not unreasonable for 
a region where severe climatic conditions obtain, and in particu- 
lar where heavy sleet is to be expected. Where climatic condi- 
tions are more mild, a lighter loading basis should naturally be 
assumed. In the planning of any particular project, this 
question of assumptions as to line loading, and the underlying 
economic conditions, should receive most careful consideration. 

Corona formation and corona loss enter as a significant factor 
in the design of transmission lines at this high voltage. The 
conditions assumed for this study are: 

a. Average elevation, 1000 ft. (normal barometer 28 .9 in); 

b. “Storm factor’, or percentage of time during which 
conductors would be subject to increased corona losses due to 
rain, snow, sleet or fog, 12.5 per cent; 

ce. Conditions during “storm” periods, 28.4 in. barometer, 
average temperature 55 deg. fahr. 

Corona conditions likewise will require special study for each 
particular imstallation, particularly the matter of “storm 
factor.”” The ordinary source of data will be Weather Bureau 
records. The published reports, however, while complete as 
to amount of precipitation and number of days of which pre- 
cipitation occurs, do not give in summarized form the actual 
duration of storm conditions. A reasonably correct value of 
the factor for any district may be obtained from study, extend- 
ing over a considerable period, of the original records of individ- 
ual storms at several stations in the district. The dividing 
line between ‘“‘storm” and ‘‘fair’’ conditions is, of course, not 
clearly defined, and hence preciseness of results is difficult to 
attain. 

Conductor Materials and Types. Apparently the choice of 
conductor materials and types for 220 kv. service is limited, at 
least from the standpoint of immediate availability, to three 
alternatives, 


1046 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


1. Aluminum with steel core. 
2. Copper with steel core. 
3. All copper. 


Aluminum without steel core does not possess sufficient 
mechanical strength for use on the span lengths in current use 
for high-voltage transmission. From the standpoint of 
mechanical strength, copper may be used either with or without 
steel core. A copper cable with a core of some other type than 
steel strand is a possibility; hemp>cores have been used, but 
experience, while inconclusive, appears to indicate that there 
may be injurious chemical action; a-semi-hollow copper cable 
with internal spacers of wood or metal has been suggested, but 
its feasibility has not been demonstrated and there seem 'to be 
no real benefits. Such a dead weight “‘filler’’ decreases the effec- 
tive strength of the cable. 

As to the satisfactory performance of steel cored cables, there 
appears to be but one point open to question; 7. e., possible 
electrolytic action between the galvanizing coat of the steel 
and the main conductors. Composite aluminum cables have 
been coming into increasing use during recent years, and from 
the experience gained, there is growing assurance of freedom 
from electrolytic action which would materially impair the 
durability of the cable. Aluminum and zine are not far 
separated in the electro-chemical series, and aluminum is 
electro-positive to the zinc, so that there is less reason for 
anticipating trouble. There has been less experience with 
copper cable with galvanized steel core, but theoretically the 
conditions are somewhat less favorable, since copper is farther 
separated from and electro-negative with respect to zinc. It 
may be noted, however, that no injurious action has been 
observed in the extensive use of galvanized fittings with copper 
eable. Further experience with such composite copper cables 
is awaited with interest. In case injurious electrolytic action 
is established with galvanized cores, there appear to be a 
number of possible remedies, such as the use of copper plated 
steel cores. A sufficiently heavy copper plating would, how- 
ever, be more expensive than galvanizing. 

In general, for equal conductivity, the relative physical 
advantages of the three types of conductors may be summarized 
as follows. Certain features noted will later be discussed in 
more detail. 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1047 


Aluminum-steel vs. copper-steel 

1. Less corona loss, due to larger diameter 

2. Skin effect presumably approximately equal 

3. Greater area exposed to wind loading, hence, greater trans- 
verse tower strength and greater clearances required 

4. Less tensile strength, hence more limitation upon height and 
spacing of towers 

5. Less weight (unimportant) 


All-copper vs. composite cable 
1. More corona, greater than either of above 
2. All material effective as a conductor 
3. ‘Skin effect more serious in larger sizes, owing to high priced 
material in the core 
Less area exposed to wind loading 
Less total tensile strength than either of above 
Less weight than copper-steel 
Homogenity of material, hence certain advantages in 
construction, more positive assurance of durability and 
higher scrap value 


pee Ss 


It will be seen that aluminum-steel, due to corona limitations, 
has a greater relative advantage for smaller line loads, which 
economically require smaller sizes of cable than for larger line 
loads. 

For any particular case and any given magnitude and charac- 
ter of load to be transmitted, the choice of conductor type will 
depend upon a complex economic balance between the cost of 
materials involved, the losses due to resistance, corona, and 
skin effect, and the mechanical characteristics of the cables. 
Different loads may call for different types. 

For the purpose of developing tower designs, a cable of 
716,000 cir. mils of aluminum and 93,000 cir. mils of steel has 
been used in the studies which follow, the considerations 
upon which this selection was made will be discussed later. 

Electrical Characteristics of Conductors. At such a high 
voltage as 220 kv., one of the primary considerations in select- 
ing size and type of conductor is corona formation and corona 
loss in its relation to conductor diameter. The subject has 
been extensively treated by Peek and others before the Institute 
and the methods of calculation outlined by these authorities 
have been employed in the studies which follow. In these 
methods. of analysis, it is necessary to assign values to the 
principal factors affecting corona. The physical and climatic 
conditions assumed have been stated earlier. The conductor 
arrangement has been taken as a flat horizontal configuration 


A 


[June 27 


POWER TRA NSMISSION 


SILVER 


1048 


ee —————<———————————————————— —— 


S61 POP 069 és0r POST 8 Lv 6IT ****1oJoB} Peo] queso Jed 0G 
LES oSP $69 @STT SEsT ae 2g Trl "74" "**Tooey peoy uso Jed Gy 
PSG £67 8gL ES6L 986T 9T 99 COTY PORT Ve ie Men Sen 1040e} peo] yus0 Jed QQ 
qua2 dag G* ZT 40J9Dq WAOIS (J2NI42D *M24-QOO‘OOT) 
tH OSE S444 S—SSOT (hg 1218.7 
OZT PIL 601 FOL OOT 6ET 661 61 PIL "* "Serta 193nO 
SOL e0L OOT ¥6 16 9ZT LIL IIl €0T © 0 6a, 9.670.600 80.0 © 6 9 Shela =) 1046 6 696816 saan oun, |p aes, OITA reyuad 
(02) “ay 7D9242AD aatgnastg wAsoq1g 
OST GPL LE&L y Ost 9ZI FLI IOL FST SPL CT ee Gat teen eee wee ete e)'s pe Fe *SOIIM r341nO 
Gel 661 PSL SIT PIL LST OFT 6&1 6ZT ee ed © ©: 0 Othe « 6s 6 enn ITM qeyued 
(02) “ay 1D9242AD aangnasiq 4ayjpay, Ag 
00 T 9%6°0 F060 L938 °0 F180 SOLaT 660 'T 9€0'T 96°02 ee eee ae a OD GE 
w H 3) dl a d re) a Vv (% PIVBL 92S) wounusssaq sozonpuoD 
y9039-19ddog areaddog 1999S-wInurTUIn,y 
(€ “BI 29g) 


ONIOVdS IVINOZIMOH “Li-0%@ SLINOAIO “AM-026 UOX SUOLONGNOD NOVLIVd SSOT VNOAOO 


I GTadvL 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1049 


with conductors separated 20 ft. Proper allowance has been 
made for the unbalanced disruptive critical voltages due to 
this horizontal configuration. The conductor irregularity 
factor, taking into account the effect of weathering of the con- 
ductor with age and the irregular surface resulting from strand- 
ing, has been assumed as 0.87. 

In Table I are shown, for a number of conductor sizes, the 
fair weather and storm disruptive critical voltages and the 
total corona loss for 250 miles of circuit. Corona losses for 


2000 | 


60 Load Factor 
75 Load Factor 
90 Load Factor 


Letters show position 
of conductors listed in 
Table 2 


TOTAL CORONA POWER LOSS- 3 CONDUCTORS KILOWATTS 
: ° 
S) 


0.9 1.0 11 
DIAMETER OF CONDUCTOR IN INCHES 
Fig. 3—220-xv. Corona Power Loss ror 250-Mine Circuit (Sum 


Tasie I ror EXPLANATORY Data) 
GENERATING VOLTAGE Hetp Constant AT 230 KV. 


various load factors are shown graphically in Fig. 3. In deter- 
mining the values of line voltage to be used in corona calcula- 
tions, effective r.m.s. values of load were obtained from 
hypothetical daily load curves prepared for various load factors, 
and the mean voltages corresponding were determined from 
typical line regulation curves (Figs. 4,5 and 6). It is believed 
that this method of analysis affords a reasonably and sufficiently 
accurate estimate of corona losses. 

The electrical characteristics of composite cables, other than 


1050 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


as regards corona, are somewhat more complicated of analysis 
than for a cable of homogeneous material, particularly as to 
the effects of the steel core on the internal inductance and 
effective resistance of the conductor. In the preparation of 
these studies, access has been had to data from certain experi- 


270 270 
260 260 
250 2507 
S$ 268,800 Volt S 
ro) ) ae AES) re) 
= 240 0,800 Kva, F 2403 
= 1,418 Kw. | to Charge Line = 
o allowance for Corona feat 
S 03088 be Hae J 230 
=a ig 
: a 
& 220 220 © 

oO 

210 210 
200 200 

250 200 150 100 50 0 

: MILES OF LINE 
RESULTS 

High voltage Losses 

—_—————_ , ————_ | Equiv. low (excl. corona 
Curve | Rec’r | Cond’r Receiver Generator voltage gen. loss) 
kw. oe ee oe ee re 


250 mile line 
A 0} *49,800 | 209.0] * 0.18); 230.0]7 4.61] 227.9 4.69] 2,646) . 
B 50,000} + 7,500 | 207.2] *78.00 | 230.0 96.15] 228.1] 797.28) 2,780 5. 
C {100,000 | 781,000 | 203.0] *98.72 | 230.0|*100.0 | 231.3 | *99.67 |11,927| 11. 


On 


Nore: *Indicates lagging quantities. 
jIndicates leading quantities. 


Fig. 4—220-xv. Transmission Line CHARACTERISTICS—RELATIONS 
BETWEEN KW., KV., P. F., AND CONDENSER KV-A.—ConpDucTOR—716,000 
cm. ALUMINUM—92,900 cm. STEEL 


CALCULATION ASSUMPTIONS 


Steel core aluminum conductor—716,000 c. m. aluminum and 92,900 c. m. steel—20 ft. 
horizontal spacing 


i ee coal receiver volts—200,000 (low side receiver transformer, includes transformer 
rop). 


Constant generated volts—230,000 (high side generator transformer) 
Loads—delivered at 75 per cent power factor 


Pkewiigerier bank of 50,000 kw. capacity with—resistance 0.5 per cent, reactance 12.0 
per cen 


Two banks of transformers in parallel at each end of line. 
Losses include those of line, transformers and synchronous condensers 


ments recently conducted in regard to these effects. It is 
understood that the investigators who have been carrying out 
these experiments anticipate presenting their findings in some 
detail to the engineering profession at an early date. It may 
be stated that this investigation indicates that in the practical 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1051 


application of inductance and resistance formulas and calcula- 
tions to transmission line ‘studies, the effect of the steel core 
may be neglected. 

Skin effect assumes appreciable proportions for the large 


1270 
260 
on : 
- 50 2 
S 268,600 Volts g 
fat D > 
= 1,456 Kw. ; 240° 
= 79,130 Kva. to Charge Line = 
= owance-for Corona) a 
= 230 S 
oc i 
Ld S) 
# e 
ro) 220 
210 
200 0) 
250 200 150 100 50 0 . 
MILES OF LINE 
RESULTS 
High voltage ; Losses 
———————— |, tive JOW (excl. corona 
Curve | Rec’r | Cond’r Receiver Generator voltage gen. loss) 
kw. Kyv-a. 
kv ys Lat, Sy % p.f.| kv %p.f.| kw % 
250 mile line 
A 0} *49,000 | 209.0] * 0.18 | 230 4+-5.48 | 227.9 + 5:56) 2,704) .. 
B 50,000} + 7,600 | 207.2] *78.24 | 230 96.89 | 228.6| 797.70 | 2,691) 5.4 
c 100,000} 781,600 | 202.9 | *98.80 | 230 99.97 | 231.7 | *99.51 |11,843} 11.8 


Note: *Indicates lagging quantities. 
fIndicates leading quantities. 


Fig. 5—220-xvy. TRANSMISSION LINE CHARACTERISTICS—RELATION 
BErwEEN Kw., KV., P. F. AND CONDENSER Ky-A.—Conpuctor—450,000 
cm. CoppER—308,200 cm. STEEL 


CALCULATION ASSUMPTIONS 

Steel core copper conductor—450,000 c. m. copper and 308,200 c. m. steel—20 ft. hori- 
zontal spacing. z : : 

Constant receiver volts—200,000 (Low side receiver transformer—includes transformer 
drop) 

Constant generated volts—230,000 (high side generator transformer) 

Loads—delivered at 75 per cent power factor. ; 

Transformer bank of 50,000 kw. capacity with—resistance 0.5 per cent—reactance 12.0 

er cent 

z Two banks of transformers in parallel at each end of line. 

Losses include those of line, transformers and synchronous condensers 


sizes of conductor called for by 220-kv. transmission, particu- 


larly in case of the larger sizes of all-copper cable. The calcu- 


lation of skin effect in composite cables is somewhat more 
complicated and burdensome than in the case of a homogeneous 


conductor. 


1052 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


The operating characteristics of a 220-kv., 250-mile line are 
illustrated by Figs. 4, 5, and 6, which show for an aluminum- 
steel, a copper-steel and an all-copper conductor the relations 
between power transmitted, generator, receiver and line volt- 
ages, power factor, condenser load and resistance losses. 


” | 
5 
(e) 
rs) 100 Ke 289.200 Volts | 
= , Vato Charge Line 
ae ,257 Kw. = bs: 
ns F (No allowance for Corona) 
< 
o 
wi 
Za 
rr) 
oO 
200 
250 200 150 100 50 0 
MILES OF LINE 
RESULTS 
Losses 
High voltage | High voltage Equiv. low (excl. corona 
Curve | Rec’r | Cond'r Receiver Generator Voltage gen. loss) 
kw. kv-a. 


kv. | Du th Eve W%, Dates eye laos tells lew % 
250 mile line (solid line) 


A 0} *49,000 | 209.0| * 0.17] 230 | + 5.2 | 228.0 5.0 «| 2,607 ea 

B 50,000} + 7,000 |} 207.5} *77.8 230 | 97.3 | 228.6] 798.1 2,168] 4.3 

C  {100,000! +80,000 | 203.01 *98.5 230 | *99.9 | 232.5) *99.3 |10,562) 10.6 
100 mile line (dotted line) 

D 0| *57;500 | 210-3 |:* 0.20| 230-~* 2.0 | 236.3] * 2.09] 3,158 ‘ 

E 50,000} * 4,900 | 209.4} *68.5 230 | *81.1 | 236-2) | *72O08 1,478| 3.0 

F 100,000 | +54,000 | 208.0] *91.5 230 | *92.8 | 238.2 *90.0 | 6,242' 6.2 


Note *Indicates lagging quantities 
ftindicates leading quantities. 


Fie. 6—220-xv. Transmission Linge CHARACTERISTICS—RELATION 
BETWEEN Kw., KV., P. F. AND CONDENSER Ky-A.—Conpuctor—500,000 
cM. COPPER 


CALCULATION ASSUMPTIONS 
500,000 cm, copper (no steel core—20 ft. horizontal spacing. 


A ees receiver volts 200,000 (low side receiver transformer—includes transformer 
rop 


Constant generated volts 230,000 (high side generator transformer) 
Loads—delivered at 75 per cent power factor. 


Transformer bank 50,000 kw. with resistance 0.5 per cent, reactance 12.0 per cent 
Two banks of transformers in parallel on each end of line. 
Losses include those of line, transformers and synchronous condensers 


Necessary explanatory details are shown in tabulations accom- 
panying the curves. These studies show that effective voltage 
regulation of such long distance, high capacity lines may be. 


obtained by means of large, but not impracticable, synchronous 
condenser installations. 


=t919} SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1053 


A study of the relative economy of various sizes and types of 
conductors is shown in Fig. 7, with accompanying explanatory 
datain Table II. This study shows, for a load of 100,000 kw. 
per circuit delivered at 0.75 power factor and at load factors of 
60 per cent, 75 per cent and 90 per cent, that the combined 
annual costs of such items of the transmission system as would 
be materially affected by the size and type of the conductor, 
2. é., interest, taxes and amortization charges on cost of conduc- 
tor, annual value of lost power on the line due to resistance and 
corona and of power absorbed by transformers and condensers. 
The curve falling lowest on the scale, at any number of years 
which may be assumed as the life of the line, represents the 
most economical of the conductors considered. 

This curve is presented merely as an example of the general 
method followed in studying conductor economy. It does not 
represent the degree of refinement which would be warranted 
in making final determination of the economical conductor for 
an actual 220-kv. installation. Other items for which allow- 
ance should be made in such a study are the effect of conductor 
size and type upon cost of line structures and insulators, and 
the possible scrap value of the conductor. Amortization should 
preferably be calculated by the annuity or “sinking fund” 
method rather than by the simpler straight line method. It 
should be noted, however, that these additional refinements 
tend in some respects to offset one another, a feature which 
gives added justification for their omission from a preliminary 
study. Obvicusly, in any case great refinement in the technical 
assumptions is not called for until reasonably close values can 
be assigned to cost of conductor materials, for which the market 
will presumably be unstable for some time to come, to the 
equivalent costs of the power losses, and to the percentages to 
be employed for return on investment, taxes, etc. 

For the purpose of developing the line designs which will be 
presented later, a cable was chosen consisting of 716,000 cir. 
mils of aluminum (54 strands of 0.1151-inch diameter) and 
93,000 cir. mils of steel (7 strands of 0.1151-inch diameter). 
_ Particular attention, however, is called to the fact that these 

designs were started and this conductor chosen as a basis of 
study about a year ago, when prices were much higher than at 
present, and further that the choice was made upon the basis 
of a lower load factor than, in the light of further study, seems 
reasonable to assume as likely to obtain on the usual 220-kv. 


1054 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


transmission system. It 


is fully recognized that at present 


price levels and for a high load factor, the economical size of 
conductor would be larger than this, and that possibly the 
economic advantage would fall to a different type. 

Mechanical Characteristics of Aluminum-Steel Conductor. 
The large and heavy cables required for 220-kv. transmission, 
and the heavy conductor loadings which the importance of 


LEGEND 


: (alse aa 
90% Load Factor (Ca & Cu-St =-—-— 


2 (AFSt 
75% Load Factor jCu & Cu-St 


(ArSt 9 ====--= 
60% Load Factor (Cn & Cu-St -———=—- 


HUNDRED THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 


40 44 48 
YEARS 


Fig. 7—Economic Comparison or 220 xv. TRANSMISSION Conpuc- 
TORS—ANNUAL Cost Curves—250 Mizz, 100,000 xw. Stnete Circurr 
Line (Sez Tasie II ror Explanatory Data) 


220-kv. service requires as a design basis, together with the 
unusual general precautions which must be taken to assure 
reliability, call for a new order of refinement in the mechanical 


features of line design. 
imaginative foresight is re 


Careful study with a high degree of 
quired to provide against unsafe loads 


being imposed upon insulators and towers or clearances being 


dangerously reduced as a 


result of unusual or unexpected con- _ 


’ 
1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1055 


tingencies, and against possible unpreventable failures becom- 
ing cumulative and occasioning extensive damage. 

The mechanical characteristics of steel-core aluminum cables. 
are complicated, and calculation of stresses and sags under 
varying loading and topographical conditions presents an 


involved and difficult problem. This is due to the fact that 
the co-efficients of expansion and moduli of elasticity are 


TABLE II 


DATA RELATING TO ECONOMIC COMPARISON OF 220 KV. TRANSMISSION 
CONDUCTORS 


(See Fig. 7) 
ANNUAL CosT CURVES FOR 9 DIFFERENT CABLES AT 3 LOAD FACTORS 


1. Annual cost curves are plotted, dollars as ordinates, years as abscissas, and show the 
annual cost for any period up to 48 years. This is explained as follows: 
fete Depreciation expressed as first cost divided by number of years 


Baaual -| chosen. 
sees 1 2. Yearly interest and taxes taken as 8 per cent of first cost. 
(3. Annual value of Lost Power taken as 5 mills per kw-hr. 


First cost includes only cost of finished Aluminum-Steel Cable at 44.9c. per Ib. for 
aluminum and 12, 2c. per Ib., for steel f. 0. b. factory. First cost of finished copper 
or copper-steel cable @ 27.7c. per lb. for copper and 12.2c. per lb. for steel f. 0. b. 
factory. All other items of construction costs have been eliminated as not materially 
affecting the relative positions of the curves. 
Lost power includes line J? R, transformer J2R, condenser loss and corona loss. 
2. Cable Data. 


Circular Mils Strands 

Curve Kind Diam. 
designation of First Alum. | Total Alum. of 

(See Fig. 7) | cable Cost or Steel of or Steel | cable 
copper cable copper in. 

A Al.-St. | $1,175,700 | 605,000 | 78,000 683,500 54 en 0.952 

B Al.-St. | 1,362,800] 716,000 | 92,900 808,900 54 if 1.036 

‘S Al.-St. | 1,513,500 | 795,000 | 103,100 898,100 54 7 1.092 

D Al.-St. | 1,814,000} 954,000 | 123,700 | 1,077,700 54 7 1.196 

E Copper] 1,764,800 | 500,000 Bees 500,000 37 0.814 

F Cu.-St.} 1,733,300 | 450,000 | 105,000 555,000 30 7 0.857 

G Cu.-St.} 1,924,400] 500,000 | 116,600 616,600 30 7 0.904 

H Cu.-St.} 1,790,200 | 400,000 | 274,000 674,000 54 37 0.946 

K Cu.-St.} 2,011,700 | 450,000 | 308,200 758,200 54 Bye 1,004 


- different for the two metals and consequently are not accurately 
determinable for the composite cables. The cable manufac- 
turers, however, have investigated these charaeteristics and 
have developed practical, though laborious, methods of calcu- 
lation of conductor stresses and sags. These methods have 
‘been followed and are considered in the main to give results of 
an accuracy satisfactory for design purposes. 


1056 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


The basic data for calculations have been taken as: 


Aluminum Steel | 
Blastic bimit (1b. per sq. in.)........-.. 14,000 130,000 
Modulus of elasticity (Ib. per sq. in.) .. OP XI OFS 20 TGS 
Co-efficient of expansion (per degree 
fAHT) eee. #i:.. ce ete a Amc ee ae eae 12.8. X 102 )625 10> 


Elastic limit of composite cable 17,300 lb. 
(716,000 cir. mils aluminum, “93,000 cir. mils steel) 


Within any limits thus far investigated, it appears economi- 
cal under the design loading, to utilize the full strength of the 
conductor up to its elastic limit, 7. e., to keep sags toa minimum, 
thus enabling use of shorter towers or longer spans at the 
expense of stronger supporting structures at angles and dead- 
end points. With a new aluminum-steel cable, when the load- 
ing has been reached which will stress the steel core to its 
elastic limit, the aluminum will have passed its elastic limit and 
in consequence have been permanently stretched. The full 
working strength of the cable, 17,300 lb., will then have been 
developed, and it may then be said to have reached its final 
stretched condition, 7. e., to have received its “Spermanent set’’. 
As the heavy design loading is removed, the action of the 
aluminum strands will be to loosen infinitesimally on the steel 
core and to take no stress. In any subsequent applications of 
the design loading, the core will again be stressed to the elastic 
limit of the steel, and the aluminum will coincidentally reach 
its own elastic limit stress. At lighter loadings the aluminum 
will be a dead load upon the steel core, which will carry all of 
the stress. 

This introduces an interesting feature in that the charac- 
teristics of the composite cable when new are distinctly different 
from its. characteristics after it has received its ‘permanent 
set,” and, for loadings less than the design loading, will follow 
different tension-sag curves. This relation is shown graphi- 
cally in Fig. 8. 

The problem of predetermining stringing sags for a suspen- 
sion insulator line, in which there will be considerable differen- 
ces in lengths of adjoining spans and in elevations of the ends 
of individual spans, involves considerations of unbalanced 
tower loads, abnormal insulator loads and reduced tower and 
ground clearances under varying conditions of conductor 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1057 


loading. It is necessary, initially, to assume a somewhat 
different mental attitude toward the problem of conductor 
stringing than that which largely has been customary. For 
the conditions of 220-kyv. design, with heavy design loadings 
and large conductors under heavy tension, the problem assumes 
greater importance than in transmission line practise heretofore. 
In usual practise on suspension insulator lines, the conductor is 
strung to a certain predetermined tension, derived from tension- 


> RN 
ei Neer Point at which Aluminum 
‘| 


TENSION IN 1000 POUNDS 


“e 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
SPAN IN FEET 


Fig. 8—TENsION—TEMPERATURE CuRVES—DziAap ENpEp Spans— 
SrRINGING AND Finat Conpitions—Conpuctor—ALuUMinum 716,000 


cM.—STEEL 92,900 cm. 
i d aluminum cable—716,000 c. m. aluminum—92,900 c. m. steel—elastic 
pect eae ee oe ies allowable stress—17,300 lb. with 1% inch ice and 8 lb. wind 


deg. fahr. : ? 
at lideling cdsves represent stringing tensions of new cable, without load, before first 


application of maximum loading. = - : 
Potted line curves represent final tensions of stretched cable, without load, after applica- 


tion of maximum loading has given a permanent set to the aluminum. 


sag curves on the basis of the average span length between 
dead-end points, and the suspension insulators are then tied in 
in a vertical position. It is assumed that when the design 
loadings occur the conductor tensions and attendant loads 
upon insulators and towers will continue to maintain the con- 
dition of proper balance of stresses within reasonably close 
limits. Probably, with most present lines, the resulting 
‘unbalanced effects under design loading will not be serious. 

nder the assumed 220-kv. design conditions, preliminary 


1058 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


study has shown that such a method of stringing will result, 
under the extremely heavy design loading, in great longitu- 
dinal deflections of suspension insulators intended to operate 
purely as suspension units, and will consequently impose 
unsafe tensions upon these insulators, with attendant unbalanc- 
ing of tower loads and possibly dangerous reduction in tower 
clearances, in addition to over-stressing and stretching the 
conductor itself. 

The theoretically proper point.of view is that, under design 
loading conditions, the conductor should be uniformly stressed 
to its elastic limit and insulators should be hanging normally. 
Assuming the line to be in this condition under maximum load, 
the inverse of the condition just described will occur as the 
load is removed and the conductor contracts in length, that is, 
the suspension insulators will assume certain definite deflec- 
tions at towers between spans of different lengths and at 
adjacent towers at different elevations, resulting, of course, in 
a non-uniform tension in the conductor itself. It is this 
unbalanced condition without load which careful design should 
aim to produce in initial stringing. This method of stringing 
might, however, in some cases result in excessive insulator 
deflections and tensions under the non-loaded condition of the 
conductor, and some compromise between the two methods 
may be necessary to safeguard the clearances of the unloaded 
conductors. 

A method of predetermining for stringing conditions the 
proper conductor tensions or sags in individual spans and the 
proper insulator deflections is accordingly a desirable refine- 
ment. Some approximate treatment of the subject, at least, 
will probably be necessary. It should be noted that the 220-kv. 
designs suggested in this paper contemplate the use of very 
long suspension insulator strings, and that this length of string 
tends to lessen the amount of abnormal insulator and tower 
stresses and reduction of tower clearances which may be set up. 
If, as is hoped, improvement in insulator design should enable 
the adoption of a shorter insulator, an accurate method of 
conductor stringing will become correspondingly more impor- 
tant. 

A purely mathematical treatment of the problem appears 
complex in the extreme, although approximate methods of 
analysis seem to be feasible. The working out of such ap- 
proximate methods offers an interesting and valuable sub- — 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1059 


ject for research. An exceedingly instructive experimental 
investigation could be made along these lines, either by means 
of a series of spans of a full-sized line capable of being artifi- 
cially loaded, or by means of a miniature properly propor- 
tioned model. One troublesome feature of such an experi- 
mental determination of these phenomena would seem to be 
that of readily obtaining and controlling the necessary tempera- 
ture range, or of compensating or correcting for temperature 
variation by some indirect means. Such an investigation 
would fulfill a most valuable function in supplying empirical 
constants to be used as a basis for mathematical treatment and 
in verifying the results of approximate methods of analysis. 

The problem of actual stringing is further complicated by 
the use of a composite cable, owing to the shifting of tensions 
between the aluminum and the steel, and especially to the 
radically different characteristics of the cable before and after 
it has been stretched to receive its ‘permanent set”, as pre- 
viously described and as illustrated by Fig. 8. This differ- 
ence in characteristics leads to the possibility of two different 
methods of stringing a composite cable, i. e., it may be strung 
as received from the factory, or it may be stressed, prior to 
sagging and tying in, to its full strength, 17,300 lb., thus giving 
it nearly all of its “permanent set’”’ (it would receive all of its 
“permanent set” if the stretching were done at 0 deg. fahr.) 
In the latter case a series of tension-sag curves based upon the 
“permanent set’ condition of the cable would be used for 
stringing. In the case of stringing the new unstretched cable, 
it would be necessary to develop a special series of tension-sag 
curves, while the “‘permanent” tension-sag curves would be 
used in locating towers and checking clearances. 

For a new cable, in the absence of special data, the division 
of stress between the aluminum and the steel is indeterminate. 
Such special data may, however, be obtained, presumably by 
experiment. It probably will be found that the conditions of 
the cable as it comes from the factory is sufficiently uniform to 


enable such special stringing curves to be used consistently. 


The application of methods predetermining insulator deflec- 
tions, as discussed above, would involve even further complica- 


tion if these special unstretched tension-sag curves were to be 


used for stringing. 
From the operating standpoint, however, it would seem 


2 preferable to string the cable without preliminary stretching. 


“ 


1060 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


The design loading, with the large margin of safety which it is 
assumed to contain, will probably rarely be reached or approxi- 
mated on the greater portion of the line. The smaller initial 
sags would then in practise, for the greater part, never be 
increased to-the “‘permanent”’ sags by natural causes. Hence 
there would be obtained the advantage of smaller normal 
operating sags, with the unstretched aluminum acting as a 
reserve to increase them suitably when, or-if, the design 
loading should occur. 

_ Possibly a combination of the two methods might be worked 
out, whereby the cable would be stressed before tying in to 
some definite tension sufficient to insure giving the aluminum 
part of its “permanent” set. It would then be sagged in by 
unloaded tension-sag curves based upon the definite relation 
between stresses in the aluminum and the steel as established 
by this preliminary application of tension. 

The practical importance of the theoretical considerations 
involved in stringing irregular spans supported by suspension 
insulators, and the extent to which refinements may and should 
be carried will in the last analysis be governed by consideration 
of the practical limits of field application, taking into account 
the many variable physical and personal factors. The intent 
is to point merely to the interesting and apparently effective 
possibilities of theoretical and experimental research, pending 
further analysis and study. No field stringing curves embody- 
ing the refinements suggested have yet been developed, even 
in approximate form. For purposes of clearance determina- 
tions, of tower design and of study of tower economics, the use 
of “average span” tensions and sags probably embodies 
sufficient accuracy, and has tentatively been used. 

Adequate splices for aluminum-steel cables no longer are 
considered to present a problem. Satisfactory types have been 
developed and are in successful use on existing lines. In 
making these splices, the aluminum is cut back from the ends 
of the steel core, the core is then spliced by means of a soft steel 
sleeve, twisted on by means of special wrenches, and the sleeve 
and a considerable length of the aluminum strand at each end 
are then covered by a heavy aluminum sleeve which is solidly 
compressed on the conductors between the dies of a portable 
oil operated jack. Such splices are reported to develop the 
full strength of the cable, the splice itself having considerable 
excess strength. 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1061 


Overhead Ground Wires. The line designs presented provide 
for two overhead ground cables of 5/8-inch diameter high- 
a strength steel, 16,000 lb. elastic limit for the cable. The 
justification for the use of ground wires in 220-ky. transmission 
is debatable, but no well-formed conclusions seem possible 
except as a result of practical comparative experience. Their 
use on present high-voltage steel tower lines is nearly universal, 
remarkably so in view of the meagre and inconclusive character 
of the data as to the benefits derived. At 220 kv., with the 
high insulation provided and in view of the diminishing import- 
ance which, with increasing line voltage, it is believed can be 
attached to induced lighting disturbances, it is wholly con- 
ceivable that the protection afforded may be found to be of 
disproportionately small value. The cost of using ground 
wires is undoubtedly a large item, particularly in view of the 
extremely heavy design loadings assumed and the consequent 
tower stresses which they occasion. 

In view, however, of the great importance of 220-kv. service, 
it has been deemed conservative, until further experience is 
obtainable, to make provision for the use of ground wires. 
The plan of installation would be to omit ground wires from a 
considerable portion of one line, in districts where lightning 
conditions were severe, while ground wires would be used on a 
parallel line. Comparative performance data would be a 
guide to subsequent procedure. ; 

Types of Insulators Available. There is no type of insulator 
as yet developed which has thus far demonstrated its ability to 
give adequate, or even reasonably satisfactory results on high- 
voltage lines. This condition, however, applies nearly as 
much to the high voltages in current use, 110 kv. to 150 kv., as 
it does to 220 kv. It does not in any way affect the feasibility 
of 220-kv. transmission. It is confidently believed that 220-kv. 
line insulation can, with existing types of insulators, be made as 
safe and dependable as can the line insulation of present 
installations. In fact, where foresight in design and careful 
maintenance are employed, the present unsatisfactory in- 
sulator situation makes its effects evident far less in impair- 
ment of service reliability than in the high first cost, direct 
and indirect, of precautions against insulator failure and in 
high maintenance expense and operating inconvenience. The 
economic value of 220-kv. service is so high that greater 
expense and attention than at lower voltages are warranted 
in Measures to guard service. 


1062 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


The probable advent in the near future of such voltages as 
220 kv. should serve, nevertheless, to emphasize the economic 
necessity of developing line insulators to a point consistent 
with the other elements of the electric power generation and 
transmission situation. The baneful effects of the insulator 
situation are evident not merely in the expense and trouble 
occasioned, but in a certain degree of popular suspicion, in 
essentials unwarranted, of the general idea~-of high-voltage 
transmission. 

It is believed, as has just been noted, that practicable 220-kv. 
insulators can be obtained from present established types. 
There are commercially available three such types, all based 
upon the principle of a series string of disks, in practise of 
about 10-inch diameter, 7. e., the standard cemented cap and 
pin type, the Hewlett type and the newer Jeffrey-Dewitt type. 


Numerous other designs for high-voltage insulators have been © 


suggested, some of the series unit type and some in one piece. 
Certain of these designs appear to offer real promise, but none 
of them have been developed to the stage of commercial pro- 
duction, or even to a point where their service performance 
can be predicted. 

The following studies and 220-kv. line designs have been 
based upon the standard 10-inch cemented cap and pin type 
units. This implies no disparagement of the other types 
mentioned; in fact, these appear in some respects to offer 
significant advantages. The standard type has been taken as 
a basis of study because it has been used by far the most 


extensively and for long periods, and, therefore, more data are 


available in regard to its characteristics. Any general designs 
of towers and fittings developed for these units could equally 
well be used for the other types. The studies which follow, in 
conjunction with the general record of experience and inyesti- 
gation, indicate that there are certain characteristics, largely 
inherent, of these standard disk insulators which render them 
far from ideal for service at extra high voltage with heavy 
conductors. In certain respects this would be true of any 
insulator built up of a large number of disks. It is hoped that 
manufacturers will soon be able to develop an insulator, which 
will be more suitable for extra high-voltage use and will offer 
assurance of greater strength and permanence, both electri- 
cally and mechanically. ~- ; 
Electrical Characteristics of Disk Insulators. The designs 


—_ = > oe 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1063 


suggested make provision for a string of 15 standard units for 
regular suspension service on a 220-kv. grounded neutral line. 
This relatively large number of units affords a considerable 
margin for deterioration and, with proper care in maintenance, 
should assure a degree of reliability in service commensurate 
with the economic importance of 220-kv. service. 

It should be noted that a string of 15 standard units, with 
the necessary connecting pieces and fittings, will be nearly 
nine feet long. Such a length of insulator obviously involves 
great expense in obtaining the necessary tower clearances and 
heights, and it is also the determining feature in fixing conductor 
separation. This serves again to call attention to the need of 
more efficient and suitable insulators. An improvement in 
insulator design which would justify shortening the string, in 
addition to improving the electrical characteristics of the insu- 
lator itself, would enable material saving in tower costs. A 
wholly new insulator, having no greater length than necessary 
to insure requisite air clearances from conductor to support, 
say four or five feet, would enable a correspondingly greater 
and a very significant saving in tower costs. Such an insulator 
at moderate price might readily open the door to a variety of 
new types and arrangements of supporting structures. 

The primary electrical characteristics are those of arc-over 
and puncture. It is essential to reliable service that units be 
employed with the largest obtainable ratio of puncture voltage 
to arc-over voltage. The particular importance of this high 
ratio for 220 kv. will be evident in the light of certain data 
which will be presented later in regard to concentrations of 
electrical stress upon individual units of the string. 

The 60-cycle arc-over characteristics of long strings of 
standard disk insulators are shown in Fig. 9, which gives 
curves of arc-over voltage for wet and dry conditions. These 
curves are based upon published test data for shorter strings, 
extended mainly on a theoretical basis with the assistance of 
such fragmentary test data as have been available.* It is 
pertinent, and of great interest, to note that the dry arc-over | 
curve flattens out as the number of units in the string increases, 
approaching a condition where increasing the number of 
disks adds practically nothing to the dry arc-over voltage, 
while on the other hand the wet arc-over curve follows nearly 


*Peek, A. I. E. E. Trans. 1912, Vol. XXXI, p. 907,—“‘ Electrical 
Characteristics of the Suspension Insulator.” 


1064 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION _ [June 27 


a straight line characteristic and for long strings reaches higher 
values than the dry arc-over curve. These characteristics, as 
is well understood, are due in the case of dry arc-over, to the 
action of the charging current on the system of distributed 
series and shunt capacities which the insulator string con- 
stitutes, the resultant effect being a concentration of potential 
on certain units of the string. In the case of wet arc-over, the 
effect of the charging current is lost in the greater effect of the 
large leakage current. 

The dry arc-over characteristic thus appears to constitute 
the controlling feature of insulator design, in so far at least as 
60-cycle characteristics are determining. The fact that an 
insulator has a higher arc-over value under rain conditions is 


600 ERRUESEBESRaEG 
= 


KILOVOLTS 


4 6 8 0 12. 14 
NUMBER OF UNITS IN STRING 


Fig. 9—Tyricat 60-Cycitn Arc-OvER CHARACTERISTICS—SUSPENSION 
INSULATORS 


of no advantage, since this condition obtains for but a small 
fraction of the time, and in particular since heavy lightning 
discharges, with possibility of resultant normal frequency 
surges on the line, are more mes to occur just before a rain 
storm than during it. 

The distribution of voltage stress over the units of a string 
of fifteen standard 10-inch disks and the concentration of stress 
on certain units, notably those nearest the conductor, is shown 
by curve A in Fig. 10, which is based in the main upon published 
test data.* Ata line voltage of 220 kv., (127 kv. to ground), 
this concentration reaches a degree which not only interferes 
seriously with the efficient and economic use of the insulator 
units, but which brings the stress on the unit next to the con- 


he 
‘ 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1065 


ductor to a point higher with respect to its strength than the 
standards of practise set for 220-kv. service make desirable. 

Two methods are recognized as offering relief from this ex- 
cessive concentration. The first is the grading of the insulator 
units used in the string. This would be accomplished by mak- 
ing up the string of units of two or more distinct types, differing 
in size or diameter or in some other feature which would cause 
them to have different condenser capacities, those with the 
larger capacities being placed nearest to the conductor. The 


| | A= Normal 
B= Graded String(3 Steps) 
C= Shielded String(predicted) 


VOLTAGE ACROSS UNIT KV. 


2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
{INIT NUMBERED FROM LINE END 


Fic. 10—Tyrrcau 60-Cyctz Vottrace DistRiBUTION—SUSPENSION In- 
SULATORS—220 Kv. GROUNDED NEUTRAL SYSTEM 


‘results of one form of such grading are shown in curve B, Fig. 


10 which is based upon published test data.* It is evident 
that by such grading considerable and, for ordinary purposes, . 
ample improvement in voltage distribution can be effected. 
From a practical standpoint, this expedient involves a certain 
amount of complication and expense in construction and of 
expense and inconvenience in operation due to the necessity 
of maintaining stocks of each of the different types of units 


+A. LE. EB. 1916 Trans., Vol. XXXI, Part I, p.745, R. H. Marvin, 
“A New Method ofGrading Suspension Insulators.”’ 


1066 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


and of insuring their proper use in maintenance replacements. 
This disadvantage, while of some consequence, cannot be re- 
garded as prohibitive in view of the benefits which might be 
expected to accrue. 

A second method of relieving this excessive concentration of 
stress consists in installing below or around the disk nearest 
the conductor suitably designed metallic shields or rings. 
The effect of such shields in improving the stress gradient may 
be even more marked than that. of grading the insulator units. 
The stress distribution obtainable by this method has been 
predicted in curve C of Fig. 10, the values for which have been 
assumed from the fragmentary test data at hand. The use of 
such shields or rings at the lower end of the insulator string 
would obviously tend in itself to increase the requirements for 
tower clearances, but the shortening of the insulator string, 
which a successful application of this expedient would justify, 
might presumably compensate. 

In general either grading or shielding or a combination of 
the two appears to be feasible. Neither would appear to re- 
quire any very elaborate investigations and tests to determine 
effective designs free from possibility of secondary complica- 
tions of any moment. The conditions with the 15-unit string 
of standard units are so unsatisfactory that probably some al- 
leviating measures should be adopted. Of the two described, 
probably grading could be developed to a point ready for 
actual use most quickly and with least experimental investi- 
gation. It is wholly possible that a considerable grading effect 
might be worked out through selection from present commercial 
types of disks. 

A feature of the insulator situation which complicates the 
question of voltage stress distribution and which will have 
some effect upon methods of carrying out remedial measures 
is the fact that in order to obtain adequate mechanical strength, 
as will be discussed later, two or three strings of standard disks 
must be used in parallel at suspension points, and proportion- 
ately more at tension points. So far as is known, no investiga- 
tion has been made of the effect of parallel strings upon poten- 
tial gradient. 

The belief is widely entertained that arcing horns or rings or 
other discharge devices are of sufficient benefit to warrant their 
use. They would fulfill several functions, the first and primary 
function being to protect the insulator from the destructive 


f 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1067 


heat of an are. This function assumes particular importance 
on a large capacity, dead-grounded neutral system. For this 
purpose the devices should be so shaped and placed as to hold 
the arc securely away from the insulator string. Other func- 
tions are protection of the conductor from the possible burning 
by a high-power arc, and reduction of the likelihood of insulator 
puncture. It may be possible to combine in one device in some 
effective and economical manner the functions of a discharge 
horn or ring and of an electrostatic insulator shield. 

The foregoing discussion of electrical stresses on insulators 
refers, as will be noted, to such stresses as may be produced at 
the normal line frequency of 60 cycles. Under conditions of 
high-frequency oscillations and of steep wave front phenomena 
generally, the insulator voltage stress characteristics will be 
quite different. In particular, the high-frequency voltage 
stress distribution over an insulator string is understood to 
follow approximately a straight line characteristic. The im- 
portance to be ascribed to high-frequency phenomena as a 
disturbing factor in 220-kv. operation is a problem of a highly 
speculative character. “ Such evidence, however, as is available, 
and the trend of theoretical opinion, tend toward the conclu- 
sion that high-frequency becomes of diminishing relative sig- 
nificance as the line voltage is increased, particularly when 
transformer neutrals are dead grounded. The suggestion has 
been offered that, with a line operating near the corona limit, 
high-voltage surges at high frequency, representing usually 
small amounts of energy, tend to dissipate themselves in corona, 
corona dissipation of energy being more rapid at high frequen- 
cies. In any event it is believed improbable that a line suffi- 
ciently well-insulated to withstand low-frequency high-power 
disturbances is likely to encounter trouble from high-frequency 
disturbances. 

Mechanical Characteristics of Disk Insulators. The wide- 
spread dissatisfaction with the present insulator situation is 
believed to have arisen largely on mechanical grounds. 

A very disturbing feature is the much discussed insulator 
deterioration. The progressive failure, after a relatively short 
period of years in service, of the cemented type disk insulator 
is well recognized and has been almost universally experienced. 
Existing high-voltage lines are facing the prospect of continuous 
and difficult tests and expensive maintenance, both attended 
by interference with operation. Whether the causes be also 


1068 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


electrical, chemical or ceramic, the results are unquestionably 
serious. In this respect, however, the difficulties at 220-kv. 
would differ from those at low voltage only in the greater 
number of disks involved. 

From the standpoint of deterioration, the non-cemented 
types of disk insulator, which avoid the effects of dissimilar 
expansion of the component materials, seem to offer and to be 
demonstrating marked advantages. 

The working stress for standard cemented cap and pin type 
disks permitted by conservative practise is only about 2500 lb. 
With the large conductors and extremely heavy design loadings 
required for 220-kv. service, this low mechanical strength 
immediately presents itself as an embarrassingly serious 
limitation. The designs which have been worked out in this 
study call at normal suspension points for two strings in parallel 
with spans up to 700 ft. and for three strings in parallel with 
spans in excess of 700 ft. The complication and expense of 
hardware and the difficulties involved in clearances are obvious, 
not to speak of the direct cost of the insulators. If these 
insulators were to be used at dead-end points, tension assem- 
blies of at least six strings would be required, at the uncon- 
servative design load of 2900 lb. per string. A failure in one 
string, by unbalancing the load distribution, would seriously 
jeopardize the whole assembly. 

For service at dead-end points, however, the unsuitability of 
the standard disk is so pronounced that it is considered probable 
that resort would be made at once to an entirely different type 
of insulator. 

Considerable promise is offered by a relatively new type of 
insulator, a wooden rod insulated with compound and enclosed 
in a suitably petticoated procelain shell. Any desired mechani- 
cal strength can readily be secured in an insulator of this type, 
so that the full dead-end tension would be carried on one unit. 
Probably two units would be used in series to obviate an exces- 
sively long porcelain tube. Such tension insulators are in 
limited use on 120-kv. and 150-kv. lines. They are a new 
development, however, and in the absence of long service 
demonstration there naturally arises a question as to their 
electrical permanence. Experiments with somewhat similar 
types of insulator have shown unfavorable results in the way of 
disintegration of the wooden rod under long applied high 
electrical stress. On the other hand, oil insulated wooden rods 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1069 


in circuit breakers have, with few exceptions, been found to be 
durable. Possibly some other material, less susceptible than 
wood to disintegration, might be employed for the rod. Any 
cracking of the porcelain shell or loosening of joints, which 
would permit escape of the insulating compound, would of 
course result in failure of the insulator. In the light of present 
knowledge, however, the lack of service trial appears no more 
serious than the known complication of huge assemblies of the 
standard type of disk insulator. 

Summarizing the situation as to availability of present 
commercial disk insulators for 220-kv. service, it is evident 
that, in addition to known drawbacks, there exists considerable 
question as to fundamental characteristics which must to some 
extent be removed before confidence can be established in 
assumptions made and designs based upon these assumptions. 
Investigations should be conducted, with possible resultant 
developments, as to at least three features of the applicability 
of disk insulators to 220-kv. service, 7. @.: 

1. Tests to confirm or establish the dry and wet flashover 
characteristics, and accompanying potential gradients, of 
strings of ten to fifteen disk units, both singly and with several 
strings in parallel. These characteristics should be investi- 
gated both at 60 cycles and at high frequency; 

2. Experiments to determine how grading or shielding or 
both can most effectively be applied to strings of present types 
of disks; 

3. Continued investigation of insulator deterioration prob- 

lem. 
It is to be hoped that those concerned with the design and 
manufacture of insulators will be inclined to undertake investi- 
gations of this character. Of even greater ultimate importance, 
of course, are efforts looking to the development of a new type 
of insulator, more efficient electrically, with greater strength 
mechanically and of unquestionable permanence. — 

Clamps and Fittings. Reliable and satisfactory clamps are 
now on the market for composite cables of somewhat smaller 
sizes. It is not expected that any significant difficulty will be 
encountered in the design of clamps suitable for a cable of the 
size proposed. The clamps will presumably be of generally 
similar design to that of those now in use on some of the highest 
voltage lines in the country, of which illustration is given in © 


je Teta & 


1070 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION {June 27 
In the design of all cable clamps for use at 220 kv., especial 
care would be required in avoiding of sharp projections, ridges 
or points which might afford opportunity for formation of 
corona or static discharges. Sleeve protectors should be used 
with all types of clamps. At the ends of the clamps, bells of 
sufficiently large radius should be provided to avoid any chance 
of conductor crystallization from continued vibration. 

In the case of suspension clamps, attention should be 
given to obtaining long smooth clamping surfaces, and any 
corrugations should be of large radius. The clamp should 
hold the cable with sufficient strength to prevent slipping under 
normal conditions, and in case of conductor breakage slipping 
should not. occur except at the tower adjacent to the break. 
With the great length of the suspension insulator string, this . 
requirement should not be difficult to meet. 

Semi-tension clamps will have an important field of use, 
since it is the aim to go to extremes in avoiding points where 
full dead-end tension will come upon insulators. This type of 
clamp will accordingly be used at smaller angle and stabilizing 
points. It should hold the conductor, under all conditions, 
with no appreciable slipping, a requirement which may involve 
separate clamping of the steel core. A somewhat similar angle 
or side tension clamp will be needed for use at points where the 
line makes a considerable horizontal angle. 

For tension clamps, the best present practise is to provide 
for separate clamping of the core, as illustrated in Fig.11. For 
large cables worked. to their elastic limits, as required for 
220-kv. service, this method of clamping will be essential. 

Equalizer yokes and connectors present more of a problem 
than for present lines, since, as noted earlier, even at suspension 
points two or three insulator strings in parallel would be used, - 
while if disk insulators were to be used at tension points, not 
less than six parallel:strings would be necessary. Whether the 
present patterns of cast yokes are satisfactory.for such heavy 
duty service is questionable. Pressed steel or some design 
built up of structural shapes would appear preferable. 

Jumpers at dead-end towers will obviously be long, more | 
than 20 ft., and probably some form of jumper guide or anchor 
will be necessary. This has been satisfactorily accomplished 
. in existing lines by means of auxiliary weights, auxiliary 


insulator strings or rigid guides of structural steel attached to 
the yokes. 


PLATE XL. 
A. E. Es 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fre. 11—Conpuctor CLAMPS [SILVER] 


EXAMPLES OF PREVAILING PRACTISE 


INGSsisIe 2 amrduaivn -c-ic ce 
Nos iSuatids 4s tics os:. ry 


Suitable Type for Suspension 
Suitable Types for Semi-Tension 
Suitable Type for Tension 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1071 

Transmission Towers. Before proceeding to discussion of 
the problems of tower types and designs, it may be noted that 
for present purposes consideration has been confined to single 
circuit lines, primarily for the reason that at the start a 220-kv. 
system would be developed gradually, one or two circuits at a 
time, probably to a considerable extent over different rights- 
of-way. When, however, 220-kv. becomes established and 
conditions call for three or more parallel lines, or when networks 
have been established such that absolutely continuous service 
of any one line becomes relatively somewhat. less important, 
then the question of using double-circuit structures will deserve 
careful investigation. The advantages will consist in a con- 
siderable saving in tower cost and some saving in right-of-way, 
against which would lie the relatively minor chance of failure of 
a structure from extraordinary causes involving two circuits 
instead of one. 

The design of two circuit 220-kv. structures would open inter- 
esting possibilities. The large conductor separation, about 
20 ft., employed in the accompanying designs, adopted largely 
as a result of the long insulator strings used, would severely 
handicap the conventional type of double circuit tower,—three 
conductors in a generally vertical plane on each side of the 
tower,—owing to the great height and great weight of steel 
required. A shorter insulator would tend to reduce this 
handicap. There are other feasible types of double-circuit 
tower for 220-kv. service, in some respects more promising, in 
particular a tower with three legs transverse to the line carrying 
all six conductors in a horizontal plane. This type makes the 
high transverse strength easy to obtain, and suggests the 
possibility of building two legs to carry one circuit initially and 
adding the third leg and the second circuit later. The design 
of a double-circuit tower would, of course, be determined 
primarily by economy of steel. A discussion of structures for 
multiple cireuit lines is, however, beyond the scope of the 
present study. 

The choice of structure material, whether wood, or steel, is 
primarily one of total economy, considering first cost, deprecia- 
tion and maintenance. The long economic life which pre- 
sumably a 220-kv. line would represent, causes durability of 
material to assume even greater importance than in present 
practise, so that for most localities, wood construction would 
not be economical, even assuming that the requisite strength 


1072 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


for the heavy loads could be secured without resorting to unduly 


short spans. 
As to type of structure to be employed, the conventional 


rigid tower has been adopted as the most available for con- 


struction in the immediate future. The rigid tower type of line 


Se 


NZ INZ ee 
9 Sen —— pp Nas 
FOR 550 FT. SPAN 11-5 — 24-0} 11-5 
FOR 1000 FT. SPAN 10°0""1g-Wire — 2}°0 la 10/0" 


AAT it A 


OW & ( 
PK SES ¥ A 


cc 
ono 
ze Ae 550\ET. Ze 4 a7 Go 
=x OW Kh 
Gee __ FOR 1000 Fy. SPAN59 17 83. 
Els 7/2344'0} aS 
irs ° 5-95 es 
Ss 1 ae 
[a Sg 
22 
22 
eS 
= 
5S 
ww 
= q 


ee yr 
Paes 


ELEVATION 470° TOWER SIDE VIEW 47-0 TOWER 
FOR 47 FT. HEIGHT 22/0" 
FOR 80 FT. HEIGHT 35:07 


Fig. 12—220-xyv. Srmny TRANSMISSION TOWER—CLEARANCE DIAGRAM 
Typz A (SuspENsIoN)—For Verticat ANGLE 5 Dua. AND HORIZONTAL 
ANGLE 0 DEG. TO 2 pea. (For Design LoapING AND STRESSES SEE TABLE 


Ha) 
ConpiT1ions Causinc Maximum SwING oF INSULATORS TAKEN FOR DETERMINING TOWER 
DIMENSIONS 
+ ~ Horizontal Angle 
Position Span Turned by Wind Ice Temp. 
Conductors 
> a 
a 550 2 deg. 8 Ib. 0 in. 0 deg. 
< eS 
b 550 2 deg. 8 lb. 0 in. 0 deg. 


has been thoroughly studied and tested by experience, and 

when properly designed, its performance record has been 
satisfactory, at least with the smaller conductors and lighter 
loadings thus far used. It is recognized, of course, that the 
very great stresses existing in such a line as is here proposed 
tends to disturb the balance of considerations which has deter- 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1073 


TABLE III 
DESIGN LOADING AND STRESSES 
Type A TOWER (SUSPENSION) 

VERTICAL ANGLE 5 DEG. AND HorizonTAL ANGLE 0 Dz. To 2 DEc. 
Conpuctor, ALUMINUM 716,000 Cir. Mit.—STEEL 92,900 Cir: Mr. 
GROUND WIRE 5/8 IN. STEEL STRAND SUSPENSION INSULATORS 
WIND 8 LB. Ice 1% IN. ATO Dec. Faure. 

(For Type A TOWER CLEARANCE DIAGRAM SEE Fic. 12) 


Span (Normal and max. allowable with maxi- 


SUNT AsISlES)oe cracls oteierstoveee ian oe oree Soeiere wk 550 ft. | 700 ft. | 800 ft. | 1000 ft. 
Height of cross arm above ground............. 47 ft. Dd ate 63 ft. 80 ft. 


Transverse Loading 


Wiidionl fo wer Rat wiarwiefecarsdenciceis: 2 sib caele e ovarees 750 850 1,000 1,250 
Wind on 3 conds. with 1% in. ice at 2.69 lb. 

SICA Eee opens stags a7 ans othe kel 8: ese mths, setae 4,400 5,650 6,440 8,050 
Wind on 2 gr. wires with 134 in ice. at 2.42 

ipener his esc ce acdc ic isleve carers styeinee: ooh 2,650 3,400 3,860 4,850 
Pull, 3 conds. due to 2 deg. hor. angle....... 1,800 1,800 1,800 1,800 
Pull, 2 gr. wires due to 2 deg. hor. angle:.... 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
BL GOLAN LO BR GIMS ota oy areteval=.c1e wYalovcqele ave ei Role.o oyelsi ava. 10,800 | 12,900 } 14,300 | 17,150 
Lest load—125 per cent. o00iscvcsiecscnsc cee 13,500 16,000 18,000 | 21,500 


Torsional Loading 
It is assumed that one conductor is broken and the pullof the conductor in the adjoin- 
ing span is decreased due to the tendency of the insulator string to swing in the 
direction of the pull. 


Assomed siaximum load. oo. «.0sc.6 i002 sie ee 8,000 9,000 10,000 11,000 
Test load—125 per Cent... 0.22. ccccleccceees ~ 10,000 | 11,300 | 12,500 | 13,800 


Vertical Loading (At each conductor and ground 
wire support) 


Weight of conductor at 0.9 lb. per ft........ 500 600 750 900 
Weight of 1% in. ice at 4.72 lb. per ft....... 2,600 3,300 3,800 4,750 
Due to 5 deg. vertical angle...............-. 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 
Insulators and hardware.............see0e> 400 400 400 400 
WV etaire, ores cteders siete %e(eretelo te, stators lace oie! oyeptieile/sr ape ays 200 200 200 200 
EEeSeUUEC REEL OMGLE Mey a en we Pafiaratevoinr e alo\'s ayasce\ eid ate irs, sew 800 800 800 800 
SE GtAMOAdaAL O11 SUDPOTtsi05 0 c1c.0leis.0 005+ o.0-0 6,000 6,800 7,450 8,550 
Testiload—125 per Cent... ois se-ciccie oe cists 7,500 8,500 9,300 } 10,700 


Design Stresses 
Above test loads include all factors of safety so that structural steel should be stressed 


as follows: 
Working load max. 
Test load condition 

In tension........0.+0005 30,000 Ib. per sq. in. 24,000 

100 L 80 L 
In compression........... 30,000 — R Ib. per sq. in. 24,000 — aos 
Bolts im SHeat. sve. feos 25,000 lb. per sq. in. 20,000 
Boltsin bearing.........+ 50,000 lb. per sq. in. 40,000 


Values L/R to be used shall be: a. For main members not greater than 120 
b. For secondary members not greater than 200 
c. For redundant members not greater than 250 
Minimum thickness of metal }in. All material to be galvanized. 
Test loads as specified for transverse, torsional and vertical loading to be applied sepa- 


ately. 


1074 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


mined the present rigid tower type of line design, and further 
study, in conjunction with actual experience in 220-kv. con- 
struction, may later indicate that greater economy is obtainable 
with a different type of construction. For immediate purposes, 


Section P.P. 
30°47°), 73°37’ Gr. Wire) 


HEIGHT 47: 0'FOR 550 FT. SPAN 
HEIGHT 80-0" FOR 1000 FT. SPAN 


ELEVATION 47 FT. TOWER 


FOR 47 FT. HEIGHT 24-0" 
FOR 80 FT. HEIGHT 


Fig. 13—220-xy. Stree, TRANSMIssion ToOwER—CLEARANCE D1AGRAM— 

Tyrr B (SuspEnsion)—For VmerticaL ANGLE 10 prac. AND HorIzoNTAL 

ANGLE 2 pag. To 10 pea. (For DEestcn LoapING AND StREssES SEE 
Tasie IV) 


ConpiITIONS CAUSING MAXIMUM SWING oF INSULATORS TAKEN FOR DETERMINING TOWER 
DIMENSIONS 


Horizontal Angle 


Position Span Turned by Wind Ice Temp. 
Conductors 
= SS 
a 1000 2 deg. plus 8 Ib. Qin. * 120 deg. 
——> 
b 550 10 deg. 8 lb. 0. in. 0 deg. 
<— 0 deg. 
C 1000 0 deg. 8 lb. 0 in. or 
——> 120 deg. 
d 550 2 deg. minus 8 lb. 0 in. O deg. 


however, it has been deemed that a conservative attitude should 
be adopted toward innovations not specifically called for by the 
conditions of 220-kv. service. 


It is growing practise in heavy line construction to provide a 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1075 


TABLE IV 
DESIGN LOADING AND STRESSES 
Tyre B Tower (SusPENSION) 
VERTICAL ANGLE 10 Dec. AND HorizonTaL ANGLE 2 Dec. To 10 Dsc. 
Conpuctor, ALuMINUM 716,000 Cir. Mins. STEEL 92,900 Cir. Mis. 
GROUND WirE °/s IN. STEEL STRAND SUSPENSION OR SEMI-TENSION INSULATORS 
WIND 8B. Ice 1% 1n. aTO Dec. Faure. 
(For Type B Tower CLEARANCE D1AGRaAm SEE Fic. 13) 


Span UNOrmAl)< set cee ons ohare cs eee ee 550 ft. | 700 ft. | 800 ft. | 1000 ft. 
Span (maximum allowable With maximum 

PAU CE acc eee ae OF gis orate he Oe 700 ft. | 900 ft. | 1000 ft. | 1200 ft. 

Height of cross arm above ground........... a7 GES 57ft. 63 ft. 80 ft. 
Transverse Loading 

Windom towers contre on ote ee es 850 1,000 1,250 1,500 

Wind on 3 conds. with 14 in. ice at 2.69 Ib. 

(Se hs ASS ae, Seen, eee ae ee me 5,600 7,250 8,050 9,700 
Wind on 2 gr. wires with 1% in. ice at 2.42 Ib. 

DELMECL ec eee en ee = eee Tee ee 3,350 4,350 4,850 5,800 
Pull 3 conds. due to 10 deg. horizontal angle. . 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 
Pull 2 gr. wires due to 10 deg. horizontalangle. 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 
SEGLAL NOM a ee ant nok a dee ech «2 2b Sl Aes 24,800 | 27,600 | 29,150 | 32,000 
est load—135. per cent.......5. 0-50 00 Te a 33,500 | 37,300 | 39,400 | 43,200 


Torsional Loading 
It is assumed that two conductors are broken and that the pull of the conductors in 
the adjoining span causes unbalanced loading in the tower. 


Load at any one conductor or ground wire 
SIMEMOOR Eats ANE coe nin SS orp ee aa oven Sener 17,300 | 17,300 |} 17,300 | 17,300 
Vest JToad—135 per cent... sac acto « os:< avvioroiere 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 


Vertical Loading (At each conductor and ground 
wire support) 


Weight of conductor at 0.9 lb. per ft........ 600 850 900 1,100 
Weight of 1% in. ice at 4.72 lb. perft....... 3,300 4,250 4,700 5,700 
Due to 10 deg. vertical angle............... 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 
THSIVATOTS ATG ALG WALE sole a's 62 2 dene ars-s oto tere 400 400 400 400 
MVE Grd A Coton oe ea Msiole wets, Rhy ro nee BUN) 200 200 200 200 
PSUs EAC KG orate fescivitiirs, ion chairs ich a DiaeGiace Do gat 800 800 800 800 
Total load ab ONE SUPPOLbe ss... tees ct he owe 8,300 9,500 | 10,000 | 11,200 
Test. load—135 per. Cent....0 seine sccacccnes 11,200 | 12,800 | 18,500 | 15,100 


Design Stresses (Same for Towers Types C. D. and E. Tables V, VI and VII) 
Above test loads include all factors of safety so that structural steel should be stressed 


as follows: 
Working load max. 
Test loads ‘ conditjon 
In tension........ Fe ere 0 aie 30,000 lbs. per sq. in. 22,000 
‘ 75 L 

In compression.......... ( 30,000 — — x ) lbs. per sq. in. ( 22,000 — ae ) 
Bolts th, shear. .2..e «oi « ~ 25,000 Ibs. per sq. in. 18,500 
Bolts in bearing......... 50,000 37,000 


Values of L/R to be used shall be: a. For main members not greater than 120 
; b. Forsecondary members not greater than 200 
c. Forredundant members not greater than 250 
Minimum thickness of metal1!/g in. All-material to be galvanized. 
Test loads as specified for transverse, torsional and vertical loading to be applied sepa- 
rately. f 


1076 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


series of standard towers of different strengths, adapted to safe 
and economical use under varying conditions of span lengths 
and angles. The extremely heavy loading basis assumed for 
a, 220-kv. line makes it feasible, and desirable from the stand- 
point of economy of steel, to carry this differentiation to a 
greater extent than has been customary heretofore. The tower 
design studies which follow are based upon a series of five 


Gr.Wire Gr Wire 
Zs : 


O'HEIGHT FOR 550 FT. SPAN 
0“O"HEIGHT FOR 1000 FT. SPAN 


’ 
‘ 


47; 
80 


as 


mmetrical abou 
Center Line 


Bee 


2 . Ground Line 
ELEVATION 47 FT.TOWER 


Sy 


For 47 FtHeight 


For 80 Ft.Height 2270 


35-0- 

SIDE VIEW 47 FT.TOWER 

Fia. 14—220-xv. Stren TRANSMISSION TOWER—CLEARANCE Dta- 

GramM—Tyrrn C (Sipr Trension)—For Vertican An@tE 15 DEG. AND 

Horizontat An@un 10 pea. To 25 peg. (For Design LoapING AND 
Stresses Sree TABLE V) 


ConpiITIONS CAUSING MAXIMUM wad OF INSULATORS TAKEN FOR DETERMINING TOWER 
IMENSIONS 


Horizontal Angle 


Position Span Turned by Wind Ice Temp. 
Conductors 
> = - 
a 550 25 deg. 8 lb. 0 in. O deg. 
b 1000 10 deg. 8 lb. 0 in. 120 deg, 


standard types of tower for use under the varying conditions 
presented by a 220-kv. line over a rolling terrain. 

The determination of economic balance between height and 
weight of towers and normal length of span is an interesting 
and a fundamentally important problem. Studies of tower 
designs and of this economic balance for four different normal 
span lengths are shown in some detail in Figs. 12, 18, 14, 15 and 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1077 


16, with accompanying data in Tables III, IV,.V, VI and VII. 
The procedure followed in carrying out this study of economic 
span length will be described briefly. As a basis of study a 


TABLE. V 
DESIGN LOADING AND STRESSES 
Type C Tower (SIDE TENSION) 

VERTICAL ANGLE 15 Dec. AND HorizontTaL ANGLE 10 DEG To 25 Dzc. 
Conpbuctor. ALUMINUM 716,000 Crk. Mit.—STEEL 92,900 Crr. Mit. 
GrounD Wire °/s in. STEEL STRAND: 

SUSPENSION OR SEMI-TENS}QN INSULATORS 
Winp 8 LB.—Icz 1% in. at O Duc. Fanr. 
(For Type C Tower CLEARANCE D1aGRAM SEE Fic. 14) 


a a ee es ee ee 


PALS CIOLMAL ose oe wears os CASE cE Cee 550 ft. | 700 ft.| 800 ft. | 1000 ft. 
Span (max. allowable with maximum angles) | 900 ft. | 1100 ft. | 1200 ft. | 1400 ft. 
Height of crossarm above ground........... 47 ft. 57 tt. 63 ft. 80 ft. 
Transverse Loading 

ANSELM OTE SOW ELS Ieee octas ainwis noel tosses e 1,200 1,400} 1,500 1,750 
Wind on 3-conds. with 1% in, ice at 2.69 Ib. 

fi oe ae AF RA, See eee) eae 7,250 8,875 9,700 | 11,300 
Wind on 2-ground wires with 1% in. ice at 

ede AD SIeL These apsomieces olka a Maleetnwia’c. ke > 4,350 5,325 5,800 6,750 
Pull, 3 conductors due to 25 deg. horizontal L 

NOISE ie. Dcin ics vis c oc8% 6 fone cre eae et 22,500 | 22,500 | 22,500 | 22,500 
Pull, 2 ground wires due to 25 deg. horizontal ‘ 

NA let ieese te eiareis « emicte cereus aiciauae | £4, pO0s|. 14-500'|',.14,500. |). 14500 
PNRM HOC es etireraie, vy. eine ae 6.9 ot thet n whe eee 49,800 | 52,600 | 54,000 | 56,800 
Rm ee Le IEE COMP lets ie.e0.sorr tea caioim ale 67,200 * 71,000 | 72,900 ' 76,700 


Torsional Loading 
It is assumed that“two conductors and one ground wire are broken and that the pull 
of the unbroken conductor and ground wire in the adjoining span causes unbalanced 
loading on the tower. 


Load at any one conductor support......... 17,300 } 17,300 | 17,300 | 17,300 
Test load—135 per cent..............-.-.++-| 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 
Load at any one ground wire support....... 16,000 | 16,000 } 16,000 |} 16,000 


Restiload—l3b Per Ceub.60 6d wjesee cs we ess 21,600 | 21,600 | 21,600 | 21,600 
Vertical Loading (at each Conductor and Ground ’ 
Wire Support) 


‘ 


Weight of cond. at 0.9 Ib. per ft............ 810 990 1,080 1,260 
Weight of 1% in. ice at 4.72 lb. perft.......] 4,250 5,200 5,670 6,600 
Due to 15 deg. vertical angle............... 4,500 4,500 4,500 4,500 
Pnsilator and. Nard Ware x. .sic1< 0:0 ¢.<.<'c arse satan 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
Detetgte ciaralaca x wen ae anaes wil rs hagere 0x sh aves Ween 400 400 400 400 
J ReCoiayeh bran eteVed al (23 Fey eon ics QR Lc eee ate Ge 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
Total load at ONE SUPPOPbace oe. 6 sf ans are ie sere 12,360 | 13,490 | 14,050 | 15,160 
Léspdoand—155 Per COiibs.>.. aaie.ci 206 o's 02:- = oo ee 16,700 ' 18,200 ! 18,900 ! 20,500 


Design Stresses (Same as for Type B Tower, See Table 4) 


_ typical section of profile, as shown in Fig. 17, (a section 23.3 
miles long from an actual surveyed route), was selected as a 
fair example of average 220 kv. line location in rolling country, 


1078 SILVER: POWER. TRANSMISSION [June 27 


and the economic study was based upon this profile. For each 
of four normal span lengths; 7. e., 550 ft., 700 ft., 800 ft. and 
1000 ft., four actual approximate line designs, based each upon 


Ee es a Be aes a 


ia (For Side Tension Téwer) 
i ie ’ ~ 
za ’ 
' oot 
' , 
et ieee / 
Fin (nasty Ai 


‘ 
‘ 
1 
Nas ee eee 

we Section {.T. | Seed 
ius? Cu 
NY 4 


\ 
Conductor ba 


oo 


47° 0° HEIGHT FOR 550 FT. SPAN ——Sror} 


Ww 
80-O°HEIGHT FOR 1000 FT.“SPAN — ore 


* 


Ground Line 
ELEVATION 47 FT. TOWER FOR 47 FT. Be a a Seen 
FOR 80 FT. HEIGHT 35°0" 
; SIDE VIEW 47 FT. TOWER 
Fig. 15—220-xv. Sremn TRANSMISSION TOWER—CLEARANCE Dt1a- 
GramM—Tyrr D (Sipp Trenston aND ANCHOR)—VERTICAL ANGLE 25 


DEG.—HOoRIZONTAL ANGLE (SipE TENnsIoNn) 25 pua. To 60 pea. (ANCHOR) 
60 pea. To 90 pra. (For Design LOADING AND StREsSES SEE TABLE V1) 


ConpDITIONS CAUSING MAxIMUM SWING OF INSULATORS TAKEN FOR DETERMINING TOWER 
DIMENSIONS 


paren | Horizontal Angle 
Position Span Turned by Wind Ice 


Temp. 
Conductors 
> ==> § 
a 550 60 deg. 8 lb. 0 in. 0 deg. 
epee Sa 
b 1000 25 deg. 8 lb. 1% in. 32 deg. 


its own set of specific tower locations, was carried out, and the 
cost of each line was estimated. These costs, as plotted in Fig. 
18, show maximum economy with normal spans of,800 ft. with 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1079 


TABLE VI 

DESIGN LOADING AND STRESSES 

Type D Tower (SIDE TENSION AND ANCHOR) 

VERTICAL ANGLE 25 Dra. 
HOoRIzoNTAL ANGLE (SIDE TENSION) 25 Dec. To 60Dkc., (AncHoR) 60 Dec. To 90 Dsc. 
ConpbuctTor, ALUMINUM 716,000 Crr. Mit.—STEEL 92,900 Cir. Mr. 
GROUND Wire ®/s in. STEEL STRAND 
SUSPENSION, SEMI-TENSION OR TENSION INSULATORS 
Winp 8 L3.—Ice 1% 1n. at O Dec. Fane. 
(For Type D Tower CLEARANCE D1AGRAm SEE Fic. 15) 


a 


SpanKGNortial)... clays cae hae elon sig anes te aaee 550 ft. | 7OOft.| 800 ft. | 1000 ft 
Span (maximum allowable with maximum 

ATTIALOS Wm cypts!o (Sess fal Syn, a 2a va oS cn jest page IS OG 1100 ft. | 1300 ft. | 1400ft. | 1600 ft. 
Height of gross arm above ground........... 47 ft. 57 ft. 63 ft. 80 ft. 


Transverse Loading 


WWittteOR EO WET. 6: Saistels cots. ote eo EEE Se oes 1,200 1,400 1,500 1,750 
Wind on 3 conductors with 1% in. ice at 2.69 

PERSE fhe owen Te, ola avalsis aie ate oi a, .0) e's Se 8 8,875 | 10,500 | 11,300 | 12,900 
Wind on 2 ground wires with 1Min ice at 2.42 

Meagan L brave pala iek dee vets eel ees ae sm) E's we 5,325 4 6,300 6,800 7,750 
Pull 3 conductors due to 90 deg. horizontal : 

VBA crass at's aloes fe Mace Sha atone ioe dp oeea<el a aie oho ia, 4 73,400 | 73,400 | 73,400 | 73,400 
Pull 2 gr. wires due to 90 deg. horizontalangle.| 45,300 | 45,300 | 45,300 | 45,300 
PROPANE Jo ois ore, ae: S » ols idle ap0l'ece sauces Slane. 134,100 | 136,900 | 138,300 | 141,100 
West dead—Ish per Cen bars c «0 os'2's ejeleaeeleleee 181,000 | 184,800 | 186,700 | 190,500 

Longitudinal Loading (Line terminal tower) 
Pelh Asiestons CORGUCEOES. 5 5 <i 0.cfe o0.c. eb oi > «oye 51,900 | 51,900 | 51,900 | 51,900 
Pull due to 2 eround wites...2.2 scan. ces oe 32,000 | 32,000 | 32,000 | 32,000 
EL) BLOM cheery 215. o sores Shed Asal a ohn «dele mast, Maud) eu 83,900 | 83,900 | 83,900 | 83,900 
‘Dest load——13 5) per, Certs aa. ince 12 e'~ ersneiw, « sous 113,300 | 113,300 | 113,300 | 113,300 


Torsional Loading 
It is assumed that two conductors and two ground wires are broken and the pull of 
the conductors and ground wires in the adjoining span causes unbalanced loading in 


the tower. 

Load at anyone conductor support.......... 17,300 | 17,300 | 17,300 | 17,300 
Test load—135 per cent of actual........... 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 
Load at any one ground wire support....... 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 
Test load—135 per cent of actual........... 21,600 21,600 | 21,600 21,600 


Vertical Loading (At each conductor and ground 
wire support) 


Weight of conductors at 0.9 lb. per ft........ 1,000 1,200 1,300 1,450 
Weight of 1% in. ice at 4.72 Ib. per ft....... 5,200 6,150 6,600 7,550 
Due to 25 deg. vertical Angle... . 10.2057 s0% 7,300 7,300 7,300 7,300 
Insulators and hardwareé...1......-.+++--+-0- 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
Myles teen skied etree acon a asi ecesnie a ey lode erence 400 400 400 400 
Repair GACKIe mae alegaielc) she) Mere wsisre vd ng othaete = 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
Total load at one StppOrts .% cers cs ors ows 16,300 | 17,450 | 18,000 | 19,100 
Test load—135 per cent of actual load.......] 22,000 | 23,600 | 24,300 | 25,800 


Design Stresses (Same as for Type B Tower, See 
Table IV) 


1080 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


the rigid type of tower assumed, while longer spans or shorter 
spans are more expensive. The 800 ft. normal span was 
selected as a basis for further studies. 

The method of carrying out these line designs involved, first, 
determining the height of tower corresponding to the span 
length selected. To determine this height, a ground clearance 
of 25 ft. under design loading was assumed (corresponding with 


SECTION S.S. 


{nsulator7 \\-Jumper Guide 


38-0" Height for 550’ Span 


For 38’ Height 
For 71’ Height 


ELEVATION 38 FT. TOWER SIDE VIEW 38 FT. TOWER 


Fig. 16—220-xv. Srmr, TRANsMiIssion TowER—CLHARANCE Dra- 
GrRaM—Typre E (AncHor)—Vurtica, ANGLE 0 pEa. To 15 »pE@. 
Horizontat Anair (ANcHOoR) 0 pra. To 60 DEG. (For Drsian Loap- 
ING AND Stresses Sup Tasrie VII) 


an 800-ft. span to about 35 ft. at 60 deg. fahr) and a sag- 
clearance template developed for the aluminum-steel conductor 
used. On level ground, for the 25 ft. clearance, this template — 
gave the standard tower heights for the four normal span 
_lengths under consideration as 47 ft.,57 ft., 63 ft. and 80 ft. For 
each height of tower, the five standard designs were developed 
in outline and, with the sag-clearance template, tower locations 
were spotted on the typical profile selected. With the locations 
determined, the required type of tower was selected from the 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1081 


TABLE VII 
DESIGN LOADING AND STRESSES 
Type E Tower (ANCHOR) : 
VERTICAL ANGLE 0 Dec. To 15 DEG. AND HorizontTaL ANGLE 0 DEG. To 60 DEG. 
ConbucTor ALUMINUM 716,000 Crr. Mit.—STeEEL 92,900 Cir. Mr. 
GrounD Wire °/s In. STEEL STRAND 
TENSION INSULATORS 
Winp 8 Lzs.—Ice 1% 1n. at O Dec. Fane. 
(For Type E Tower CLEARANCE D1aGRaAM SEE Fic. 16) 


a 


SUES TN GE os ie oe oe 550 ft. | 700 ft. | 800 ft. | 1000 ft. 
Span (maximum allowable with maximum 

ZT I) loa ic Sone ORE, Ca eee 1000 ft. | 1200 ft. | 1300 ft. | 1500 ft. 
Height of cross arm above ground........... 38 ft. |- 48 ft. 54 ft. GL Sts 


Transverse Loading 


RSME OP LOWED aoe ot. se sete cass cates 2 oo 850 1,000 1,250 | 1,500 
Wind on 3 conds. with 1!4 in. ice at 2.69 lb. 

WG Sar eet eral tte wre ees Sistas dieec.« wee, oe 8,070 9,700 | 10,500 | 12,100 
Wind on 2 gr. wires with 1% in ice at 2.42 Ib. 

STR Ht 35 CREADAG Oy LA ees 4,830 5,800 6,300 7,300 
Pull—3 conductors due to 60 deg. horizontal 

ANP eersiole Mae Lae eA tea cis cae Fun 6s 51,900 | 51,900 | 51,900 | 51,900 
Pull—2 gr. wires due to 60 deg. horizontal 

BNO natmsfe atsicgso te eis wy. ee ae vue. eee hie gaa 32,000 | 32,000 | 32,000 | 32,000 
McA OAC 2 rave ch cous 2. 2 coacteet Chee enema 97,650 | 100,400 | 101,950 | 104,800 
Testiload—-135: per: cents.ee weireeo< at apr eps wees 131,800 | 135,500 | 137,600 | 141,500 

Longitudinal Loading (Line terminal tower) 

Pull due to 3 conductors... ccc secscees s...| 51,900 51,900 51,900 51,900 
Pull. dus toe 2-ground wires: 22.25. Gesgie oes 32,000 | 32,000 | 32,000 32,000 
otal Loads of os cies oes eo ose Maesty oi Parr exoleie 83,900 | 83,900 | 83,900 | 83,900 
Test load—135 per cents. ...22-0.-deiec genes 113,300 | 113,300 | 113,300 | 113,000 


Torsional Laoding } 
It is assumed that two conductors and two ground wires are broken and the pull of 
the conductors and ground wires in the adjoining span causes unbalanced loading in 


the tower. 
Load at any one conductor support......... 17,300 | 17,300 | 17,300 | 17,300 
Test load—135. Der CEDEis< eeeciwnetecdewna 23,400 | 23,400 | 23,400 23,400 
"Load at any one ground wire support........ 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 | 16,000 
Test load-——135 per-Centins.. 2 aciics soe sine ace 21,600 | 21,600 | 21,600 | 21,600 


Vertical Loading (at each conductor and ground 
wire support) 


Weizht of conductors at 0.9 lb. per ft........ 900 1,080 1,170 1,350 
Weight of 1% in. ice, at 4.72 lb. per ft...... 4,700 5,670 6,136 | 7,080 
Due to 15 deg.—vertical angle.............. 4,500 4,500 4,500 4,500 
Insulators.and hardware: .< <)-crwliiets view ewics 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
NA ray eines atleast aver Cochise anal onzxen caticurd.cesien oee eller a3 400 400 400 400 
We pati cae kterdatitsvotys ain eeeeas ea craten sole ele are 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 
‘Of oiel iosd at one-cupporis<is.=speeieee 12,900 | 14,050 | 14,600 | 154700 
Test load—135 ETICE by ener: ews aru este 17,400 ' 19,000 ! 19,700 '! 21,200 


Design Stresses (Same as for Type B Tower, See Table IV.) 


1082 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


1000 


FEET ELEVATION 


oOo 
So 
o 


0 5.000 10,000 15,000 FEET 20,000 25,000 30,000 


FEET ELEVATION 
ei 
€ 


500 |— 


Oo 


35,000 40,000 45,000 FEET 50,000 55,000 60,000 


1500 


1000 


FEET ELEVATION 


or 
(=) 
co 


. 
65,000 70,000 75,000 FEET _ 80,000 85,000 90,000 
= 1000; 4—= 
2 
<= 
a 
= 
lu 
ta 
Ie 
500 
=a 
ou 
95,000 100,000 105,000 110,000 115,000 120,000 125,000 
EET 


Fie. 17—Srction or Prorite or TyprcaL, Transmission Ricut oF 
Way Usp 4s Basis ror 220-xv. Linz Stupies To DetTeRMINE Economic 
PAN ; 


220-KV. TRANSMISSIO | te shh et ei ‘ WERS => 
ae 
= : LINE STUDIES PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE TO DETERMINE ECONOMIC SPAN. SELF-SUSTAINING, HORIZONTAL ARRANGEMENT, SINGLE CIRCUIT. STEEL TOWERS 
“toot s 
Article 3 Se . 700-foot span _ 800-foot span 
: nit ee ee 
Quan. Os Sal AE ne er: RS BLS oh alae Unit Total Unit Total 
Used : Quan | Quan 
a ae a a aid Soak Item Div. Group Used Cost Item Div Group Used Cost Item Div Group ee 
Bs “TOWERS Weta ok eee xe oe 1 ni —1. 
A: Cost Ra BeRateea Ae ae = Sets <P ae $10,455 1 mi. 1 oe = $ 9,880 1 mi. 1 ee +, * $ 9,895 
1. Dype Ann Shae seen onliwee 8.490 | each 708 nai 8,800 8.018 | mi 1,053 8,450 m, 6.810 | mi. 1,246 Fal 8,490 Pr 
2 | eet Same eRe Bote raes 1.770 “ hia sapen 6.510 each 890 5,800 5.350 each 1,040 5,565 fi 
ep as eS En 0.172 ¥ a ach 1.120 : 1,450 1,625 1.160 : 1,710 1,990 
Ate) yee ete S 0.084 . ais es 0.216 a 2,200 475 0.172 a 2,530 435 . 
eis i Se ee apnea . mare aa 0.086 “ 3,950 340 0.086 a 4,400 380 
B. -Freightrsten rt See 732 cwt "0.28 eee ; Pia ae ties 0. 0a4 : a Be 
G.atanies eee Debate eats i ae 205 703 cwt 0.28 195 712 cwt 0.28 200 8 
eee CSE ny URN NE ats ie 220 35.1 ton 6.00 210 35.6 ton 6.00 215 
E. Excavating and Grading..... mi a B01 ; aoe az6 22.8 ; Bm = 
Re Seay BIE Tet S aoa nie on ae 345 mi eee 261 mi aS sirtay 259 
2 se | Sei OE Pa 1.77 2 6.51 each 30 195 5.35 each 35 187 
E 40 70 1.12 “ 40 45 1.16 7 45 53 
= PS rs ES ae 0.172 9 50 10 0.216 “« 50 10 0.172 “ 55 10 
4 pa Fx Se) Ree, ae 0.084 ™ 60 : 3 
ee = Shae; d 5 0.086 60 6 0.086 65 6 
Fr Suticae’ Paonia a eae le ; 55 5 rok ee 0.086 i 55 5 ets sir 0.042 “ 60 3 or 
- Se Che caf ee eae mi. fer Pe 170 be, hoes mi. Bee ey 167 Pas hb mi. Sey ce 180 
1, Earth 10.35 twr. 10 105 Ae: oe: 7.63 twr. 10 76 6.60 twr. 15 99 
2: Shnereters oo ess Ss st es 0.250 : 260 65 0.280 “ 326 91 0.210 f 381 80 
a Stas ; we) ek ee, oe each each i each 
ee eee Oe oe 0.082 ~ 250 20 — 0.108 “ 300 33 0.085 350 30 — 
d- ew Dawei eererett sists 2 < 0.084 < 300 25 — 0.086 5 350 S10 0,085 . 400 34 — 
e- wagh ORs oo vn SE re 0.084 G 275 20 — tee rae 0.086 is 325 28 — =A Shine 0.042 i 375 16 — sie 
SS fc Je oT ores mi. ste “es 295 aE pra mi. Se Sirs 242 aie Pastis mi. Cit ois 232 
dp Brectinglc . +4. Be 10.60 twr. 18 190 pe. Poy 8.02 twr. 20 161 Var Stor 6.81 twr. 22 150 
ap SSCA loa nd ee 10.60 -: 10-38% 105 Sele eer 8.02 10 81 a aie Homey peed sparo i 2 12 Oe : 
M. Miscellaneous............. 10.60 each 5 Lae 55 8.02 each 5 : 40 6.81 each 5 34 
2. INSULATORS (Suspension) ..-.- ft mi. 1 Bice ance Yorn $ 4,390 1 mi. 1 Sa? Hein: ees $:3;300- +} ge mi. 1 ee hres ete $ 3,575 1 mi. 1 
AL Cast f..0.-by factory cass 1,379 each 2.30 3,170 Bee 1,040 each 2.30 2,400 1,152 each 2.30 2,651 Ya 920 each 
B. Suspension clamps........ 28 : 4.00 142 22 i 4.00 88 rma gic bs : 4.00 72 : 13 ra 
C. Semi-tension clamps.....- 3 ss 5.00 15 2 . 5.00 10 2 3 5.00 10 ome 2 i 
D) -Detsios clanips-.. 385.7592 6 e 6.00 36 2 . 6.00 12 P i 6.00 12 Bsc is Sine 
1 a ae et 116 “ 4.00 465 86 «“ 4.00 345 45 ; 4.00 180 eae 42 = 
2 lee Hi. cguklines yoke 2S: 14 eee 6.00 85 11 d 6.00 65 42 6.00 252 oe 32 f 
Ge hi Lisle cs ck estes 05 eis 65 $ 1.00 65 47 1.00 48 45 > 1.00 45 asks 42 y 
H. Clevis eyes and shackles....}| 259 - 0.50 130 194 ‘ 0.50 97 202 : 0.50 101 Fs 61 bide... 
i. ._Atcing horas.cacsrrerre 7% 62 = 0.50 30 59 ie 0.50 30 ) 51 “ 0.50 26 pa 29 .. 2 vi 7 
. Bo Mreiahtsd5 cn nts 020. t 180 cwt 0.40 72 127 owt 0.40 51 140 cwt 0.40 56 tes eee 
: Eo ansling arch betling...... 9.0 ton 6.00 |. 55 6.4 tox 6.00_ 40 | 27.0 ton 6.00 : 42 wen ton 
L. Assembling and erecting... .| 1,379 disc 0.10 140 1,040 disc 0.10 104 1,152 disc 0.10 116 cine : 
| M. Miscellaneous.....-------- 1,379 ¥ 0.01 15°% 1,040 < 0.01 10 1,152 4 0.01 ; 


Se cme re Metis oe Eo 


eee eww eeee 


————— ae Sneed St 


, a 4 
seeeeeeccers 
7 aa A) 1 


0.216] 08 7 160)" © pee ee 
st | , ‘ see ER Rae a eae 49,780 


18,000 
5 = 
ba 2 2 1,040 3,572 5,980 4,095 : 
Bese Ai 3,950 a 1 Pa “ a 
7 | 25 15 
00 poke : a . es 5 oe 4,236 1,434 
50,100 16,600 2,500 2,500 1,500 {48,200 |13,500 | 4,000 2,800 1,800 46,880 ; é 
70,300 : Nineee Seats CS) Me Sie oy 81,300 0. ats 


550-foot span 


; Ys \ D E 
eee e www ewer eeee 0 086 0.086 
2 ae : - 9 % 6 9 x6 Total ; 
ee eeeeser eer esreees ae oan wen 
ate hed heel iE 
Mile Tower Mile Tower Mile 
586 612 55 612 53 1,040 
20 = 22 
2 
9 ag Oe A SEES ; ar 3p err : t ae! Sah 6 0.5 6 0.5 2 
oe oy debiees 6 : 39 60 5.1 60 Som 86 
: ae 12 1m 12 5 oy 11 
- - * ~weeeeneer eeeve . 60 ae 8 60 5 2 47 
stereos we. ee eee: 117. j » 96 8.2 96 8.3 194 
le seers eesere . 39 | 24 0 ce : ; nts 
MunLMneRananeemaners>* secs + <=" 6" “5° "** | | 3 


D E 
0.085 0.042 
save’ 2X6 2X6 Total 
per per 


ca Tower Tower Mile 
Ppapna aan aearepenece<seaer"< ss = = = = 
2 i Ge Ie tinier lal eis : 
pas na ber gesorneesareee eo a ee as | 
ate 9 al hl ia eveeerer : : Ooo : = 
oe a2 5 Pe verte 60 60 2.5 42 
oF SL EEN ELEC, BEER ERIS 2 12 12 —" = 
1 es 60 2.5 42 
23 a2 96 4.0 161 
mh 24 1.0 29 


various types of towers is the resultant of applying the template for the normal span to 23.3 miles of actual profile. (b) In determining the number and kind of towers, shown in this horizontal row, a template for given normal span was applied t } 
: plied to 


span only. average span for the 
“wh 17 disos per insulator string on Towers C, D and E. d-on $ B Towers. e-special. f.3 way. 


ae mse h. (c) 15 discs per insulator string on Towers A and Bi 


Savas. 


[SILVER] 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1083 


known angles and span lengths involved at each tower site. 
The results of this study are given in Table VIII, showing for 
each normal span length the numbers required of each type 
of tower and a comparison of line costs, exclusive of conductors ~ 
and ground wires for which the costs would be constant. 

It is believed that this method of analysis, 7. e., using an 
actual or typical profile, affords a more accurate and reliable 
basis of determining economic normal span lengths and tower 
heights than the simpler method of considering only straight 

lines on a level profile. Fur- 

| ther refinements in the way of 

i | | studying the effect of using a 

ae jm ET different height or more than 
Curve _ Description |_| one height for the heavier 
<o18 - ee, towers might be attempted, but 
é Z 2 Cost of Towers it is questionable whether they 


18,000 


pail 
| 


3 Cost of Insulators& Hardwar 


4 Cost of Right of Way would be warranted, in view of 
the many uncertainties in- 
0,000 volved, particularly in field 

: work. It will be noted that 


12,000 


a 


ry 


8,000 


3 | this study of economic balance 
= : is carried out on the basis of 
the high prices obtained in 
early 1918. A lower price level 
would have some effect upon 
7, the results, as would a different 
NORMAL SPAN OF TOWERS size or type of conductor and a 
different type of insulator, par- 

Fic. 18—220 xv. Transmission ticularly if it were stronger and 
Line—DETERMINATION OF ECON- ghorter. é 
arty | Sie Og ace or SPAN Tn the tower designs study has 
been made of the general form, 

of the dimensions of the main members and of approximate 
weights, but the designs have not been carried into the-details. 
No designs have been prepared of tower footings, side hill 
extensions, etc., which are distinctly contingent upon local con- 
ditions and which have no direct or material effect upon the 
general line designs. Figs. 12 to 16 show the general types. 
of towers proposed, with details as to dimensions, and as to 
working and test loads. Estimated weights are shown in Fig. 
19. The working loads were computed from the design load- 
‘ngs under the most extreme conditions of angles and span 


COST PER MILE OF LINE - DOLLARS 


6,000 


4,000 


~ 600 


1084 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


lengths for which the tower is to be used. In addition to the 
main margin of safety provided in the design loading, a further 
margin is introduced in the difference between working and test 
loads, 7. e., 25 per cent for suspension towers and 35 per cent 
for angle and dead-end towers. It may be noted that a still 
further margin of safety will result when a tower is employed 
in a location imposing less than its maximum designed working 
load, a condition which will-obtain for the major percentage 
of the line. 

After the study of tower locations was carried out, it became 
evident that there was economic justifications for a sixth type 


70,000 | | 


WEIGHT OF TOWER IN POUNDS 


er [pe} w BSS 
So So c=) Oo 
oa ro) (s} (= 
(=) fo) j=) Oo 
oO oO So (=) 


0550 600 700 800 900 1000 
SPAN OF TOWERS IN FEET 


Fie. 19—220-xv. Strneue-Circurr Stee, Transmission Towrrs— Es- 


TIMATED WEIGHTS 


Type A—See Fig. 12; Type B—See Fig. 13; Type C—See Fig. 14; D—See Fig. 15; 
Type E—See Fig. 16 


of tower, a special light weight type to be used primarily on 
short spans in tangents. This tower is illustrated in Fig. 20. 
An economic improvement in the design shown for this light 
weight type might be effected by shortening the tower to 
correspond to the smaller sags obtaining in short spans. 

It is believed desirable that sample towers of each design 
should be subjected to thorough experimental tests before 
quantity production is started. Tower design involves ap- 
proximations, and the heavy loads and consequent great 
weights of 220-kv. towers justify more than usual effort to 
obtain an economically consistent design. In the method of 
making such tests, more elaborate and refined methods than 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1085 


hitherto employed might be developed to idvantage. It is 
desirable to ascertain not only the point and manner of failure 
under test, but also the simultaneous stress conditions existing 
in all important tower members. 

Tower foundations will be largely a special problem for each 
locality. The conditions governing present practise will apply, 


30° SECTION M.M. 


For 1000, Span 

For 550' Span = ej 
For 1000’ Span hes 
For 550’ Span [*—S-10—+- 


' 


80:0 For 1000 Span 


33°49’ For 1000’Span 
31°6'For 550’Span 


ELEVATION 47 FT. TOWER SIDE VIEW 47 FT. TOWER 
For 47’ Height 20/0* 
For 80 Height 32:0 


Fic. 20—220 xv. StreEL TRANSMISSION Towmrs— CLEARANCE Dia- 
GrRamM—Typr AA (SuspENSION)—For VertTicAL ANGLE 5 pDEG. AND 


HorizontaL ANGLE O Dua. 


CONDITIONS CAUSING MAXIMUM SWING OF INSULATORS TAKEN FOR DETERMINING TOWER 
DIMENSIONS 


Horizontal Angle 


Pos tion Span Turned by Wind Ice Temp, 
Conductors . 
a 1000 0 deg. 8 lb. Qin. 0 or 120 deg. 
b 1006 O deg. 8 lb. Oin. Oor120 deg. 


the only new considerations being the unusually heavy loads 
involved and the strong emphasis which must be placed upon 
dependability. In general, for most soils, earth foundations 
would probably be adequate for straight suspension towers, 
while concrete foundations would be necessary for full tension 
and heavy angle towers and probably for semi-tension and 


Fea 


1086 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


light angle towers. Where concrete foundations are used, the 
tower should be carefully grounded, 

Protection of towers from deterioration is of more than 
ordinary importance owing to the great investment represented 
by a 220-kv. line and the long economic life which it presumably 
will possess. Galvanizing would seem essential and it should 
be heavy and carefully applied. Protection of joints and of 
steel at the ground line will-eall for every feasible precaution. 


DESIGN FEATURES OF 220-KV. STATION AND SUBSTATION 
EQUIPMENT 


While, in general, the character and arrangement of equip- 
ment at generating stations and substations is not a part of 
the primary scope of this paper, there are certain features iN 
connection with this equipment which directly concern the 
feasibility and the economic and general advantages of trans- 
mitting power at this high voltage. Brief consideration of 
these features is essential to a study of 220-kv. transmission. 

The problems of interest, new or assuming particular im- 
portance in connection with equipment for a 220-kv. system, 
are of two types, those arising directly from the high voltage 
per se and those resulting from the relatively enormous capaci- 
ties and amounts of power involved in a system large enough 
to call for the use of such a voltage. The handling of electrical 
potentials of 220,000 volts does not appear to involve any dis- - 
turbing complications or uncertainties. In fact, the manu- 
facturers do not recognize that any serious problem exists. 
Current design principles and materials now in ordinary use 
will be employed, the principal difference from present high 
voltage equipment being the greater amounts of insulation and 
the larger clearances required. The step to 220 kv. is relatively 
no greater than that previously taken from 66 kv. to 110 kv., 
or from 110 kv. to 154 kv. Certain of the manufacturers have 
already developed designs, and assert readiness to undertake 
commercial production of 220-kv. equipment on short notice. 

The problems attendant upon the huge capacities which 
use of 220-kv. transmission makes possible and feasible,— 
generating stations of several hundred thousand kilowatts, 
interconnected systems of a half million or a million kilowatts,— 
are distinctly of a major order. From the purely physical 
standpoint, the principal problems are those of switching and 
protection from short-circuit stresses. Both of these, it is 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1087 


believed, can be handled satisfactorily. The more general 
questions of simplicity and reliability of operation and of 
efficiency and general economy attain a new order of importance 
and will probably lead to some significant departures from 
present practise in smaller scale systems. 

Design for such large capacities and high voltage centers 
around one cardinal principle, simplicity and intrinsic strength 
of equipment rather than flexibility and external protective meas- 

‘ures. The principal equipment units represent such high 
values, both in service and in investment, that: the maximum 
of continuous service should be obtained, and more careful 


la 
Possible | 
220 Kv. 


Tie Line 


1 
' 
I 
| 
i 
' 
15 pe 
Loar 


3 220 Kv. 
Generating Stati Transmission Lines _ Main Substations 
50,000 ew, Asli 100,000 Kw. per Circuit each Transformer 
with Condenser 
66 Kv.or 110 Kv. 
Main Feeders 


Fig. 21—Tyrpicat ARRANGEMENT D1AGRAM—220-xv. System 


attention and large expense are fully justified in assuring virtual 
elimination of failures in service. The accompanying arrange- 
ment diagram of an assumed typical system, Fig. 21. indi- 
cates the extent to which the aim of simplicity is advocated 
in reduction of bus arrangements to a simple and even rudi- 
mentary form and in elimination of superfluous oil switches. 
In particular, attention may be called to the fact that no spare 
units, either generators or transformers, are provided, and none 
are contemplated. The investment in the large units will be 
so large that outage should be represented only by the irredu- 
cible minimum of apparatus troubles and maintenance, not by , 


1088 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


the nearly continuous idleness of spare equipment. This com- 
plete omission of reserve units of major apparatus is of course 
predicated upon adequate reserve capacity being available in 
local generating stations near the load centers, as has been 
discussed previously. 

The obtaining of strength and high reliability of equipment 
is primarily a problem of construction economics rather than 
of system design, although the latter is an important element. 
Certain features of the problem are high reactance of generators 
and transformers, ample insulation of transformers and an 
efficient oil circulation system, high mechanical’strength of oil 
switches, avoidance of low-voltage buses and low-voltage 
paralleling, -and an effective and dependable system of relay 
sectionalizing. 

Study of the design and operation of 220-kv. equipment has 
brought out certain general principles or features which may 
be noted before taking up consideration of particular pieces: of 
apparatus: 

1. High-Voltage Switching. All line switching, automatic 
or manual, should be done on the high-voltage side of trans- 
formers. This statement may come as a jolt to certain estab- 
lished ideas, but the further the switching problem has been 
studied, the more clearly does it appear that high-voltage 
switching is not only more simple but is more safe. The 
amounts of power involved, particularly under abnormal 
conditions, are so tremendous that the current values obtaining 
at lower voltages impose switch duties and heavy stresses 
generally which could be handled only with great difficulty and 
at an expense materially higher than would be required at 
* 220-kv., where the currents involved are relatively small. 

From the standpoint of automatic sectionalizing and con- 
tinuity of service, high-tension switching is obviously desirable, 
since defective circuits in tripping out will leave the trans- 
formers in service to continue supplying load from parallel 
circuits or alternative routes. 

2. Transformer Connections. All 220-kv. transformers, on 
the high-voltage side, should be connected in Y with the neutral 
grounded, as shown graphically in Fig. 22. The high poten- 
tials involved and the great lengths of line to be interconnected 
_ constitute conditions which might easily result in uncontrolable 

surges if the high-voltage circuits were isolated from ground. 
_ While grounding at one end of a line would materially alleviate 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1089 


these conditions, more adequate stabilization of voltage, with 
consequent greater economy in equipment and security in 
operation, can be obtained by grounding at all points where 
transformers are located. It may be of interest to note that 
the voltage stresses on a 220-kv. grounded system (normal 
voltage to ground 127 kv.), will be less than for some certain 
existing isolated delta systems. There obtains also the general 
; advantage of grounded Y operation that automatic sectionaliz- 
ing is made more positive and reliable, a vital consideration on 
so large and important a transmission system. 

The neutral should be grounded without resistance. The 
purpose of a resistance in the neutral connection is to limit 


eee 
.: Generator Voltage 
A 


Ra 
AMS or 


ar manen—{_) Condenser Osta 


66 Kv.or 110 Kv. 
cae aie eb 
Low Voltage Low Voltage Low Voltage 


Fig. 22—Di1AGraM oF TRANSFORMER CONNECTIONS—220-Kv. SysTEM 


current flow into a ground on a line or in apparatus. For lower 
voltages where excessive magnetic stresses would result, the 
expedient is frequently desirable, but for 220 kv., where the 
short-circuit current values are relatively small and provision 
for handling the resultant stresses relatively simple, any 
benefit which might be gained would not be justified by the 
expense-and complication which the use of resistance would 
involve, and it would in any case be more than offset by the 
impairment of the function of the ground in stabilizing poten- 
tials. f 

3. Protective Equipment. No equipment of any character 
is contemplated for protection against over-voltages. As a 
fundamental principle it is believed that investment ca 


1090 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


applied more effectively and with greater ultimate economy in 
providing greater margins of safety in the apparatus against 
the stresses which are likely to be encountered, than in attempt- 
ing to shield weaker apparatus by methods now known. For 
such a voltage as 220 kv., protective equipment would be 
proportionately more costly than in case of lower voltages and 
its efficacy more questionable. 

High-voltage protective devices are of two general types, 
those intended to protect against, abnormal potentials at 
normal or low frequencies, and those intended to protect against 
high-frequency surges or steep wave fronts which might give 
rise to localized high-potential stresses in the windings of 
transformers and in other apparatus. For protection against 
high potentials, electrolytic arresters and other so-called light- 
ning arresters have been used extensively in systems of lower 
voltage. On a 220-kv. system with dead-grounded neutrals, 
it is not believed that any abnormal potentials are likely to be 
encountered which apparatus insulation cannot and should 
not. be able to withstand. For protection against high- 
frequency effects, series reactances have been used and elabo-. 
rate arrangements of reactances, condensers and resistances 
have been proposed. While probably high-frequency con- 
stitutes more of a real danger, it is considered that it can be met 
most effectively and economically by providing adequate 
insulation strength. 

220-kv. Transformers. The questions which naturally will 
be the first to arise in consideration of transformers for a 220- 
kv. system are those of size of units and three-phase vs. single- 
phase units, the two questions ane to some extent inter- 
dependent. 

Considerations of simplicity in wee arrangement and of 
economy in operation favor, in general, transformers of the 
largest size permitted by the conditions of each installation or 
by limitation of manufacture. Theoretically there seems no 
limit to the capacity of a transformer unit, but beyond a certain 
capacity the provision of strength to withstand the mechanical 
stresses of short-circuit current becomes a matter of such com- 
plication and expense that an economical limit will come into 
effect. At the present stage of the art, the manufacturers 
advocate that transformers be not attempted beyond 50,000 to 
60,000 kv-a. for three-phase units, or 35,000 to 40,000 kv-a. for 
single-phase units. Transformer cores and windings for these 


= REHM SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1091 


capacities can be shipped assembled from the factories. Ad- 
vance quotations and estimates from manufacturers show 
progressively lower unit costs up to these sizes. The economic 
advantage of large units depends not so much, however, upon 
lower unit costs as upon considerations of space, bus construc- 
tion, number of switches, etc., all of which involve relatively 
less expense for larger units. The adverse difference in cost of 
handling facilities is not great. 

As to choice between three-phase and single-phase units, 
from the standpoint of simplicity and cheapness of installation, 
three-phase units would be preferable. As to factory cost and 
efficiency, there appears on the basis of information at present 
available to be little difference, three-phase transformers being 
somewhat cheaper for same capacity of bank and somewhat 
more expensive for same capacity of unit. The great weight 
which should be given the principle of providing high intrinsic 
reliability of main units, rather than providing spare units, 
materially reduces one of the principal advantages claimed for 
single-phase transformers, that of the less capacity required in 
reserve units. For large installations, three-phase units offer 
advantages. For relatively small substations, it is believed 
that equally satisfactory service at less cost can be rendered by 
a bank of two three-phase units as compared with one bank of 
single-phase units with a spare. Certainly a bank of three 
three-phase units would be superior, and the cost should be no 
greater. 

At generating stations, operating and economic considera- 
tions strongly favor the generator and its transformer equip- 
ment as a unit. If the generator capacity should exceed the 
practicable limit of three-phase transformer capacity, there 
apparently would be a close margin of choice between using a 
single-phase bank or two three-phase transformers operating 
as a bank and controlled by one circuit breaker. 

In past high-voltage practise, probably one of the most 
troublesome features in operation has been the bushings. 
Experience indicates, however, that satisfactory bushing 
designs have now been developed and can readily be applied to 
220-kv. service. Bushings will of course be identical and 
interchangeable for transformers and oil switches. Trans- 
formers will have but one high-voltage bushing per phase, the 
neutral ends of the winding not being insulated from the tank. 

The saving in equipment costs which has been noted as one 


1092 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


of the reasons for selecting grounded Y rather than delta for 
the 220-ky. transformer connections, is very marked in the case 
of transformers. Insulation is less throughout the whole 
transformer and extra insulation is required at only one end of 
the windings rather than at both, cores and tanks are corres- 
pondingly smaller, efficiency is higher, amount of oil required is 
less and bushings are lighter and shorter. ; 

The large sizes of installations involved in a 220-kv. system, 
together with the necessity for careful attention to maintaining 
insulation strength and transformer reliability generally, will 
not improbably result in a radical change in the present method 
of handling and cooling transformer oil, 7. e., the abandonment 
of cooling of oil in each transformer and gravity circulation of 
oil through the windings in favor of forced oil circulation and 
external cooling. The idea of external cooling is by no means 
new, but whereas for the relatively small installations of present 
practise it appears to involve unjustified complication and 
expense, for installations of the size here contemplated this 
condition will probably be reversed. The apparent advan- 
tages, briefly summarized, are as follows: 

a. Tanks smaller and cheaper due to elimination of cooling 
coils and smaller volume of oil in transformer. 

b. Positive circulation of oil and possibility of more 
accurately directing it in its flow through the windings to the 
points needed and in amounts needed. 

ec. More effective cooling due to low temperature which 
may be obtained in incoming oil and more rapid circulation. 

d. Oil kept absolutely dry and always at maximum insula- 
tion strength due to possibility of sealing oil system against the 
atmosphere, a most important advantage for extra high-voltage 
operation. 


e. Oil may readily be filtered continuously to any extent 
des*red. 

f. System as a whole more reliable and probably cheaper. 

Such an external transformer oil system might be developed 
to handle all oil in a common system, or to keep the oil for each 
transformer bank separate. The common system would be 
somewhat cheaper and simpler, and hence preferable if ade- 
quate precautionary measures could be worked out to prevent 
contamination of the entire oil system as a result of a failure in 
one transformer. The system in either case would include 
cooling devices located wherever desired, probably in a pond or 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1093 


stream, oil pumps, filters, a storage tank at a suitable elevation 
to provide circulating head, and at some point an expansion 
device which would maintain a reasonable pressure regulation 
under conditions of varying volume of the enclosed oil due to 
temperature changes. The entire oil system would be effec- 
tively sealed against the atmosphere. Vital parts of the oil 
system would presumably be installed in duplicate, the expense 
being small in proportion to total cost of the station. 

A system of external cooling. of oil may, at generating 
stations, open the way for a significant increase in overall 
efficiency. Transformer losses will amount to about 1.25 per 
cent of station output. Possibly half of this heat may be 
recovered from the oil by passing it, on its way to the final 
cooling coils, through some device installed in the steam system 
between the condensers and the economizers. While no 
studies have been made of the economic feasibility of such a 
scheme, the physical possibility opens an interesting problem. 

220-kv. Oil Circuit Breakers. A system such as here con- 
templated, with huge generating stations, numbers of them 
interconnected, and large synchronous condenser capacity at 
substations, will necessarily involve unprecedented concentra- 
tions of energy at switching points, particularly in case of short 
circuits. The high duty required of circuit breakers to meet 
this condition is a vitally important problem in the design of 
such a system. It is, as has been noted, early evident in a 
study of the switching problem, that switching should be done 
wherever possible on the high-voltage side of transformers, 
since the high voltage can more easily be handled than the high 
currents at lower voltage. Two hundred and twenty-kv. 
_short-circuit current values are not extreme, and in a 220-kv. 
circuit breaker the large clearances and switch openings 
necessarily involved by the high voltage contribute directly to 
giving the rupturing capacity required by the current to be 
handled. 

- Magnitudes of 220-kv. circuit-breaker duty will, of course, 
depend upon the size and arrangement of the 220-kv. system. 
With a system of the capacity and arrangement shown in 
Fig. 21, the duty of a circuit breaker at the bus of either the 
larger generating station or the larger substation would, 
according to approximate calculations, be from 1,000,000 kv-a. 
to 1,500,000 kv-a., depending upon the length of the 220-kv. 
lines. At the smaller generating station or substation the duty 


1094 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


would be somewhat less. No difficulty should be involved in 
obtaining circuit breakers for this duty at 220-kv. With the 
gradual expansion which might be expected in such a power 
supply system, with other generating stations and substations 
added, extensive interconnections made in secondary networks 
and probably a considerable 220-kv. network established, there 
might be expected circuit breaker duties of 3,000,000 to 
4,000,000 kyv-a. Manufacturers foresee no insurmountable 
difficulty in designing 220-kv.-circuit breakers for duties of 
this magnitude. The duty on such an extensive system might 
be reduced by adoption of some degree of sectionalized opera- 
tion of the 220-kv. lines, but it is hoped that the need for 
such an expedient can be avoided. 

Two types of circuit breakers have been offered by the manu- 
facturers for 220-kv. high duty service. One type consists of a 
massive circuit breaker, each phase in one tank of heavy boiler 
plate, with two breaks in series for moderate duty and four 
breaks in series for heavy duty. The tank is built according to 
the principles of boiler design to withstand the internal pressure 
generated by the opening under oil of the rated kv-a. loads, as 
predetermined by test and calculation. The tank is not 
designed to withstand explosions in the space above the oil, this 
hazard being eliminated by provision for thorough ventilation 
or other expedients to prevent formation of explosive mixtures 
in this space. 

Another type of 220-kv. circuit breaker consists of two breaks 
in series per tank, one such tank being used for conditions of 
moderate duty and two tanks in series for heavy duty. The 
four series breaks in the double-unit circuit breaker are operated 
simultaneously. These tanks likewise are designed to with- 
stand the stresses generated under the oil under. conditions 
of maximum duty, but in this case the full stresses are not 
permitted to come upon the tank. Each break is located 
in a carefully designed explosion chamber, of relatively small 
diameter and of any required strength, which confines the 
initial force of the explosion and serves both to reduce the 
pressures which can be set up in the main tank, and to utilize 
this force as an aid in extinguishing the are. With this type 
of circuit breaker, one tank unit would probably be installed 
initially when the 220-kv. system was small, and a second unit 
added later when the growth of the system brought about 


power concentrations in excess of the rupturing capacity of the 
ingle unit. ; 


* 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRA NSMISSION 1095 


‘It is believed that either of these types of circuit breaker will 
give satisfactory service on a 220-kv. system. 

220-kv. Air-Break Disconnectors. Air-break disconnectors 
for 220-kv. service present a problem which, while distinctly of 
a minor character in relation to the general problems of 220-kv. 
construction, is troublesome, and for which no wholly satisfac- 
tory designs have thus far been offered. The difficulties 
attending development of such disconnectors do not concern 
feasibility, since a disconnector which will operate acceptably 
can be built after existing designs, but concern rather avoidance 
of unnecessary expense, space requirements, and general 
complication. The problem is one of making a firm high- 
capacity contact, without incurring hazard or undue inconven- 
ience to operators or to service, under any sort of weather 
conditions, between two elements supported by long, heavy, 
cumbersome and somewhat fragile insulators. 

These 220-kv. disconnectors would be used to disconnect an 
oil switch from or connect it to a live line or bus. It is not 
contemplated that such a switch need be able to break the 
charging current of a 220-kv. transformer, although a switch 
capable of this duty would be valuable if it could be developed. 
It might be used to take the place of a 220-kv. circuit breaker 
in some cases or to give added flexibility in cases where trans- 
former circuit breakers were not provided. 

In situations where disconnectors need not be operated with 
either pole alive, as for instance between transformers and 
transformer circuit breakers at the generating station in Fig. 
21, the cumbersome 220-kv. disconnector would not be needed, 
and some form of simple readily removable link would be used. 

Generating Station Arrangement. Simplicity should be the 
dominating principle in the electrical layout of the generating 
station. The generator and its transformer should be a unit 
and there should be no low-voltage bus and no low-voltage 
paralleling. For stations of the size contemplated, a bus at 
generator voltage would involve such tremendous duty on oil 
switches, such elaborate sectionalizing reactances and, in 
general, such expense and hazard to reliability of operation, all 

without any material benefit, that it unquestionably should be 
~ omitted. 

Preferably, although not necessarily, a specific bank of 
generators should be assigned to each 220-kv. circuit, thus 
enabling segregation of circuits at the generating stations, if 


1096 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


desired. The economic capacity of a 220-kv. circuit is roughly 
100,000 kw. to 150,000 kw., so that usually this would mean 
two, or possibly three, generators per circuit. In case condi- . 
tions governing generating station practise should favor larger 
generators, say of the order of 100,000-kw., and if satisfactory 
units of this capacity should be developed, simple station 
layout would be possible by using one generator to each 220-kv. 
circuit. 

In case it were necessary for a 220-kv. generating station to 
deliver power also at a lower voltage, for instance 66 kv., it 
would still be desirable to avoid a bus at generator voltage. 
The preferable arrangement for such a station would bea bus 
at each line voltage, each fed by its own generators. These two 
busses might or might not, depending upon the particular 
conditions obtaining, be interconnected by transformers. 

The omission of the low-voltage bus would not complicate 
the’ problem of auxiliary station service, since good practise 
already provides that such service shall be supplied from a 
special generator rather than from the station bus. 

Synchronizing at 220-kv. can be effectively accomplished, it 
is believed, by an adaptation of the static synchroscope. 

Main Substation Arrangement. Two hundred and twenty- 
kv. substation layout will be influenced largely by the particular 
local conditions of each installation. The usual type will 
probably serve to step down from 220 kv. to a secondary 
transmission voltage, such as 66 kv. or 110 kv. In sucha case 
it will, in general, be necessary to have both a primary and a 
secondary bus system,—at 220 kv. a simple bus with sectionaliz- 
ing circuit breakers, at secondary voltage, where greater 
flexibility would seem desirable, probably a ring bus. Owing 
to the high current values which would obtain at the‘secondary 
voltage, (it should be kept in mind that the large condenser 
capacity will aggravate short-circuit conditions), it appears 
advisable to provide sectionalizing reactances in this bus. 

Synchronous condensers, of such capacity as may be de- 
manded by length of 220-kv. line, amount, load factor and 
power factor of load, will be provided for each transformer 
bank. In the usual case, these condensers will be connected to 
a third winding in the main transformers. This method of 
connecting the condensers appears to be simpler, cheaper, and 
equally reliable as compared with connecting the condensers to 
separate transformers on the low-voltage bus, although the 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1097 


corrective effect would not apply to the secondary windings. 
Three-winding 220-kv. transformers, with the tertiary winding 
of 50 per cent of the capacity of the 220-kv. winding, would 
cost about 15 per cent more than two-winding transformers. 
The voltage of this tertiary winding and of the condenser 
would be as high as may be found practicable for satisfactory 
operation of this type of apparatus. 

In cases where the secondary substation voltage were within 
range of generator operation, 11 kv., 13 kv. or 22 kv., the con- 
densers might be connected directly to the secondary bus. 

Relay System. The station and substation arrangements 
which have been proposed are predicated upon a relay system 
which may be depended upon for effective and consistent 
automatic operation, 7. ¢., for insuring that a faulty piece of 


apparatus, transmission line, or low-voltage feeder will be cut 


out correctly, promptly and in such a manner as to avoid 
interruption to the other elements of the system. Complete 
multiple operation of all 220-kv. apparatus, stations and lines 
is feasible only with a thoroughly dependable relay system. 
In view of the encouraging developments in the relay field 
during recent years, and of the fact that on such an important 
system much effort can be concentrated in working out a 
solution, it seems reasonable to assume that an adequate relay 
system will be available. 

Complete 220-kv. multiple operation is essential to obtaining 
full economy and service reliability from the system, and any 
resort to sectionalized operation, due to lack of adequate relays, 
unreliability of circuit breakers or any other cause, should 
be looked upon as a distinct failure to develop the full possi- 
bilities of the system and as a temporary expedient to be dis- 
pensed with as soon as possible. With complete multiple 
operation, transmission lines are used to maximum efficiency, 
there is full flexibility in shifting of load between generators 
or stations, and, with dependable automatic disconnecting, 
trouble in any part of the system may be isolated with a mini- 


~ mum of disturbance to load. 


CONSTRUCTION COST 
The following estimates are intended to give an indication 
of the installation cost of construction carried out along the lines 
of the assumptions and recommendations in this paper. Local 


conditions, of course, may require a considerable variation in 


1098 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


arrangement and cost, particularly of substation apparatus. 
These estimates are based on early 1919 prices, and apply to 
station capacities of 200,000 kw. and larger at 220 kv. 


Step-Up Substation. Outdoor 

transforming and switching struc- 

tures and equipment (220-kv. 

apparatus and connections only), 

installation and indirect expense. $8 to $9 per kw. 
Step-Down Substation. Outdoor 

transforming and switching struc- 

tures and equipment (does not in- 

clude low-tension feeder bus or 

feeder switching equipment) syn- 

chronous condensers of capacity 

for length of connected lines, 

building, control equipment, in- 

stallation and indirect expense.... $15 to $20 per kw. 
Transmission Lines. Single cir- 

cuit steel towers suspension insu- 


lators. 
SROWOLS leks it tis it tere sea $8000 per mi. 
Insulators and Hardware........ 2800 per mi. 
Conductors and Ground Wire.... 5000 per mi. 
Special Structures............... 1000 per mi. 
Right-of-way }iacs . ides? vq. 8000 per nm. re 
in direct exp CUSe jamucne «sistant 3700 per mi. 
TOG all Ais cata eae eee ates $23,500 per mi. 
Total Cost 220-kv. Transmission. 
LOOMIS CNIS es ee $40 to $45 per kw. 
ZOO: Tai tie eee eater ce 60 to 65 per kw. 
SOUBTM n'ciwtl a cop intact incre ties twee ee teks 80 to 85 per kw. 


CONCLUSIONS 

1. It is generally recognized that the country’s industrial 
advancement will require increasingly great amounts of electric 
power, particularly in view of the relation between use of power 
and unit productiveness of labor, and that this power must be 
supplied in accordance with a rational policy of conservation 
of our greatest national asset, our fuel resources. This points 
to the necessity of large scale transmission of power from distant 
points of generation at the energy sources, coal fields and water 
powers. 

2. Two hundred and twenty kv. appears a logical choice for 
such large-capacity, long-distance transmission, which is clearly 
beyond the economic range of present transmission voltages. 
Two hundred and twenty kv. is high enough to meet pending 


1919] SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION 1099 


requirements in power supply evolution but not so far beyond 
existing practise as to involve question of its immediate 
feasibility. ' 

3. Design of a 220-kv. system brings up important problems, 
new in character or significance. These problems are due 
rather more to the large amounts of power involved than to the 
high voltage. 

4, Two hundred and twenty-kv. power supply will require 
unprecedentedly high service standards, load factors will be 
high, particularly at the start, and the frequency should be 60 
cycles. For full economy the load for each 220-kv. circuit 
should be 100,000 kw. or higher. 

5. The selection of type and size of conductor is an important 
economic problem involving a balance of many factors. Cor- 
ona does not enter as an especially serious limitation owing to 
the large size of conductors otherwise required. Research is 
needed as to best method of stringing conductors. 

6. Insulators of present commercial disk types can be made 
to give acceptable service, but there is need of an insulator 
more efficient electrically, stronger mechanically and of un- 
questioned durability. There is opportunity for valuable 
research and development work in this field. 

7. The familiar single-circuit rigid type of steel tower ap- 
pears to be most conservative for immediate use, owing to its 
reliability having been demonstrated by experience. The field 
offers promising possibility for development of other types of 
single-circuit and multiple-circuit towers. The economical 
span length (here taken as 800 ft. normal), may vary with the 
factors of each situation. A series of standard towers of 
graduated weights will be advisable. 

8. The basic idea of 220-kv. station and substation design 
is simplicity and intrinsic strength of equipment, rather than 
flexibility and external protective measures. 

9. Transformer connections should be Y on 220-kv. side 
with neutral dead grounded. Development of 220-kv., large 
capacity transformers presents no undue difficulties. Fre- 
quently the design might advantageously employ forced oil 
circulation with external cooling. Present types of bushings, 
suitably adapted, seem satisfactory for 220-kv. service. 

10. The 220-kv. system should be laid out for multiple 
operation and switching should be done at 220-kv. A thor- 
oughly dependable and carefully coordinated relay system is a 
basic requirement. 


1100 SILVER: POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


11. Development of circuit breakers presents no serious 
difficulty from standpoint of voltage, and it is believed that 
proposed designs will be adequate for the duty which will be 
demanded. 

12. At generating stations each generator and its step-up 
transformer bank should be treated as a unit. There would 
be no low-voltage bus and no low-voltage circuit breaker. 

13. At substations each transformer would be-a unit with a 
synchronous condenser supplied from a tertiary winding. 

14. The studies which have been made and the tentative 
designs which have been built up serve to establish confidence 
in the conclusion that 220-kv. transmission is immediately 
feasible as a. commercial proposition. 

15. It is hoped that public presentation of these 220-kv. 
studies may serve in some measure to facilitate the working out 
of this advance in the transmission art, and that in particular 
it may promote interchange of ideas, bring out constructive 
criticism and stimulate needed investigations. 

The author wishes to offer acknowledgment and express ap- 
preciation of the assistance of his associates and of various 
engineers and manufacturers whose ideas have been sought 
and freely used in the preparation of this paper. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1101 


DISCUSSION IN ‘“‘PROBLEMS OF 220-Kv. POWER TRANSMISSION 
(SILVER), LAKE PLacip, N. Y., JUNE 21,4919. 


W. S. Murray: I think Mr. Silver has made a contri- 
bution apropos of the times and for it I have had in mind for 
some time a very concrete application. 

The time is before you for very large things and it would 

seem to me that 220,000-volt transmission will offer an op- 
portunity to exercise ourselves in that field. 
_ The amount of waste due to improper generation of power, 
its transmission and application, is something enormous— 
far beyond, I think, the conception of many of you here pres- 
ent. I can epitomize such a statement by saying that I be- 
lieve that a careful investigation will show that in the Boston- 
Washington territory, 450 miles long and say 100 miles inland, 
the amount of waste is about $300,000,000 per annum. 

The plan of the super-power transmission to save that waste, 
is to establish on the coast, stations in which there will be units 
not smaller than 35,000 to 40,000 kw., each of these stations 
aggregating 50,000 to 1,000,000 kilowatts as a whole, and 
at the same time developing such hydroelectric points on 
rivers and steam stations at the mouths of mines as will eco- 
nomically justify themselves; all of this power so generated 
being transmitted to the super-power line to give an economy 
of between ten and eleven pounds of steam per kw-hr., the 
consumer securing it say somewhere between twelve or thirteen 
pounds. 

The average rate for the generation of power throughout 
territory taking into account the steam power factory drive 
is somewhere between twenty-five and thirty pounds of steam, 
per kw-hr. Thus this rate would be cut in two. 

In my experience with railroad electrification there is no 
-question that the present economy of the electric engine over 
the steam, taking passenger, switching and freight, into con- 
sideration is in a ratio of two to one. In the case of steam 
driven factories it would be much greater than that. 

The load factor of a steam railroad, say on the order of the 
New York Central or the New York, New Haven & Hartford, 
can be made to be 70 per cent. On the New Haven there are 
opportunties on its main line division of making it 75 per cent. 
As we all know, the load factor of the central station is good if 
it is 35 per cent to 40 per cent and so, in combination with the 
load factor of the railroads and that of industrial power and 
lighting, we might hope to get an average load factor of some- 
thing like 50 per cent. 

The idea of economy alone is good but the plan is even far 
more reaching when we consider that we must create very 
shortly some form of common carrier for power. I think that 
you will be surprised when I tell you that the cargo space used 
by coal shipment today on the Northeast Atlantic seaboard is 
40 per cent and this means that our industrialism, which is 


1102 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


expanding tremendously (all the earmarks of it are before us 
now), the necessary transportation to take care of it falling 
far behind, and therefore if we can take this enormous coal ship- 
ment off the rails and put it up overhead, we will take a tre- 
mendous burden off of the railroads. : 

There are two great things that enter the consideration. of 
this matter. One is the question of the coal men who will only 
have to carry one pound of coal against two, if the economies 
I have suggested are correct. The answer is not.to say to the 
coal man that his railroad is going to be knocked out of its divi- 
dends if it is a coal carrying road, but that his road is going to 
become the highway for new industries. New industries will 
spring up along that road and the space created by eliminating 
a part of the coal, will give space for the new industrial com- 
modities which can be hauled at a higher rate. 

In other words, it is a constructive and not a destructive 
policy. 

The other most important question is the matter of the obso- 
lescence of the plants already established. What are we going 
to do with them? ©The answer to that, I think, is not a difficult 
one. We are going to use those plants and we will use them 
this way: On peak load they will be a most valuable asset in 
the regional system. On light load they will be most valuable 
as condensers to take care of the idle or magnetizing current 
in order that the larger generating units may generate at maxi- 
mum efficiency the real power. Thus instead of facing ob- 
solescence their life will be extended in this new field. 

Another question: What will be the corporate status of 
the present companies? The primaries of today will become 
the secondaries of tomorrow. The power will be generated in 
bulk and be transmitted to the present companies who will 
maintain their present entity as distributors and so far as 
franchise rights, etc., are concerned, will remain exactly as 
they are today. 

If an investigation is made, and I trust will be, and we find, 
as I have stated that there are $300,000,000 being wasted in 
this zone, it seems to me that as we are now mining some 75,- 
000,000 tons of coal anthracite, and we have only got 75 years 
of it left, and as we have jumped from 100,000,000 of bitumin- 
ous coal mined per annum to 580,000,000 that every engineer 
must fight for this conservation plan. 

It is very well to say that we have 3,000,000,000 tons of coal, 
which we have, in this country but where is it? It is not ina 
place where it can be economically transported. Much of it 
1s away out in the Alaska fields. Of course we have the Penn- 
sylvania, Illinois and Ohio fields but if you can see the acres 
that have been taken out of them you will see the force of the 
necessity of our economizing, I think, as much for ourselves as 
for the sake of posterity. 


I want to leave a final thought with you in this statement: 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1103 


When the matter of this investigation is presented to Congress 
an appropriation will have to be made to cover the work, and 
I think that we ought to all of us consider this not a local mat- 
ter but a national one. It seems to me that this viewpoint is 
fair enough. The Senator from Ohio or the Senator from Ne- 
vada or even the Senator from California might get up and 
say “Well, why not make a super-power transmission in our 
territory? Why should we not vote for the Northwest Coast 
instead of the Atlantic seaboard?” 

I think that that would be a very short-sighted attitude be- 
cause the finishing shop of the United States is on the North- 
east Atlantic seaboard for American industry. There is very 
nearly 80 per cent of the country’s industry concentrated 
right here. Now, if we are going to maintain the American 
standard of wage-and living while competing with the world 
—and this is the great angle of vision we should take now— 
that is where the American product must continue to be 
finished and placed on shipboard. 

I was very happy indeed at the Boston Section to have that 
branch of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vote 
a resolution of approval of Secretary Lanes’ proprosed. appro- 
priation to cover this investigation and as I said before, we 
can just visualize this great line constructed as described, into 
which is fed a kilowatt hour at an expenditure of ten pounds 
of steam keeping in mind for economies sake the wonderful 
contributing factors of load factor, to say nothing of break- 
down service which will be established between plants. Surely 
this is a sound vision, it is certainly not impractical. 

I don’t believe I could leave a better slogan with you in 
closing than saying, that lately we have been spending billions 


for destruction for preservation, now let’s spend billions for 


construction for conservation. 

W. M. Dann (Pittsburgh): The transformers that Mr. 
Silver speaks of are certainly very interesting on account of 
their size and the high operating voltage. They are the 
largest units that have so far been proposed seriously, but I 
believe the manufacturers feel no hesitancy at all in building 
units that will be dependable and reliable in service. 

On page 1091 referring to the choice between three-phase and 
single-phase units, it seems to me that all the arguments are 
in favor of single-phase units, particularly since the three-phase 
unit as large as 100,000 kv-a..seems to be impractical-at the 
present time. Fora bank of that size three 35,000-kv-a. single- 
phase units will be cheaper than two 50,000-kv-a. three-phase 
units. The switching would be simplified, the floor space re- 
quired would be less and there would be some gain in efficiency. 

The high intrinsic reliability which Mr. Silver refers to can 
almost be said to be characteristic of power transformers now- 
adays because they are actually responsible for very little real 


trouble. However, 100 per cent reliability is an ideal which we 


Fe 


gs 3 


ee 


1104 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


will have to admit has not yet been reached and it seems to me 
from the point of view of insurance that it would be unwise to 
figure on operating such a big and important system without | 
spare transformer capacity. If this is conceded, the argu- 
ments in favor of single-phase units are even stronger. _ 

The statement is made that for relatively small substations 
equally satisfactory service can be rendered at less cost by a 
bank of two three-phase units as compared with one bank of 
single-phase units with a spare. It seems to me-that the argu- 
ments are in favor of single-phase units particularly since 
spare units are provided with the single-phase and not with the 
three-phase transformers. } 

Operating the generator and the transformer equipment as 
a unit will very likely meet with pretty general approval. 
Here again I believe that the choice of units is in favor of the 
single-phase transformer. oe 

The suggestion that the future may see a radical change in 
the present method of handling and cooling transformer oil is 
certainly a very interesting one. Heretofore the forced cool- 
ing of transformer oil has not been very common and not very 
popular and the reason it has not been popular is the expense 
and complication and the lack of real necessity for the forced 
cooling system. It may be that in connection with trans- 
formers of this unusual size, experience may bring up some 
new points which will make it seem a little more desirable. 

On page 1092 is givena list of apparent advantages for the 
forced cooling system and just to take the opposite side of the 
argument for the moment, I would like to submit a few points 
to go with this list: 

(a) Tanks are smaller and cheaper due to eliminating the 
cooling coils. The saving in size is really not very great. It. 
appears only in floor space because the height is practically 
fixed by the insulation and the length of the bushings for 220-, 
000 volts. In other words, the height of the transformer is 
practically the same whether the cooling coils are internal or 
external. _ The saving in cost, if copper cooling coils are taken 
into consideration, amounts to from 5 per cent to 8 per cent. 
If iron cooling coils are taken into account, the saving is con- 
siderably less. This is nota net saving, for the cost of the ex- 
ternal system with its pump and motor is greater than the 
internal cooling coils. 

(b) Assuming that the ducts in the windings are free from 
restrictions and that there are no places where the oil does not 
flow naturally In response to the thermal head, there is nothing 
more positive in circulation or more positive in cooling than 
the natural flow of oil set up by the heat of the windings and 
it would seem that forced cooling should be unnecessary un- 
re some new and compelling reasons are developed to justify 

I question whether the rapid circulation of oil in a water- 
cooled transformer is fully appreciated, for it is really more 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1105 


rapid under the natural conditions than with forced cooling 
unless the external piping and pump are unreasonably large. 
The thermal head in a transformer forms one of the most effi- 
cient pumps. Anyone who has ever looked into a transformer 
when operating under load will remember the boiling of the oil 
at the surface due to the strong circulation. 

(c) The temperature of the oil at the bottom of the case is 
dependent only on the size of the cooling plant, irrespective 
of whether it is internal or external, and low temperature of 
the ingoing oil is not specially characteristic of the forced 
cooling system. 

(d) The oil must of course be kept absolutely dry, and if 
it is conceded that we can’t get reliable cooling coils placed in- 
side the transformer, then the present almost universal prac- 
tise would have to be abandoned. It seems to me that we can 
count on reliable coils and perhaps the risk of getting water 
into the oil is not very much greater than the risk of getting 
air into the external system through the piping and pump, and 
that of course would be a very serious thing with these high 
voltages. 

(e) Continuous filtering of the oil can be carried out whether 
the transformer is cooled by natural cooling or by forced cool- 
ing. It would be impracticable to filter the main flow of oil 
supplied to a transformer of this size because the volume is 
too great. 

(f) It may be that when we get used to large systems, 
having these high-voltage transformers, the forced circulation 
of the oil may appear to be more desirable and perhaps cheaper 
than it has heretofore, but experience up to the present time 
really does not indicate it. 

I happen to have had some experience with a 14,000-kv-a. 
three-phase transformer which is cooled with a forced circula- 
tion of the oil through an external system. This is quite a 
little smaller than a 35,000-kv-a. or 40,000-kv-a. single-phase 
unit but its test results are interesting and it seems as though 
they ought to be useful in considering the forced cooling of 
large transformers. This transformer is supplied with 270 
gallons of oil per minute and is circulated by means of a pump 
driven by a 10-h.p. motor. The maximum temperature at 
the top of the oil is 51 deg. cent. and at the bottom, before it 
enters the case, 45 deg. making a difference of 6 deg. from 
bottom to top. 

Now, if that same transformer were cooled in the more usual 
way with water circulated in internal cooling coils, it would 
require approximately 60 gallons of water per minute and a 
pump requiring not over 2 h.p. to drive it. The temperature 
of the oil at the top would be 51 deg. cent., the same as before, 
but at the bottom it would be 47 deg., a difference of only 4 deg. 
from bottom to top. The temperature of the water is 25 deg. 


cent. in both cases. 


1106 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


The interesting points here are that: 

(1) The difference of temperature of the oil from bottom to 
top as a water-cooled unit is only two-thirds of what it is as a 
forced-cooled unit. This means that the circulation of the oil 
is about 50 per cent more rapid and 50 per cent greater in 
volume when the transformer is cooled with the natural circu- 
lation. This is a good illustration of the rapid flow of oil in a 
water-cooled transformer, which I said a moment ago perhaps 
is not fully realized. The thermal conditions tending to pro- 
duce the rapid circulation of the oil in a water-cooled unit, are 


Qil 51° C. 


Oil 51° Cy 
ie a 
oS 


j 


lAverage Oi 
Temperatur 
lt? 


(G8 See eB Seas 
Puy |_| a aes 2 Horsepower Tees tee 
eS ~~. Water Line gs Water Inlet, Temperature 25° C. 


Water 25° C. Water Outlet, Temperature 36° C. 


270 Gallons per Minute 56 Gallons per Minute 
10 Horsepower Motor 
FORCE COOLED TRANSFORMER WATER COOLED TRANSFORMER 
Ere. Fic. 2 


all present when it is operated as a forced-cooled unit, but the — 
restriction to the flow of the oil in the piping and the external 
cooling coils is great enough to pull the flow down to about 
two-thirds of what it would be as a water-cooled unit. In 
other words, the efficient pumping effect of the thermal head 


plus the external pump are not sufficient { 
that would result from t client to produce the flow 


count of the friction he 
way to bring the circula 
cooled circulation 
of money on th 


ad of the external system and the only 
tion up to a par with the natural water- 
: atte to spend an pee tee amount 
S al piping, pump and motor. i 

May seem surprising to some but at one stops to inane 
ne requires very little pressure to make the oil flow up through 
oe and to return it down the sides of the case and 

at it requires a very considerable pressure to circulate it _ 


he thermal head alone simply on ac- — 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1107 


through the external piping and cooling coils, the results are 
not so surprising. 

(2) The temperatures are more uniform under the natural 
cooling condition than with the forced cooling condition in 
this transformer. This follows as a natural result of the 
greater flow of oil. 

(3) If enough money were spent in pump and motor to 
double the flow of oil that exists under the forced cooling con- 
ditions the gain in maximum oil temperature would be only 
1.5 deg. over the natural water-cooled condition and the 
expense of this undertaking would be practically prohibitive. 

Looking at this problem from the point of view of simplicity, 
it would seem to be a better proposition to go into the tank 
directly with the cooling medium and carry the heat away 
rather than to provide means for removingall of the oil with 
its heat units from the tank, carry it to some external point 
and there extract the heat and then return the oil to the tank. 

Really, the big problem in cooling a large transformer is the 
problem of getting the heat out of the coils into the cooling 
stream of oil, and usually the cooling of the oil itself can very 
easily be taken care of without resorting to the forced cooling 
system. 

After we have studied this problem of cooling unusually large 
transformers during the next year or two, perhaps the forced 
cooling system may show up to a little better advantage. I 
think it will be very interesting to watch the developments of | 
the next few years. 

Philip Torchio: I am representing in my employment, 
central stations. I want to say from the start that the central 
station as an industry don’t care how the power is generated. 
Whether they generate it themselves or if they buy it from out- 
side sources, it is the same to them. The central stations are 
purveyors of power to the public and they are not concerned 
about the question of selfish motives to have it generated lo- 
cally under their direct control or from an outside entity, pro- 
vided that equal cost can be secured and equal reliability of 
service can be given to the customers. 

So, in commenting on the interpretation of Mr. Silver’s 
paper in the broad generalization and application to the solu- 
tion of the power problem of the nation, I want to put an em- 
phatic denial on record that the central stations have any selfish 
motive in raising any question or any objection to such plan. 


In fact, the question of securing economical advantages of tie 


eonnections has been one of the characteristics of the central 


station industry. ay 
In the particular field of activity of my people, we have prob- 


_ably been leaders in the interconnection of systems. We have 
_had interconnection between the stations of the lighting com- 


panies and the railway companies since 1899 and they have 


been added thereto from year to year so that all the stations 


in that territory are now interconnected in one system. 


1108 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


In commenting on the general problem of power supply to 
the nation, as the time is short I want to refer you toa discus- 
sion I presented in January 1918, on Mr. Jackson’s paper. 
In that discussion I brought out emphatically the essen- 
tial necessity for the states east of the Rocky Mountains to 
develop to the highest degree the steam power plants. The 
question of utilization of water power is secondary. We have 
very little water power available east of the Rocky Mountains, 
except at one location, the Niagara and St. Lawrence River, 
and for the application of those powers I also made certain 
suggestions, which I think should be given serious considera- 
tion by the Congress Committee if such a Committee is ap- 
pointed. : 7 

Now in our daily studies of supplying power to important 
centers or important industries, we are meeting daily with the 
question ‘‘Can you as safely transmit it ten miles away? If 
you have to cross a river, wouldn’t it be better for us to have a 
station?” Now here comes a suggestion to go 250 or 300 
miles. I don’t think that the public is much concerned on the 
theoretical savings that can possibly be made by having the 
power delivered from a distant point, two, three or four hundred 
miles, versus the power generated locally, which may be a dif- 
ference of one-tenth of a cent per kilowatt hour. They are 
more concerned that the power be reliable, continuous. 

In 1911 I presented a paper to the Turin International Con- 
gress on the latest development of high-tension transmission 
which was then 120,000 volts. Being a delegate of the Asso- 
ciation of Edison Companies, I transmitted to the Association 
the paper presented at the Congress, with a supplemental re- 
port, headed ‘‘What the Central Station Can Gain from the 
Latest Development of High-Voltage Transmission.”’ While 
the report did not state specifically the location, still it covered 
the territory between Boston and New York, a part of the 
territory that Mr. Murray has described. I recommend that 
that paper be considered, because it gives the values of what 
you can gain and visualizes the relative advantages. 

Returning to the point of reliability of service, Mr. Murray 
says the plan contemplates using the existing stations for peak 
loads. I assume that in a district like Greater New York the 
peak load would occur in the winter months, usually between 
November and February, and I imagine that during that period 
the stations would be under steam. I don’t understand what 
Mr. Murray had in mind about thesummer months. I imag- 
ine that he would use the transmitted power when the loads 
are light, as during the summer months, when the loads are 
normally about 60 or 70 per cent of the maximum winter load. 
It may interest you to know that on June 20th, 1919, a few days 
ago, at four o'clock, out of the clear sky, suddenly darkened, 
we got the highest load in the history of our company. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LEAKE PLACID ; 1109 


_ Now how could the customers be supplied from a peak sta- 
tion, shut down? It would be impossible. We will have to keep 
those stations under steam. Now when you keep stations 
under steam you have a great loss in banking fires and radia- 
tion, and those losses must be considered. 

A valuable paper has been presented to the Smithsonian 
Institution by Mr. Pogue and another writer, emphazing the 
necessities of this power problem and the necessities of having 
power transmission lines the same as we have passenger and 
freight communication lines. 

But I think one thing is overlooked, that we must use coal 
to generate our power. It makes very little difference in the 
saving of coal if we generate the power at the mine or if we 
generate it at tide-water or in Chicago. ‘The only possible 
saving is of lightening the load on the railroads. 

The point I have made in my quoted remarks is that by 
keeping up the development of the central stations as we are 
doing it, securing for our increment power the high efficiencies 
of which Mr. Murray speaks, and we concentrate all our com- 
bined efforts along the lines which the central stations are fol- 
lowing, we will get out from coal all there is in it, the same as 
if we generated the power at the mine. Our goal must be to 
concentrate all efforts to prevent the small uneconomical plant 
from generating power. Those are the people that use the 
thirty, forty and fifty pounds of steam. We must also stop 
the trunk railroads from using from one hundred and twenty- 
five to one hundred and fifty millions of tons of coal a year at 
5 per cent efficiency. 

Now if we generate that power in our stations and we realize 
with these intercompany ties that I was proposing eight years 
ago, we will secure‘all the advantages that Mr. Murray points 
out, and we will give to the customer a more reliable service 
than if we tried to supply it with power over long distance 
transmission lines. 

The time is short and I want only to emphasize this feature, 
that the central stations are not advocating from a selfish stand- 
point the higher development of their plants, but they are logi- 
cally fulfilling a line of economic development. If we carry 
out that development we will reduce from one-half to two- 
thirds the freight for power coal on our railroads. Then the 
gradual electrification of trunk railroads will double their car- 
rying capacity and the question of congestion of traffic will be 
solved in a logical way and in a saving way. 

S. W. Mauger and R. M. Spurck: The importance of the 
subject and the advantages shown by Mr. Silver in the use of 
220-kv. transmission, warrants some comments from the stand- 
point of the designing engineer and we are therefore presenting 
the following remarks on line insulators, switching devices and 
relays, confirming Mr. Silver’s conclusions. Raat it 

1. Although it is believed that the values shown in Fig. 9 
for the dry flash-over voltages of insulator strings, is somewhat 


1110 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


low for strings of 8 units and more, the values which it is be- 
lieved are more nearly correct, are not enough higher to neglect 
the additional advantages that can be obtained from grading. 
Such grading appears to be practically feasible. The use of 
shields, however, offers many mechanical difficulties that would 
make the results obtainable not worth the added complication. 

Very little reduction in the flash-over voltage of strings of 
units is expected when such strings are combined in multiple. 
Attention is called to the probable mechanical difficulties in- 
volved in shielding strings of multiple units. 

We believe that a great part of the insulator trouble noted by 
Mr. Silver, has been confined to insulators having cemented-on 
metal fittings. Practically no trouble has been experienced 
with the link type of insulator, which has no cement and whose 
design is such that the insulating section is maintained in com- 
pression. 

The completion of the development of new designs of hard- 
ware promises further extension in the use of existing designs of 
link insulators which already have a service record, indicating 
that they are suitable for 220-kv. transmission with the moder- 
ate mechanical loads ordinarily required. | 

For higher mechanical loads, a similar insulator of much 
more rugged design and capable of handling the heaviest- me- 
chanical load estimated for the present 220-kv. transmission 
problems is being developed. 

2. Eliminating low-tension switching is a big step in reduc- 
ing the complication involved with such large units as are re- 
quired for economical operation at 220-kv. and the saving will 
go a long way toward paying for the increased cost of the high- 
voltage switching apparatus. 

This, of course, can only apply to generating stations, but 
in substations the voltage to which the transformers are stepped 
will be high enough to obviate the very heavy currents. 

As Mr. Silver brings out, the handling of very heavy cur- 
rents involves more difficulty aside from the question of space, 
than the handling of very high voltages. 

3. Mr. Silver makes an apparently bold recommendation 
regarding protective equipment, but with the great saving in 
line conductor cost, we can possibly afford to spend a little of 
this saving in making our insulation proof against over volt- 
age. This is at least worthy of careful consideration. 

4, As far as oil circuit breakers and line disconnecting 
switches are concerned, we have found no design problems that 
cannot be worked out and the performance of the apparatus 
predicted with a fair degree of accuracy from designs and per- 
formance data on similar apparatus for lower voltages, namely, 
those voltages between 100 kv. and 155 kv. 

_ In oil circuit breakers for 220-kv. in order to obtain the de- 
sired insulation, it is necessary to have exceedingly large tanks 
on account of the large breaks between contacts and large clear- 


1919] DISCUSSION-AT LAKE PLACID . 1111 


ances between contacts and tank, and we believe therefore, 
that it is advisable to have a smaller and very strong arcing 
chamber which will relieve the tanks from stresses occasioned 
by opening large amounts of power. These explosion chambers 
also are very efficacious in breaking the arc because in their 
design the pressure of the gas is utilized to a good advantage 
in blowing fresh oil through the are stream, thereby assisting 
in effecting a prompt extinction of the are. Such breakers can 
be supplied with two or four breaks per phase, with four break 
design having all four breaks in one oil vessel or preferably two 
breaks in each of two oil vessels. 

5. 220-kv. air break disconnectors must necessarily occupy 
considerable space, which of course involves difficulty in de- 
sign and operation as well as expensive structures for support- 
ing the switches. We cannot hope for any change in these 
conditions, but it is felt that the conditions can be met with en- 
tirely operative and rugged designs, even if necessary to open 
the exciting current of a transformer. It is not recommended, 
however, that this should be done except on the small capacity 
transformers. The following types have been suggested: 

(a) Combination knife-blade arc-horn type with two blades 
in series operated simultaneously and mounted on rigid in- 
sulators. ‘The blade opens upward. 

(b) Underhung-blade type supported from link suspension 
insulators, the blade opening downward. 

(ec) Knife blade type with hinge end supported partly on 
insulating bushing of transformer or oil circuit breaker and 
partly on a separate rigid insulator which is revolved or other- 
wise moved to operate the switch and the other end supported 
by a rigid insulator on the tower structure. The blade opens 
downward. 

The type mentioned above first is the only type we would 
recommend for opening with exciting current flowing. The 
second type with the proper mechanical design can probably 
be made to give the most reliable service from standpoint of 
insulation, because link insulators without cement can be used, 
thereby eliminating troubles attributed to cement. _ 

6. It is gratifying to know that Mr. Silver recognizes the 
great progress that has been made in relay development. 
From the standpoint of relay application, there is no more rea- 
son to anticipate difficulty with a 220-kv. system than with one 
of lower voltage. i 

J.C. Parker:- I take it that the comments by Mr. Torchio 
are not intended in disparagement of the very large social vis- 
ion that Mr. Murray has given us of the implications of this 
_ paper on the 220-kv. transmission, rather that they are in- 

tended as a warning and a possible encouragement and incen- 
tive to the profession as a whole to tackle the large proposition 
of the super-power development as an integral matter, rather 
_ than asa specialized Jine of development. 


1112 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


I think it is very satisfactory to the electrical engineers that 
Mr. Murray has pointed out to us an opportunity for a social 
relation for our technical work. I think electrical engineers in 
the past have had occasion to feel that particularly the civil 
engineers have had a greater social relation in such things as 
matters of transportation and sanitation than have we elec- 
trical engineers. 

The problem of coal conservation as affected by these super- 
voltages and super-power lines, it seems to me, divides itself 
naturally into two parts, one which is technical, the other which 
is more or less political. Those two parts are incidentally con- 
cerned with the things that are internal to the industry and 
peculiarly within the hands of the electrical engineers, and 
those things which are external. Whatever we may do in the 
way of technical improvement in getting higher voltage lines, 
lines capable of transmitting at high voltages and at high 
economies, will be utterly nullified, as pointed out by Mr. 
Torchio this morning, unless an inducement may be created 
for the ultimate user to take the power so economically gener- 
ated and transmitted. 

Mr. Torchio is quite right in the statement that if you wipe 
out the entire marginal cost of steam power production you 
have done no good toward getting economical coal usage, unless 
the ultimate consumer can find a selfish interest in such utiliz- 
ation. Now that does not mean that these higher voltage lines, 
these large projects necessarily fail to attain the end. It sim- 
ply means that we must be spurred toward very large efforts 
in the direction of securing the one thing that is essential, con- 
tinuity of service. With these very large systems, with large 
centers of population dependent on the service, continuity be- 
comes preeminently the requirement, and much more so than 
even in our metropolitan systems of today. I don’t think that 
that need discourage us. There is opportunity, there is hope 
for the right sort of development. 

Mr. Silver has pointed out one line that must be pursued, 
that of simplicity. Much of the discouragement in our high- 
tension transmissions in the past has been due to the fact that 
we did not sharply differentiate between a transmission system 
and a distribution system. These super-power lines cannot be 
tapped for every small community. We will probably have 
intermediate voltage lines for distributing to the smaller com- 
munities. 

I believe also that Mr. Murray pointed out the importance 
of a multiplicity of generating points on a relatively simple sys- 
tem. Where that sort of thing has been done with such volt- 
ages as 140 kv., continuity of service has been attained. On 
the other hand, the profession as a whole, if it is going to ac- 
complish this very large social program, must devote to it a — 
ita deal of effort. We must make our utilization apparatus 
simpler and cheaper. We must make the means of distribution 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1113 
much more economical, with a marginal generation at as low as 
0.2 of a cent in the pre-war days, the distribution companies 
were the thing that stood between cheap coal utilization and 
sales to the customers. There is a big problem for even the 
application engineer whereby he ties himself to this program 
of national conservation. 

W. S. Murray: Mr. Torchio raised some very interesting 
and very valuable points, indeed, and I thought it possible 
that an impression might have been conveyed that in the study 
of this matter we rather considered we had plenty of hydraulic 
power in this region. Now I want to draw your attention to 
the fact that at first blush the.study shows that there is a de- 
mand of some seventeen million horse power, of which ten is 
industrial and seven is required for the railroads. 

Now the actual amount of hydroelectric development avail- 
able for what you might call, economic application, is some- 
where around a million, and so there is not a very great deal of 
hydroelectric power available as it stands. In other words, 
just as Mr. Torchio pointed out, the steam will carry the heavy 
end—93 per cent steam, 7 per cent hydroelectric. May be 
later as we extend the line up into Maine and South down to 
Richmond, we will strike into the Northern and Southern 
hydroelectric powers, and the percentage of water power will 
be increased, but it is primarily now a steam problem, a problem 
of getting the highest economies out of steam. 

That was just the point I wanted to bring up for fear you 
thought perhaps we were thinking of the development of the 
hydroelectric feature. 

Next is with regard to the point Mr. Torchio raised concern- 
ing a day that might come along in the middle of a low load sea- 
son which would reach right up to the maximum of the high. 
We have got to look at this thing away out there and not right 
in front of us. We have got to keep our minds far ahead _ and 
with this super-power system installed one or two units quickly 
thrown into service would meet the conditions Mr. Torchio has 
described. It is just because of the lack of it today that we are 
at times embarrassed. His argument “against” is truly ‘for’ 
when we view this matter broadly. | 

I agree that these great steam stations are preferably to be 
located in the large centers, such as New York, or Boston, or 
Philadelphia, etc. Mr. Torchio is absolutely right along those 
lines, but we must not lose sight when we have done that, of 
the fact that this tremendous super-power transmission at 
220-kv. is the interlink between all those large centers, and 
provides a means to supply the very customers that Mr. Torchio 
pointed out we must reach and therefore, while entirely agree- 
ing with him that his load centers are correct it should be 
remembered that the super-power transmission ties in those 
load centers and make them more effective, permitting us 
opportunity to create a high load factor for a regional instead 


of a city plant. 


1114 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


Now just remember the house. Then, after the house, the 
city. Then the district, then the territory, and now the region 
and that is all this proposition is; to establish a twelve pound 
line in this region. We are on the verge of large things, and it 
is within the vision of those large things and within the vision 
of practicability that we do the larger things in a more efficient 
way than the smaller. 

J. C. Clark: The San Francisco Section has organized a 
local Committee on Railway Electrification, including in its 
membership a number of the best electrical engineers of the 
community. The Committee was organized about the first of 
April, 1919, and has been holding meetings every two weeks 
since that time. One object of the Committee is to gather all 
the data they can get in the way of actual figures of power con- 
sumed in railway operation, such things as maximum load 
swings, demands upon lines to carry trains at all times, and 
load factors. In this latter connection it is quite surprising 
and gratifying to hear Mr. Murray state that the load factor 
on his regional trunk, due to railroad operation, will run as high 
as 75 per cent. No such high load factor has been predicted 
by our people for the California mountain divisions. 

Among other subjects which are being studied is the amount 
of potential water power in the Pacific Coast States, especially 
in California; the amount of fuel oil used by railroads; and 
more technical topics such as the practicability of dispatching 
trains with special attention to load factor. 

The plan of the Committee is not to engage in political activ- 
ity unless called upon. The Committee wish to be prepared 
so that they will have all the facts and figures at their disposal 
which they may need in order to assist any legislative body in 
studying the problems of conservation of fuel in their district. 
Fuel oil in California is going very fast. 

_ Some of us do not look for the initiative in railway electrifica- 
tion to come from the railways. It is rather remarkable that 
the matter of railway electrification has been studied in the 
past almost exclusively from the railway standpoint. It is felt 
that we need not hope, certainly not in the near future, for any 
considerable move for railroad electrification from our railroads. 
One reason that has been apparent to some of us is that, in 
these days of regulation of such utilities as railroads, it is a 
growing practise to insure a reasonable return to the railroads 
or any utility, on its investment. 

Now, if the railroads are assured, say, 8 per cent, it perhaps 
removes one of the incentive toward more economical operation. 
If that return is assured in any case, it is not quite apparent 
why they should strive to improve their methods—at least not 
from the point of view of the fuel conservationist. It seems to 
many of us to be up to the public to insist upon railway elec- 
trification, and with the attitude of being prepared for a public 
movement for railway electrification, we are getting together 


MON eet 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1115 


all the data we can to enable us to be ina position to offer such 
assistance to legislative bodies as may be asked. 

Mr. Silver expresses some apprehension about insulators. 
He has a good reason for this in view of the universally bad ex- 
perience with the cemented type of insulator. Fortunately, 
however, there are some very good operating data, covering a 
period of perhaps ten years, on another type of insulator. I 
refer to the original suspension insulator known as the Hewlett. 
The failures in the cemented type of insulator have not been 
due primarily to electrical causes but to mechanical cracking 
and absorption of moisture. Electrical failures follow. The 
cracking may be caused by expansion of the cement or of tightly 
fitting metal parts. The presence of the cement greatly aids 
in the absorption of moisture by porous porcelain in contact 
with it. The absorption is apparently due to breathing. — In 
the Hewlett type the metal parts are strung loosely through 
glazed cable ways. I have recently had occasion to examine 
many insulators of this type having a ten year service record 
with inappreciable loss. Electrical, mechanical, and porosity 
tests showed no depreciation. Some of the old original units 
that gave perfect service were poorly made compared to present 
standards. This speaks well for the design. 

It may be necessary to grade the strings of insulators used 
on these high-voltage lines to lower the stress on the line unit. 

In regard to the transformers, I believe decidedly, that all 
high-voltage neutrals should be grounded without resistance. 
With proper precautions there should be no difficulty with tele- 
phone operation. The connection will in general be Y-delta 
to prevent tripple frequency. 

There are some advantages and many disadvantages in high- 
tension switching. The number of these switches should be re- 
duced to a minimum. 

As transmission voltages are increased, the number of times 
that lightning voltages exceeding operating voltage are induced 
on the line in a given season will decrease. 

The question naturally arises whether it will pay to install 
lightning arresters. While it is probably true that a lightning 
arrester gap on a 220-kv. line would discharge only at infre- 
quent intervals, great damage might be done if it were absent 
during: these intervals. If it is assumed that the transient volt- 
age is limited to the gap setting, it can be shown that about five 
times the insulation is necessary to make the apparatus equally 
safe without a lightning arrester. When the arrester is ab- 
sent the voltage is limited by the line insulation. The turn 
insulation probably receives relatively greater transient stresses 
on very high-voltage lines than on moderate voltage lines. A 
lightning arrester is decidedly desirable if its cost is commen- 


~surate with the cost of other apparatus. Consideration must 
also be given to the enormous,energy involved. » 


- F.C. Hanker: The field of the 220-kv. system is appar- 
ently limited, as pointed out by Mr. Silver, to trunk line service 


1116 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


where we have long distance transmission and heavy blocks of 
power. That would be the natural conclusion, based on pres- 
ent analysis of costs, the development of the necessary trans- 
forming and switching equipments involved in the line con- 
struction. It would naturally hold for pioneer installations 
but if we look back on the history of transmission voltage, we 
find parallel-situations in the steps of 110-kv. to 154-ky-a. — It 
has only been a few years since 110-kv. was discussed as a high 
voltage for transmission, while today it is so common that it 
may be considered almost in the class of distribution voltages. 
The frequency of 60 cycles selected for the studies is in line 
with present tendencies toward the establishment of this fre- 
quency as the standard frequency of power supply in this coun- 
try. A general analysis of the factors entering into a decision 
as to the best frequency to adopt in any specific case will show 
that the increase in 60-cycle systems is a natural one and is one 
that will undoubtedly continue at an accelerated rate. 
The existing transmission systems that are operating at high 
voltages above 110-kv., have layouts that in general require 
regulation at one load center so that it is usually possible to 
adjust operating voltages at the generator station to correspond 
to the requirements at the load center and in this way keep the 
investment in synchronous condensers to a minimum. In 
the case of trunk line service where a mumber of generator 
stations and different load centers are involved, the mainte- 
nance of satisfactory voltage regulation at all points becomes 
more of a problem and it is usually more economical to supple- 
ment the synchronous condenser installation with synchronous 
boosters or the equivalent, such as induction regulators. This 
is particularly true where systems tie in with existing city sys- 
tems that have standards established, making it necessary to 
maintain closer voltage regulation than is permissible on som 
of the pioneer lines such as exist in the West. 
With the relatively high investment in lines and substation 
apparatus it is important that full capacity be available. This 
makes regulating apparatus at tap points desirable in order to 
reduce the circulating currents to a minimum. We have re- 
viewed cases where parallel lines were involved in which it was 
desirable to provide independent regulation for each circuit. 
This was due to unequal loading at tap points that would have 
resulted in excessive circulating currents had the two lines been 
paralleled at both ends and regulation obtained by synchronous 
condenser equipment. It would also have cost very much 
more to control by the use of synchronous condensers than by 


boosters or equivalent regulating schemes. This condition 
would obtain on projects such as have been proposed for trunk 
lines along the Atlantic Coast tieing in the different existing 
power stations. To be of value it should be possible to trans- 


fer power in both directions, which would mean, in the case 
where synchronous condensers were used, installations at each 


= 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1117 


end of capacity to give the full range of regulation. This con- 
dition can be better fulfilled by the use of sufficient synchronous 
condenser capacity to provide for operation at the most eco- 
nomical power factor and take care of the additional regulation 
by some other method. 

With the installations under consideration, the capacity of 
the regulators that would be required would be larger than 
have been built of the usual type of induction regulator. There 
has been developed, however, a combination of the step type 
and induction type that would be feasible for the capacities in- 
volved. In this regulator the objectionable features of the 
straight step type regulator have been eliminated in that no 
switching is done with circuits having difference of potentials, 
and as a result, sparking is avoided. The short-circuit stresses 
that have been a limiting feature in the design of induction 
regulators are avoided, in that only a small percentage of the 
total short-circuit current is handled by the regulator. 

The kv-a. required to charge the lines of the length that have 
been considered in the studies becomes of importance due to 
the effect on the generator excitation. A normal design of 
generator such as would be installed would have a short-circuit 
ratio of approximately unity, that is, with the excitation re- 
quired to give normal voltage at no load, the sustained short- 
circuit current would be approximately full-load current. In 
the studies made, 80,000 kv-a. is given as required to charge 
the line so that it would only be necessary to supply 20 per cent 
external excitation to excite the full 100,000 kv-a. in generators 
to normal voltage. There will undoubtedly be times when 
only one generator will be available to supply a line, and under 
this condition, the charging kv-a. would exceed the capacity of 
generating apparatus. ‘'Fhis would take the control of the 
voltage out of the hands of the operators and result in abnormal 
voltages on the transmission line. 

This condition is not of importance when operating under 
the usual loads, but must be considered where high-voltage 
switching is involved. 

In commenting on the design features of 220-kv-a. station and 
substation equipment the paper points out that the studies 
have developed that current design principles and materials 
now in ordinary use will be employed. This is encouraging 
after reviewing the analysis that has been made of the prob- 
lems encountered in laying out the other parts of the system. 
While the margin on safe operating voltage is probably greater 


_than is apparently the case with the line construction, it is rec- 


ognized that new problems exist and the manufacturers appre- 
ciate the importance of these problems. They are not content 
to be satisfied with the present conditions but feel that just as 
careful analysis and research is fully warranted and should be 
undertaken to ensure the success of this higher voltage system. 
The problems have been classified as of two types, those due 
to the high voltage of itself and those due to the enormous ca- 


1118 POWER TRANSMISSION {June 27 


pacities involved. The insulation problems in the stations are 
concentrated where greater expense is justified in providing 
the margin in safety that is essential. 

The conclusion that all line switching should be done on the 
high-voltage side will probably find opposition but if future 
investigation confirms this statement it will simplify the switch- 
ing problem. In accepting the recommendation, it should be 
recognized that this method of operation will subject the trans- 
formers to higher stresses than in the case of low-tension switch- 
ing. It is true that the potentials resulting from switching are 
of the same order as those the apparatus would have to stand 
from static disturbances or other transients that may occur on 
transmission lines, but they probably occur more frequently. 
On the 110-kv. and 154-kv. systems, we have heard of no serious 
results from the high-voltage switching, yet this point must be 
taken into consideration in laying out a system on the higher 
voltage. With the operating conditions that have been as- 
sumed it would be well to consider arrangements wherein the 
step-up transformers and the step-down transformers are con- 
sidered as a unit and operated as such. This does not neces- 
sarily mean that the apparatus must be operated in parallel on 
the low-tension side at the generating station, as the layout can 
be so arranged as to provide for what is essentially unit opera- 
tion. 

In investigating breakdowns that have occurred on lower po- 
tential circuits, we have obtained results that indicated that 
the current was ruptured in the oil breaker at a rate several 
times the normal frequency. If this condition holds for low 
voltages with relatively short travel of the contacts and short 
ares, it must be more severe at high potentials with correspond- 
ingly long arcs. . 

* H.R. Summerhayes: Figs. 1 and 2 of Mr. Silver’s paper 
show a comparison of the cost of the line construction, total 
operating cost for 154,000 volts and 220,000 volts, and at first 
it seems as if more of a gain should be made on 220,000 volts in 

' spite of the increased cost of the towers, etc., which is incurred 

by the higher voltage, but in reality the comparison is between 

170,000 and 220,000 because 170,000 as stated in the footnote 

is the voltage at the generating end of the line, just as 220,000 

is the generating end voltage, and I think that the comparison 


~ is really between those two voltages and not between 1 

and 260,000. i en 

R. P. Jackson: Mr. Silver’s statement that there is no 
type of insulator as yet developed that has thus far demon- 
strated its ability to give adequate, or even reasonably satisfac- 
tory results on high-voltage lines is an: exceedingly severe in- 
dictment of the suspension insulator considering the amount 
of power now being actually carried by conductors hung on 
such insulators. “Reasonably satisfactory” is a relative term 
and if defined as being as satisfactory for example as the steel 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1119 


towers on which the insulators hang, the statement is doubtless 
correct. 

In reading Mr. Silver’s paper, it is obvious that he has some 
serious misgivings as to the insulators for the high-voltage high- 
power lines proposed, and with good reason. A link of nine to 
eleven ft. between the line and the tower appears altogether too 
long. Six feet would be possible as a pillar to support discon- 
necting switches. Further, a strain tower taking up the ten- 
sion of the three lines in both directions apparently requires six 
strings, each of fifteen insulators for each conductor anchor. 
This means 6 X 15 X 6 = 540 insulator disks per strain tower. 
This strikes one as a monstrosity. 

In the first place it would seem to the writer that the use of 
15 disks in series is unduly conservative on a solidly grounded 
neutral line that limits the voltage to 130,000. Ten, or at the 
most twelve, should be sufficient with say a 7in. spacing. This 
would givea string about 6.5 to 7 ft. long and reduces the in- 
equality in stress distribution. 

When it comes to 2900 pounds as a maximum load on the 
ordinary disk insulator, Mr. Silver is not unduly conservative. 
Such an extraordinary proposition calling for such loads as Mr. 
Silver describes demands something larger and stronger in an 
insulator than anything now on the market. 

The present types of insulators have been developed to meet 
certain prevailing conditions. In fact, some operating men 
state that for their use the usual cap and pin insulator is unnec- 
essarily strong. It is undesirable to use a size and type of 
insulator developed for the low stress conditions of ordinary 
transmission lines for these new and much more severe condi- 
tions. It certainly ought to be possible to make up an insu- 
lator good for twice the stress of the ordinary unit, thus reduc- 
ing the parallel strings for a conductor anchor from six to three. 

Just which of the three types enumerated by Mr. Silver 
would lend itself most readily and most safely to increase in 
_ strength is somewhat debatable, but it would seem that the 
interlinked type in some form would offer somewhat the best 
starting point, judging from what can be readily obtained now 
in strain balls for guy wires. y 

It is to be hoped that no effort will be spared to do something 
in this direction before resorting to the use of such a multiplic- 
ity of insulator units as the present standard designs would 
appear to demand. ; 

The writer would personally commend Mr. Silver’s judgment 
in regard to lightning protection in retaining the overhead 
guard wires and eliminating the lightning arresters. As to 
something in the nature of choke coil protection against surges 
of steep wave front, one does not feel so sure. That largely 
depends on how well built are the high-tension windings of the 
transformers. j : ; 

H. B. Dwight: The statement in Mr. Silver’s paper that 
the frequency of 60 cycles should be chosen for an important 


1120 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


generating and transmission system, even where there is a 
large present 25-cycle load, seems a logical and proper conclu- 
sion. As stated in the paper, the frequency of 60 cycles is su- 
perior to that of 25 cycles for the general supply of energy, and 
therefore any means which will tend toward the increased use 
of 60 cycles is a step toward standardization of the right kind. 

It may be interesting to note some of the main items of extra 
expense entailed by choosing 60 cycles for the generating and 
transmission system where the greater part of the load is 25- 
cycle. Many residence districts and street lighting loads can 
be changed to 60 cycles at very small expense. Many 25-cycle 
transformers can be connected in two parallels and operated 
at 60 cycles at increased capacity. For power circuits, it 
would be possible to provide frequency-changer sets for a large 
part of the total system load. 

The cost of the motors of the frequency-changer sets should 
not be charged to the fact that 60 cycles was chosen, because 
they take the place of the synchronous condensers which would 
have been needed for a system of this kind, as stated in Mr. 
Silver’spaper. Although transmission is usually considered easier 
at 25 cycles than at 60 cycles, the advantage almost entirely 
disappears when synchronous condensers are used to eliminate 
voltage variation. Practically the same rating of condensers 
is needed for a 25-cycle line as for a 60-cycle line, for the same 
results in a certain case. Although there is less voltage drop 
to be overcome in the case of the lower frequency, there is less 
reactance to work on by the condensers. 

It might be questioned whether the motor of a frequency- 
changer set would be as effective for voltage control as a syn- 
chronous condenser of the same rating. The answer is in the 
affirmative if the load power-factor is as low as 80 per cent, the 
motor of the set being operated at nearly unity power-factor at 
full load, and at a load power factor at no load, of such a value 
_ as not to endanger its stability of operation. 

Therefore, if a large part of the load be supplied with 25- 
cycle energy through frequency-changers, it would not be nec- 
essary to scrap the 25-cycle apparatus in use, and yet new in- 
stallations could be supplied with energy directly from the 60- 
cycle transformers and so could enjoy the advantages of better 
choice of motor speeds, better lighting and cheaper and more 
standard apparatus of all kinds. 

Thus, at the time of building a new generating and trans- 
mission system, by the additional expense of the generating end 
of the frequency-changers, and a small duplication of distribu- 
tion circuits, representing an extremely small percentage of. 
the cost of the system, a 25, 30, or 50-cycle system could be put 
in the way of gradually becoming a 60-cycle system. 

_ J.F. Peters: There area number of factors that enter 
into the design of apparatus suitable for operating on a system 
_ as large and as high a voltage as the one proposed by Mr 
Silver, that I wish to comment on briefly. : 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLA CID 1121 


Referring to page 1086 under, Design Features, I note that the 
author states, “The handling of electrical potentials of 220,000 
volts does not appear to involve any disturbing complications 
or uncertainties. In fact, the manufacturers do not recognize 
that any serious problem exists.’ Although that is true to a 
certain extent, I wish to point out that there are several factors 
which become of major importance in designs for high voltage, 
which for low voltage are of no consequence whatever. 

In the design of low-voltage apparatus, it is not necessary to 
take into consideration the electrostatic field, whereas on high- 
voltage apparatus that becomes the most important factor in 
the design. Considerable work‘on the distribution of electro- 
static field in transformers and methods of controlling that 
distribution has been done by Mr. Fortescue, some of the re- 
sults of his work have been presented before the Institute. 

Under high-voltage switching, I wish to call attention to the 
fact proven by experience that there are more or less high volt- 
ages produced by switching. The magnitude of these voltages 
and their relation to the applied voltage is not definitely known. 
There is a question in my mind as to the advisability of high- 
voltage switching on anything as high as 220,000 volts on ac- 
count of that uncertainty. 

Under transformer connections, I am pleased to note that 
the author has recognized the decided advantages that there 
are in the star connection. In addition to the advantages that 
he has stated, I might add that this connection results in trans- 
formers being smaller and more efficient on account of the lower 
voltage that is developed in the windings, consequently less 
insulation of inactive material. 

With reference to limiting size of transformers, referred to 
on page 1090, from my experience on the design of large trans- 
formers, I have found that the mechanical stresses due to short- 
circuit currents are not serious for high voltage. The short- 
circuit stresses are not nearly as severe in transformers for high 
voltage as they are for the same size units on lower voltages. 
The reason for this is that the density of the leakage field is 
much less on the former. My experience indicates that the 
factor that limits the size of transformer units is transportation 
and handling facilities. Those limits are not only due to over- 
all dimensions, that is railway clearances, but for units of the 
size suggested by the author, they approach the limit of carry- 
ing capacity of even special cars. 

On the top of page 1092 the author refers to the relative 
amount of insulation for the line and grounded ends of trans- 
formers. I do not believe that he means to infer that extra 
insulation is not necessary between turns on the grounded 
end of the transformer. It is true that the electrical stresses 
between turns on the grounded end are somewhat less than for 
the line end, but they are considerably greater than within 
the body of the winding. I believe that the insulation be- 


4 


1122 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


tween turns should be correspondingly reinforced for both 
f the transformer. f 

“ F. beads I am glad to see that Mr. Silver has decided 
so definitely on the use of grounded “Y” connection. There 
is no doubt that for high-voltage transmission this connection 
which preserves a definite voltage relation of the lines to ground 
and by which the possible voltage oscillations set up by arcing 
grounds are greatly minimized, is the best connection. _ 

This connection is made almost necessary by the decision to 
do all of the switching on the high-voltage side, since the trip- 
ping out of one phase, either by failure of switches or inability 
to close and open all three phases at the same time, does not 
produce a greatly unbalanced electrostatic condition. 

The argument that the grounded Y connection increases the 
hazard due to short circuits, line failures, etc. damaging the 
apparatus by mechanical stresses, is not of great moment be- 
cause on such high-voltage systems the reactance of the trans- 
formers and of the line must, of necessity, be so high that the 
current would be limited to a few times normal through any 
piece of apparatus. 

The use of the grounded Y connection would permit appre- 
ciable savings in the design of transformers since less insulation 
is necessary to ground, and it is not necessary to insulate all 
points of the winding to ground to the maximum extent. 

I believe in general that the insulation to ground in the high- 
voltage transmissions can be reduced, since the probability of 
over-voltage due to lightning, etc. becomes less and less as the 
voltage of the system increases. 

I believe our standard Institute test of twice the line voltage 
plus 1000 volts, is unnecessarily high for the higher line volt- 
ages irrespective of whether the systems are isolated or grounded 
and I think that it would be much more logical to adopt a 
graded test value in which the factor of safety in test would be 
appreciably higher for the low-voltage units than for the higher- 
voltage units. Where grounded Y connections are used, the 
test should, I believe be still further reduced, .at least in the 
higher voltage lines. If both transmitting and receiving neu- 
trals are permanently and effectively grounded, it would ap- 
pear that we could regard the transmission system essentially 
as three single-phase systems and could with safety, permit 
such test values as are ordinarily given for grounded single- 
phase systems. ; 

I have taken the liberty of drawing up suggested curves of 
test voltage for both isolated and grounded systems which give 
: graded test depending on the line voltage. See Figs. 3 and 


The conclusion that the high test values now applied are not 
necessary for high-voltage apparatus is borne out by the fact 
that there are a number of installations in operation of old 
transformers in which the test value was only 1.5 times the line 


& 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACIE 1123 


voltage although I believe that some, if not all of these systems 
are operated grounded Y, and, further, it has not been the prac- 
tise in the past to insulate step-down transformers with a rated 
voltage lower than rated voltage of the step-up transformer to 


a 
= 18 i= eal THT ical 
= ++ isolated Y or 4 no Lightning Arresters 
= 16 eg sh LI 
n” 
a 
a 
1a 
a 
cw 
or12t 
Pui r 
ae | 
: 
ZB «ld = ] 
Qa 
E 1 i 
= 08—+ ee ee 
= Present Test for Grounded Railway Circuits 
es : E T 
So 0.6 aS = Noltages 1 Ky zi 
= 2 4 6 810 20 40 6080100 200 400 600 
= KV LINE VOLTAGE 
Fic. 3 


the same value, the insulation being based entirely on the rated 
voltage. It would appear that all apparatus on a given system 
or circuit should be insulated to the same value. As a matter 
of fact, under light load conditions the step-down transformers 


VA, 83-Kv, Test = (2 Line +1) Kv. all 
20 4-Ky. Test = 1.5.(1.5 Line +3 VLine) Ky. 
5-Ky. Test = 1.5(1.18Line +3 V Line) Kv, | | 
Pe a a LJ 
20 40 60 80100 200 400 600800 1000 
KV. LINE 


Fic. 4—Ky. Test 
. Ungrounded circuits, no lightning arresters. 
Grounded Y circuits, no lightning arresters. 
. Standard A. I. E. E. Test. 
Proposed Standard Test Ungrounded Circuit. 
. Proposed Standard Test Grounded Y Circuit 


arPwd 


are frequently subjected to an even higher voltage than the 
step-up machines, and since these step-down transformers have 
withstood such conditions without failure, it would appear 
unnecessary to insulate a step-up machine to such a high value 


as is our present practise. 


1124 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


With Mr. Silver’s conclusion to omit the use of protective 
- equipment, I am not so much in sympathy. Lightning ar- 
rester equipment in general protects the apparatus against ex- 
cessive voltages to ground. It is not as truly selective to 
frequency to the extent which we desire but it should be borne 
in mind that lacking any protective equipment to discharge 
over voltages to ground, the apparatus will be subjected to 
surges originating or applied to the windings at a higher voltage 
than if the proper protective equipment were connected. 

With proper protective equipment, failures to ground on 
high-voltage apparatus are extremely rare as pointed out pre- 
viously, such failures as do occur usually being internal failures 
between coils or turns caused by local high voltages. Undoubt- 
edly without protective equipment, the apparatus would have 
to be insulated not only to withstand greater voltage to ground 
but against higher local voltages which occur due to oscillations 
or waves of steep front. ; 

I do not feel that it would be safe to use apparatus without 
protective equipment unless the insulation was increased some- 
thing in the order of 50 per cent over that otherwise required. 

On the curves attached I have shown values which would 
be derived if the test values suggested were increased 50 per 
cent to take care of the cases without protective equipment. 

C. F. Harding: Although Mr. Peek has pointed out in the 
discussion of Mr. Silver’s paper that the corona loss on such 
a line, where the amount of energy transferred is large, will be 
rather a small item, yet Mr. Silver has given considerable at- 
tention to that subject and I want to mention briefly a point — 
which I think is worthy of consideration in connection with 
that loss. As I understand it, Mr. Silver has based his cal- 
culations upon the formula developed by Mr. Peek, presented 
to the Institute a number of years ago. If I remember rightly, 
that formula was derived from test voltages extending up in 
the neighborhood of 140 or 150 kv. The speaker presented a 
paper about seven years ago, on the subject of corona loss on 
transmission lines which checked very closely the Peek data up 
to about 150 kv., but departed therefrom materially between 
150 and 180, or 190-kv., seeming to indicate that above 150-kyv. 
values, it might be desirable to introduce new constants into 
the formulas. These calculations in the neighborhood of 220 
ky. may therefore be slightly in error, and it is hoped that in 
the near future some new data will be available in that range. 

Also, very little has been done in connection with corona to 
ground. It was found in some investigations with which I 
have been familiar, that where the lower wire is in fairly close 
proximity to the ground, as must necessarily be the case with 
these long spans and wide spacings with the 9-ft. strings of the 
insulators, there is a relatively large loss between the lower 
wire and ground, due to corona. It may be necessary, there- — 
fore, in some of the future designs, even to go to the extreme 


° 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1125 


measure of putting each conductor on a separate relatively 
light tower line, separating the conductors by means of separate 
towers. 

So much has been said about the different types of con- 
ductors, copper, copper-clad and reinforced aluminum, it would 
seem well worth while in the future to study the possibilities of 
steel tubing, making the diameter of the conductor relatively 
large and keeping the tensile strength high, the resistivity of 
the metal used being of relatively small importance. 

With regard to the question of bushings, although those have 
been mentioned in connection with transformers, little has 
been said about roof bushings or wall bushings, used out of 
doors. It probably will be necessary to use bushings with 
a much lower factor of safety upon such lines than those which 
are being used upon the 140 and 110-kv. lines. In connection 
with the new 600,000-volt laboratory installation at Purdue 
University, with which we hope to make some tests upon ex- 
perimental lines and insulators in the very near future, we have 
had difficulty in getting our lines through the building with 
anything available at present in the way of bushings, even 
with a great reduction in the factor of safety. Of course, Mr. 
Silver’s paper anticipates new designs available in the future, 
but I think the factor of safety will have to be cut down ma- 
terially. 

F. W. Peek: Regarding Mr. Harding’s comments, my 
1910 corona loss measurements were made up to almost 250 kv. 
The voltage range under discussion was thus actually covered. 
Very little would be gained by placing the conductors on single 
towers and separating them a considerable distance. The loss 
occurs due to high dielectric flux density at the surface of the 
conductor. The flux density depends upon the surface, or 
diameter of the wire, and the capacity. The capacity is not 
greatly reduced by increasing the spacing. The greatest re- 
duction in flux density or stress can be made by increasing the 
diameter of the conductor. 

I do not think that the bushing problem is serious. We 
have used bushings up to about 750 kv. without difficulty. 

J.A. Koontz: MHigh-tension power transmission at 220 kv. 
has been a problem confronting the western engineers for sev- 
eral years. While to date it is not a reality, I firmly believe 
that lines will be operating at sucha voltage before many years. 
In fact, had it not been for the war and consequent difficulties 
in financing large hydroelectric developments in the past two 
years, I believe that such a system would now be operating on 
the west coast. ; 

Mr. Silver’s statement is quite true that such high voltage 
has a limited field and can be used economically only where 
large blocks of power must be transmitted over long distances. 
The trend of voltage increase in the past ten years has shown 
that with increased voltage it has been possible to get increased © 


1126 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


reliability. This is due largely to raising the factor of safety 
all along the line. Following this trend, and by carefully work- 
ing out all the details, I believe the same high service standard 
could be incorporated in a 220-kv. transmission system and 
still show economy with improved reliability. 

Some of the real problems to be solved where there may still 
be some doubt are those of corona, insulation and proper oil 
and disconnecting switches. There is one question concerning 
corona which I would like to ask Mr. Silver, and-that is, if any 
tests have been made on large conductors in order of 1 in. in 
diameter to see if 0.87 is the proper conductor irregularity 
factor, asfrom some preliminary tests made at Stanford Uni- 
versity on a 1 in. 37-strand aluminum conductor it would ap- 
pear that 0.72 would be nearer the proper value than 0.87. 

On pages 1049 to 1052, Figs. 3 to 6, are shown corona loss 
curves which I do not believe would represent operating con- 
ditions under good practise, as it does not seem to me logical 
to hold the generator voltage constant and permit of receiver 
voltage variations, but rather, hold a constant receiver voltage 
and increase the generator voltage when necessary to take care 
of maximum load conditions. In this manner, the customer 
will not be subjected to a line drop of both transmission and 
feeders, and the corona loss will be reduced. . 

Fortunately, the Pacific slope weather conditions are such 
that mechanical problems are greatly reduced, as in most 
cases we do not have to design more than 25 per cent of our 
line for sleet loading, and even. where sleet is encountered 
we do not have to take care of such heavy load conditions as 
would be necessary in the Eastern climate. 

I notice in the tower design that Mr. Silver has left only 
a 4-ft. minimum clearance from towers when insulators are de- 
flected to their maximum condition. This does not seem to 
me ample, as from experience on high-voltage lines on this 
coast, flash-overs seem to be the principal service interruptions 
on high-voltage lines, and to eliminate this, it would seem nec- 
essary to maintain ample clearance, in fact, experience would 
indicate that four feet would be a minimum for 150,000 volts, 
as bringing the conductor close to the tower, intensifies the 
electrostatic field, and unless special precautions are taken the 
conductor may fire with corona near the steel tower members, 
which would tend to aggravate any flash-over conditions. This 
is a point which seems to me should be given serious considera- 
tion in any high-voltage line design. 

The insulator problem is certainly very important and the 
exact method of taking care of same is one which will probably 
present as difficult a problem as any encountered. Witha long 
string of insulators I believe grading of some sort will be essen- 
tial so that insulator units in the long string have more nearly 
the same voltage impressed across each one. 

The question of automatic operation on 220-kv. lines, should 
be given very serious thought before attempting same, as at the 


? 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1127 


present most of the long high-tension lines are seldom inter- 
rupted by high-voltage switching. When such large blocks of 
power are essential with power problems of this magnitude, I 
believe the generating stations and substations should be given 
greater flexibility, as the failure of a piece of equipment would 
necessitate taking out such a large block of power that I think 
it would be difficult in general to pick up this power on the 
stand-by steam stations in order that there might be no serious 
interruptions to service, or, if the auxiliary steam stations were 
kept under condition to always take care of such a shift in load, 
it would mean unnecessary fuel expense. I have thought of 
the possibility of attempting to group the transformers and 
line as a unit, but have always been afraid that this would pre- 
sent operating difficulties regarding proper flexibility. 

The question of omitting all arrester equipment, I believe 
is wise, as with very high voltage the insulation strength is 
such that the troubles that the ordinary lightning arrester would 
take care of are of little consequence, and I believe greater 
safety would result in omitting, rather than installing, any of 
the present arrester equipment. 

H. G. MacDonald: The modern tendency toward large 
concentration of power has necessitated a revision of design and 
radical departures from previously well-established precedents. 
The forms of construction which had proved adequate during 
the period of small or moderate powers are entirely insufficient 
for modern requirements. Mechanical structures, form and 
loeation of contact elements, and speed of operation have all 
undergone modifications. 

Best modern practise tends toward a construction built to 
withstand considerable internal pressures, as guarantees call 
for several repeated operations in quick succession in an at- 
tempt to locate and clear short circuits. It is well demonstrated 
that the maximum need of heavy construction is not due to 
the shocks of the actual circuit breaking operation, but to the 
formation of excessive amounts of gas, deterioration and dis- 
‘turbance of oil due to repeated operations, and the ultimate 
explosion of this gas. No device which has for its object sim- 
ply the confining of the stresses due to circuit interruption 
without considering the incident stresses from the attendant 
phenomena will produce a breaker which can be considered safe. 

Modern breakers of moderate interrupting ability will usu- 
ally have elliptical tanks with bracing across the bottom, steel 
tops held by tie bolts secured to the bottom bracing, entirely 
enclosed operating mechanism, leaving a comparatively clear 
slightly crowned top, light moving elements permitting of high 
and rapid acceleration, and contacts placed well below the 
surface of the oil, and so shaped as to reduce voltage discharge 
and to deflect the are and the attendant gases away from any 
insulating surfaces. Adequate vents will be located in such a 
manner as to facilitate the rapid escape of the gases by the cre- 


1128 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


ation of a draft of air through the chamber above the oil. The. 
elliptical tank gives the maximum strength for a given space 
and in connection with the overhung steel top and tie rods, 
makes a construction sufficiently rigid for any service except 
the very heaviest where a round tank construction will be used. 

A prime consideration in successful circuit interrupting is 
speed of opening. As the time during which the arc persists 
determines the amount of contact material vaporized, the 
amount of oil broken up, the amount of gas liberated, and con- 
sequently the pressure formed, it is obvious that quick open- 
ing is highly essential. The simple means of accomplishing 
this end is by highly accelerating the moving element. Where 
this element is light, this will be readily accomplished, but 
when the moving element becomes heavy, and a long travel is 
necessary to obtain the proper break distance, some auxiliary 
means must be used to quicken the contact separation. Quick 
break contacts have been added to certain designs of breaker 
by means of which rapid separation of the arcing contacts is 
obtained without unduly accelerating the entire moving mem- 
ber. Another means of introducing quickly into the circuit 
the necessary insulating distance is by using quadruple break 
contacts instead of the ordinary double break. By producing 
all four of these breaks simultaneously, it is obvious that twice 
the separation is obtained within a given time as compared to 
the double break. As a maximum resort, quadruple quick 
break contacts afford the most rapid separation obtainable 
under present designs. The quadruple break, when used in 
connection with the round tank construction accomplishes in 
a single cireuit breaker what would require two sets of pole’ 
units i series in the case of the oblong flat-sided tank, and at 
no sacrifice of insulation clearances, and in combination with 
the maximum mechanical strength. 

A circuit breaker for 220,000-volt service will inherently pos- 
sess a large interrupting ability. The insulation requirements 
will very largely determine the physical proportions and if a 
consistent design from a purely mechanical standpoint is 
worked out, a structure of very considerable strength will re- 
sult. An oil tank to retain the volume of oil required, and with 
fittings and covers sufficiently rigid to carry the operating 
means and the contact elements, will be of no mean propor- 
tions. By comparatively small additional reinforcement, and 
by the use of suitable material at vital points, a structure cap- 
able of interrupting very large amounts of power will be pro- 
duced. As so much stress is being laid on continuity of service 
ee all contingencies, the breaker design should be such as 

o Insure this to the greatest possible extent. The only safe 
course 1s to make the whole breaker structure sufficiently strong 
to care for the maximum stresses which might occur under any 
conditions which might reasonably be anticipated. No exist- 
ing method of ventilation will dispose of the gas with absolute - 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1129 


certainty that no explosion will occur in the main body of the 
breaker. The explosion chamber used on certain designs of 
breaker does not eliminate the formation of gas. This gas will 
presently pass into the air chamber above the oil and must be 
disposed of. The arrangement of details, and the movement 
of the breaker parts present the possibility of the are which 
originates in the top portion of this explosion cylinder (the 
cylinder being practically tight at the top) following the mov- 
ing contact in its downward travel, expanding as it goes, and 
expelling all the oil before it. The cylinder is now filled with 
incandescent metallic vapor forming a conducting path for 
the full length of the cylinder. As the moving contact leaves 
the cylinder by a very small distance, the possibility of the 
formation of a large amount of gas and serious damage to the 
breaker seems to be not very remote. If, on the other hand, 
the breaker structure entire is made with a view to withstand- 
ing abnormal pressures, and the design provides for a rapid 
contact separation to a sufficient distance so as to preclude the 
possibility of the are holding through the distance, the maxi- 
mum safety and assurance of continuity of service is afforded. 

L. B. Chubbuck: Referring particularly to the descrip- 
tion on pages 1093 and 1094 of proposed 220-kv. oil circuit 
breakers, I note Mr. Silver’s suggestion of breakers with rup- 
turing capacity of 3,000,000 to 4,000,000 arc kv-a. We have 
furnished the Ontario Hydroelectric Power Company with a 
number of large 110-kv. breakers which have been subjected to 
very heavy short circuits and believe our experience may be of 
interest. Three Niagara stations are interconnected to give 
a combined generator capacity of nearly 200,000-kv-a. and 
while bus reactors are used, the main H. T. breakers have suc- 
cessfully handled short circuits up to nearly 1,000,000 arc kv-a. 
These breakers are of very heavy round tank construction with 
motor fans on each tank to prevent the collection of an ex- 
plosive gas mixture in the expansion chamber. 

We have found that older design breakers are not capable 
of handling such service, and on even much lighter service will 
smoke badly after one or two operations. Asa result of serious 
trouble with such breakers used on too heavy service, the neces- 
sity for a large factor of safety in heavy capacity circuit breaker 
design cannot be emphasized too strongly. 

On these proposed high-capacity, high-voltage power sys- 
tems, out-door breakers are recommended, also as much sec- 
tionalizing, and as little switching at the generating station as 
possible. iy Cet 

J. N. Mahoney: Commenting on the problem of oil circuit 
breakers for high-voltage high-duty service, the cylindrical 
form of tank of the boiler drum type has particular advantages. 
This form is inherently adapted for the use of four breaks in 
series per pole or per phase. _ ein 

~ When properly designed this form of tank will withstand ex- 
_plosion of hydrogen or hydro-carbon gas and air in the space 


1130 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


above the oil. It is true however, that good design also in- 
cludes provision for removing, displacing or neutralizing such 
gases and preventing their slow accumulation to any consider- 
able pressure as an explosive mixture. . 

Because of the inherent possibilities, the tank design should 
be adequate to at least withstand an explosion of a mixture of 
hydrogen and air at atmospheric pressure with a reasonable 
factor of safety. 

There should be no difficulty in meeting the insulation re- 
quirements with present well tried methods and materials. 
The only uncertainty is in predicting the probable voltage 
surges to be met when such a large system is disturbed by un- 
usual conditions. 

E. B. Meyer: The fundamental consideration underlying 
Mr. Silver’s paper on 220-kv. power transmission is the eco- 
nomic utilization of our fuel and water power resources in a 
manner calculated to conserve them to a maximum extent. 

During the period of the war the need of conservation, 
coupled with the necessity for a maximum useful expenditure 
of power, made this subject one of the very considerable im- 
port. The cessation of hostilities, however, has relieved the 
pressure somewhat, but the question of the practicability of 
high-voltage trunk lines is still one which will claim the atten- 
tion of engineers and capitalists. 

It is not my intention to go into the consideration of the tech- 
nical features of the 220-kv. transmission project, believing 
that these problems can be solved as they are encountered. 

The author points out that such a trunk line as he has in 
mind must be operated at a very high load factor, the loading 
per circuit being 100,000 kv. or higher. 

_ With a transmission line having such a large capacity, con- 
tinuity of service becomes at once the primary requisite and it 
is, therefore, necessary to take into consideration the fact that 
spare circuits must be erected to insure the service. 

_ The cost of this insurance to the service, in the form of spare 
circuits,-increases the fixed charges, per unit of energy delivered 
very materially, and it is doubtful whether a system operating 
less than three or four lines, delivering in the neighborhood of 
a half-million kv-a., could bear this expense and still prove to 
be an attractive financial investment. 

The generation and distribution of an amount of power of 
the magnitude indicated as necessary to the financial success 
of such an enterprise would require exceedingly large expendi- 
tures of money and would have to be preceded by a thorough 
and radical reorganization of the engineering policies as at 
present contemplated by the central station industry. - 

In arguing for the erection of the large generating stations lo- 
cated in the coal fields, there are two basic considerations: - 


First: Savings in freight charges with the consequent release — 
of railroad equipment for other uses. ' 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1131 


Second: The opportunity of utilizing low grade fuel which 
would not be worth transporting. 

There is some doubt as to the feasibility of carrying out a 
project of this nature, except on an exceedingly large scale, as 
the differential in favor of a plant at the distant energy source 
1s quite small. 

The erection of a plant in the coal mining district for instance 
would require that the following factors be very carefully in- 
vestigated in arriving at comparative construction and opera- 
ting costs: 

1. Availability of cooling water and possible high cost of 
erecting dams, cooling ponds, ete. 

2. Increased cost of boiler plant to provide grate and furnace 
space sufficient to burn low grade fuel. 

3. Cost of transmission line right-of-way and cost of con- 
structing and maintaining the line. 

4. Line losses and transformer losses. 

5. Labor costs and housing facilities for construction and 
operating force. 

C. E. Howell: A study of Mr. Silver’s paper appears to 
definitely bring out at least two apparent difficulties to be met 
in the construction and operation of the super-power transmis- 
sion systems-of the near future. These seem to me to be a 
matter of human inertia and commercial conservation rather 
than lack of ideas. These two points are: 

First, the low mechanical strength of any high-voltage in- 
sulator now on the market; 

Second, lack of methods of protecting a large portion of a 
transmission system from the effects of line trouble on a small 
section of it. 

The practical application of any insulators on the market at 
the present time probably would necessitate the use of the usual 
disk with cap and pin, or the insulator known as the ‘‘Hewlett 
Disk.”’ No other insulators have had sufficient application to 
- eradicate apparent defects. These two types have an ultimate 
mechanical strength so low that it would undoubtedly be neces- 
sary to limit their ultimate load to approximately 3000 pounds 
per string of insulator units. To withstand the mechanical 
loads which will be impressed on insulators on high-voltage 
lines of the future, it would be necessary to use a large number 
of strings of insulators if the above types are employed. This 
would necessitate large expenditures for insulators, hardware, 
etc., as well as increasing the dimensions of the supporting 
structures and therefore their cost. To even imagine replacing 
a defective disk in a six string tension assembly with 17 disks 
per string on a line similar to the one described by the author 
of this paper, causes one to pause. 

As a constructive criticism, it is suggested that the present . 
types of insulator shapes be discarded for the moment and sus- 
pension units using comparatively large amounts of porcelain 


1132 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


in compression to permit greater working loads per string of 
units, be employed. Small diameter insulators for low-voltage 
distribution lines and for guy anchors have been constructed 
on this principle with resulting mechanical strengths of com- 
paratively enormous values, and it is believed that the same 
ideas may be extended to include the development of insulators 
for use on high-voltage large capacity lines. It is to be hoped 
that better ideas than this may be forthcoming soon, but the 
above suggestion should lead to a departure from the present 
practise of insulator construction and perhaps to an insulator 
worth perfecting. 

The great transmission systems of the future will require 
better systems of protection from line trouble than those now 
employed. As systems and interconnected systems become 
larger and larger, difficulties of minimizing effects of scattered 
short circuits, ete., on the whole net work will multiply. The 
possibilities of obtaining switching equipment to successfully 
interrupt short circuits on individual circuits consisting per- 
haps of less than 5 per cent of a system, are good, but means 
for preventing this short or ground from demoralizing the re- 
maining 95 per cent of a larger system are less easily perfected. 
Sooner or later service will demand some method of nearly in- 
stantaneously reducing the value of a short circuit to a reason- 
able figure (thus not effecting the remainder of the system), 
and later disconnecting the circuits in trouble. Most certainly 
a million kilowatt system with 220 kv. or even higher kv. trans- 
mission lines will not be permitted to lose say 800,000 kw. of 
its load because some small portion of the system is subjected 
toa “bump.” The present-day method of interrupting a por- 
tion of the system in trouble and at the same time effecting the 
operation of the remainder for perhaps an hour or more, is 
analogous to applying brakes to a high speed train in such a 
. manner that the tracks become unservicable, thus disrupting 

the schedule of the remainder of the railroad indefinitely, al- 
though undoubtedly stopping the train in question. 

_ It is suggested as a means of accomplishing the results which 
it will soon be necessary to obtain in operation, that switching 
equipment be so designed, constructed and arranged that it 
will be possible to nearly instantaneously insert in a circuit in 
difficulty resistance or reactance, or a combination thereof, be- 
fore interrupting such circuits. This would relieve the remain- 
ing portion of the system of some of the effects of the short 
circuit. This scheme will, undoubtedly, be recognized as the 
idea which was intended to be employed in the reactance type 
of oil switch which was placed on the market several years ago, 
and which has had a more or less successful career. It is be- 
poe that either resistance or reactance, or a combination 
_ thereof, may be employed to perform the function suggested 

above, but that it will be necessary to liberally construct the 
switching equipment employing'this feature, in order that me- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1133 


chanical difficulties may be prevented. This may necessitate 
employing two switches, or two separate switching elements in 
one switch, or a switch containing two separate elements and 
the reactance or resistance. 

There are undoubtedly other and better ways of solving this 
problem but whatever they may be, it is to be hoped that better 
means of switching large capacity systems, than now employed, 
may soon be available. 

T.B. Parker: In the design of steel towers for transmission 
lines, it has been found necessary to fit each type of tower to 
definite conditions, which shall as nearly as possible represent 
the requirements of actual operation. As in the paper under 
discussion, it is usual to specify three sets of design loadings; 
(1) a vertical load, representing the dead weight of structures 
and conductor and the effect of vertical angles; (2) a trans- 
verse, horizontal load, representing the direct over-turning 
effect of wind and horizontal angles; and, (3) a torsional load 
to provide for the effect of broken wires and unbalanced load- 
ing. 

In view of the large savings that can be made by small 
changes in detail, it is desirable, when possible, to subject each 
tower type to actual tests. It is best to make test loads iden- 
tical with design loads, and, for the sake of simplicity, to con- 
sider each set of loads as separately applied. This means that 
a tower will be designed for the maximum stress produced by 
any one of the three non-simultaneous sets of loadings. 

Line towers, however, are normally subjected to loads which 
are not purely vertical or horizontal, but a combination of both. 
It is therefore necessary to know the effect of many different 
load combinations upon each type of tower, before choosing 
the proper type for each location. To determine these effects 
requires much study, while their neglect may result in danger 
to the line, or in loss of economy. 

It is evident that separate design and test loads do not lend 
themselves to convenient use in line design, while combined 
test loads would needlessly complicate the procedure and make 
comparisons difficult. The solution would appear to be the 
use of separate design and test loads, with the addition of com- 
bined loads, each made up of definite proportions of the original 
vertical and horizontal loadings. Thus, a tower designed to 
carry non-simultaneously certain vertical and horizontal loads 
might also be required to support three-quarters of the hori- 
zontal load, together with one-half of the vertical. Two or 
three such specified combinations suffice to definitely establish 
the characteristics of a tower and to clearly define its limitations. 

This method has the advantage of retaining the separate, 
non-simultaneous test loads, but extends the design work to— 
cover mutually consistent combinations. Possibilities of over- 
load are avoided, and greater economy secured by taking advan- 
tage of the maximum strength of towers under all conditions. 


1134 POWER TRANSMISSION [June 27 


J. B. Crane: The paper presented by Mr. Silver is very 
important at this time as it points out one way in which large 
systems can be interconnected to secure the maximum advan- 
tages of diversified loads. BON 

On page 1087 the author shows a typical diagram and it is 
suggested that.it might be possible to cutout the 220-kv. bus at 
the main substation and to use the 66-kv. oil switches on the 
low-tension side of the transformers. This is, of course, on the 
assumption that the substations will be operated at 66 kv. or 
110 kv. and that further transformation will be necessary in 
ease it is decided to furnish low-tension power from the sub- 
stations. . 

The use of 220 kv. for transmission presents some very in- 
teresting operating problems and on account of the present 
high cost of building transmission lines it is suggested that a 
careful study should be made to replace insulators with current 
on the line in order to obviate the expense of building and 
maintaining duplicate transmission lines for any single service. 

The use of fifteen insulators in one string should allow a 

factor of safety large enough for the proper testing and renewal 
of defective insulators. The writer has had some experience 
with operation at 110 kv. where we have been using seven in- 
sulators on tension and eight insulators on strains or semi- 
strains. The practise is to test the insulators once a year (this 
will probably be shortened to once in six months) and where 
three defective insulators are found in one string the trouble 
is immediately reported and the line gang replaces same as 
soon as possible. Where less than three defective insulators 
are found the matter is reported on, the regular daily report 
and the insulators are changed at the earliest suitable time. 
There was one case recorded where the line was operating with 
four defective insulators in one string leaving only three good 
insulators for protection of the line. 
_ It is suggested that it would be possible to put two clamps 
in series on each wire and make suitable suspension hangings 
above each of these clamps so that an entire new string of in- 
sulators could be placed on a tower to take care of any defec- 
tive strings and suitable fittings could be made for fastening 
the insulator assembly to the clamps and to the tower so that 
same could be done without interrupting the service. 

The writer believes that an experimental line one-half mile 
long.should be built and operated at 220 kv. as soon as possible 
in order to work out some of these operating details and to as- 
certain Just what kind of trouble would be likely to be en- 
countered in practise. 

_A. E. Silver: Several speakers have mentioned the inter- 
linking type of insulator as being especially suitable for 220-kv. 
service. However, due consideration must be given to the 
difficulties of mechanical assembly under the heavy loading 
requirements of 220-kv. construction, which with present de- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT<LAKE PLACID 1135 


signs of this type of insulator would be even more serious than 
with the standard cap and pin type. 

Mr. Hanker’s point as to the possibility of over excitation 
of generators by the line charging currents, resulting in abnor- 
mal voltages on the transmission line, is well taken. In 
specific cases careful consideration should be given to eliminat- 
ing danger from this source. 

Referring to Mr. Summerhayes’ point regarding Figs. 1 and 
2, the titles are misleading, although it is noted in the foot notes 
accompanying these figures that generator voltages of 225 kv. 
and 170 kv. and corresponding receiver voltages of 200 kv. 
and 150 kv. are used in the comparison. 

It seems to me that the essential thing now is not to 
endeavor to draw any definite conclusions but to come to a 
thorough .realization that the problem of developing 220-kv. 
transmission is definitely confronting us and to present clearly 
to the engineering profession the conditions of the problem 
and then to all work together to bring out the best possible 
solution. 


Presented at the 35th Annual Convention of The 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Lake Placid Club, N. Y., June 27, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. E. 


THE EFFECT OF TRANSIENT VOLTAGES ON 
DIELECTRICS II 


The Effect of Lightning Voltages on Arrester Gaps, 
Insulators and Bushings on Transmission Lines 


BY F. W. PEEK, JR. 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


_ This paper treats of some of the practical applications result- 
ing from an investigation of the effect of lightning voltages on 
insulators, bushings and protective gaps. 

There is a great difference in the relative lightning spark-over 
voltages of various gaps as well as a great difference in the set- 
ings imposed by operating conditions. Both of these factors 
must be considered in comparing the relative protective values. 

A gap must be set so that the normal line voltage does not 
cause it to spark-over. Gaps are generally used out of doors. 
Rain lowers the 60-cycle spark-over voltage of all uncovered 
gaps and thus imposes a greatly increased setting and decreased 
protective value since the lightning spark-over voltage is not 
changed by rain. 

The covered sphere gives the maximum protection. The pro- 
tective value is constant under all conditions. 

The sphere-horn, having electrodes of points, horns and 
spheres, gives very good protection over the whole range of 
frequency and wave front. The spheres discharge the very 
steep waves, the horns the moderate ones, and the points con- 
tinuous high-frequency waves, of slanting front and static. 

The protective value of selective gaps varies with the wave 
front. Its protective value is a minimum for very steep wave 
fronts and tor waves of slanting front. Over a certain range 
its protective value is very good. 

The relative protective values of various gaps for steep and 
slanting wave fronts and high frequency are shown graphically 
in Figs. 14, 15, 16 and 17. The relative protective values are 
approximately independent of the point on the 60-cycle wave at 
which the discharge occurs. 

Data are given on the steepness of lightning waves actually 
occurring on transmission lines in practise. 

Bushings and insulators with equal 60-cycle spark-over voltages 
may have entirely different lightning spark-over voltages. A bush- 
ing should be designed for a high lightning spark-over voltage. 

The lightning wet spark-over voltage of a bushing or insulator 
is the same as the dry spark-over voltage. 


N 1915 I presented a paper covering an extensive investiga- 
tion on the effects of transient or lightning{,voltages on air, 
oil and solid insulations, line insulators and the discharge 
voltages of various gaps.'_ An exact study was made possible 


\ 


1137 


1138 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


by the development of the “‘impulse generator,”’ which was also 
described in the paper referred to above, and as a result some 
very important fundamental relations were discovered. 

It is the purpose of this paper to treat in more detail a few 
of the important practical applications which have been made 
of these relations within the last few years. The present 
discussion will be concerned principally with lightning arrester 
gaps, bushings and line insulators. It is hoped in particular, 
to make clear the advantages and disadvantages from a strictly 
practical standpoint of the various arrester gaps. 

The fundamental relations referred to above, bearing on the 
present discussion, will be briefly reviewed: 

When a 60-cycle voltage is slowly applied to a gap and 
gradually increased, spark-over will occur at some definite 
voltage. This is the minimum voltage that will cause sufficient 
ionization for the gap to discharge and it requires a relatively 
long time. 

Lightning voltages, or voltages of relatively steep wave front 
start at zero or line voltage and increase at the very rapid 
rate of millions or billions of volts per second. When such 
voltages are applied across a gap or insulator, spark-over does 
not occur at the instant the minimum or 60-cycle voltage is 
reached, as considerable time is required at this voltage. When 
this voltage is reached the spark begins to form but is only com- 
pleted after the rapidly rising voltage has reached some higher 
value. The “‘slower” the gap the higher the voltage will rise. 
In a uniform field, break-down takes place over a relatively 
short path, everywhere, at the same time. In the case of a 
non-uniform field represented, for instance, by the needle gap, 
corona forms around the electrodes before spark-over. A vast 
amount of air must be ionized. The condition is equivalent 
to putting the corona or arc resistance in series with an ever 
increasing capacity represented by the unbroken dielectric. 
Time is thus required to bring all of the space between the 
electrodes up to the break-down gradient and during this time, 
the lightning voltage rises higher and higher. 

To summarize: (1) Two gaps or insulators with equal 60- 
cycle spark-over voltages may have entirely different lightning 
or impulse spark over voltages because of the time lag. 


1. “The Effect of Transient Voltages on Dielectrics,” F. W. Peek, Jr 
A. I.E. E., Vol. XXXIV, 1915, page 1857. any 


“Lightning,” General Electric Review, July 1916. 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1139 


(2) The time lag is the greatest in a non-uniform field or 
for electrodes where corona precedes spark-over; it is minimum 
for a uniform field. 


(3) The time lag for any given electrodes and spacing is not 
constant, but depends upon the steepness of the wave or the 
rate at which the voltage is applied. The spark-over voltage 
increases and the time lag decreases with increasing steepness 
of wave front. 


(4) Lightning or impulse spark-over voltages, unlike 60- 
cycle spark-over voltages, are not appreciably lowered by rain. 

The above discussion means, of course, that certain gaps 
and insulators which have equal 60-cycle spark-over voltages 
may have entirely different lightning spark-over voltages. 
The ratio between the impulse and 60 cycle spark-over voltage 
was termed the impulse ratio. When there is no time lag the 
impulse ratio is unity; the greater the time lag, the higher the 
impulse ratio. Under certain conditions selective gaps may 
have an apparent impulse ratio of less than unity. 

It is very important to utilize these principles in design; 
protective gaps should have an impulse ratio of unity or low 
lightning spark-over voltage, while insulators and insulation 
should have a high impulse ratio or high lightning spark-over 
and puncture voltage. 

The practical application of these principles to various pro- 
tective gaps will first be discussed. 


PROTECTIVE GAPS 


General. The lower the voltage at which a given arrester 
gap can be set the greater is its protective value. In practise, 
the setting must be such that the gap does not discharge under 
any normal operating condition. The 60-cycle spark-over 
voltage of a gap is very much decreased if the electrodes be- 
come wet. The decrease in voltage due to moisture differs 
greatly with the shape of electrodes. It is minimum for points 
and maximum for plane surfaces. The 60-cycle spark-over 
voltage of a gap may be affected by other surface conditions, 
but by far the greatest effect is that caused by moisture. See 
Table I. Practically all high-voltage arrester gaps are installed 
out of doors. These gaps must, therefore, be set so that the 
line voltage does not cause spark-over during a rain storm. 
This means that with any gap with “fast” electrodes the setting 


1140 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


must be approximately doubled and the protective value thus 


reduced. 
The wet and dry 60-cycle spark-over voltages of 6.25 cm. 


TABLE I 
SPHERE GAP 
The Approximate Effect of Rain, Ice, Dust, etc. on the 60-Cycle 
Spark-over Voltage of Sphere Gap. 


Foreign material on sphere Voltage per cent of 
surface. normal 
‘Thirteoating Of Gusts «cite: cece sien 98 
Coating of ofl. Socewsc ces 2 oe tae 100 
Heavy coating of oil and sand...... 75 -— 90 
Thin coating 0f:4Ce. . «055.5 00 000 tim 75 -— 90 
Thick coating Of ice. ..0... Ss .va ea es 75 — 80 
Surface oxidized. 2 ssic al-ieissoshe ie 100 
Ordinary pietings s. .\6s804 3a ea eowe wis 90 — 100 
Rain 0.2 in. precipitation per min. 
Polished’ spheres, ... 5 .axsw sede 40 - 50 
Rain 0.2 in. precipitation per min. 
Pitted spheresi% iG. oe tae 40 - 50 


spheres is given in Fig. 1. That the lightning spark-over volt- 
age is not appreciably changed by rain is shown in Fig. 2. In 
comparing the relative protective value of lightning arrester 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE-MAXIMUM KV. 


OF sue: 4 6 8 10 12 
\ SPACING CM. 


Fig. 1—Spupres—Wer ann Dry Spark-Over VOLTAGES ~ 
6.25 cm. spheres—06-cycles—one sphere grounded—0.2 in. rain—data Table II - 


gaps it is, thus important to make the comparison on equal 


wet 60-cycle spark-over voltages or b ing i 
y the setting imposed b 
the operating conditions. eke ? 


ae | 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1141 


Operating conditions other than rain or inherent properties 
of the arrester proper may make it necessary to increase the 
setting of certain types of gaps and not of others. Rain is, 
however, the chief factor in non-selective gaps. Asan example 
of the effect of rain on the setting, assume a 66,000-volt line 
with grounded neutral. The voltage to ground is 

66,000 _ 

73—«OT 38,000 
The arrester gap must be set at about 25 per cent above this 
or 47 ky. wet. Referring to Fig. 2, if the gap is protected 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE -MAXIMUM KV. 


i 
7 
BERETS 
TEs Beall i 
pee eran i) TE Ale L.| 
4 14 


0) 2 10 12 


Y, 
bee 
Ea 


6 8 
SPACING CM. 
Fic. 2—SpHERE—WET AND Dry SparK-OVER VOLTAGES 


6.25 cm, spheres—60 cycles and impulses—O.2 in. rain—one sphere grounded—data 
Table II 


from the weather the lightning spark-over voltage is 47 kv., 
wet or dry; if the gap is not protected from the weather the 
dry 60-cycle spark-over voltage must be 94 kv. in order to 
make the wet 60-cycle spark-over voltage 47 kv. and the ap- 
paratus is thus subjected to double the stress which would 
obtain if a covered gap were used. This follows because the 
lightning spark-over voltage approximately corresponds to the 
dry setting. There may be no gain in protection with a gap 
discharging at very low lightning voltages if in practise it 
must be set at a wide spacing to prevent line voltages from 
continually causing it to spark over. 

The horn gapYis not affected by the weather to as great an 


1142 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


extent as the sphere gap. Ifa sphere and a horn are adjusted 
for equal wet 60-cycle spark-over voltages, the dry 60-cycle 
spark-over voltage of the horn will be lower. For low-fre- 
quency surges the horn would thus discharge at a lower voltage. 
For steep wave front lightning voltages however, the lag of 
the horn, which may easily have an impulse ratio of 2, will 
cause it to give inferior protection. See Fig. 3. 


THE SPHERE GAP—THE SPHERE HORN 


The sphere gap has an impulse ratio of unity. It thus offers 
equal protection for all sorts of transient voltages, and is with- 


Impulse 2000 Ke. 
t | 


Wet or Dry. 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE-MAXIMUM KV. 


0 2 4 6 See 210) 12 
SPACING CM. 


Fig. 3—Horns—Wer anv Dry Spark-Over VoLTaGEs 
60-cycle and impulse—wet and dry—data Table IV 


out time lag when set at not greater than diameter spacing. 
When exposed to the weather, however, the setting must be high 
enough so that the line voltage will not spark-over 
during rain. See Figs. 1 and 2. 

In the practical gap the sphere and horn were combined; 
the horn being used to assist in breaking the dynamic are and 
for the gain in discharging low-frequency surges due to the 
smaller difference between the wet and dry spark-over voltages 
The difference between the wet and dry spark-over voltage of 
points is less than with the horn. A point is sometimes added 
to further increase the protection at low-frequency surges. 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1148 


This gap has proved very successful in its several years 
of practical use, very greatly increasing the protective value of 
arresters. See Fig.4. Take for comparison equal wet settings 
of 50 kv. at 2000 kilocycles the spark-over voltage of the horn 
is 185, the sphere 100. For impulses below 500 kilocycles, 
the spark-over voltage of the horn is lower than the sphere. 
Thus, when a sphere horn is used the discharge takes place 
across the sphere for steep wave fronts and across the horn 
for low-frequency surges. The gainfdue to the sphere is 
greater at higher voltages and steeper wave fronts. The 


60+ Dry & Wet & Dry 
Impulse Spark—over 
Voltage 


Covered Sphere 


IMPULSE SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE-MAXIMUM WET 


Ke. yy 
a 
| 

T T 

[ 

== 

= 
0 a = a 

0 80 100 120 


20 40 60 
60 CYCLE WET SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE 
Fic. 4—Spuere—Horn 


Relative protective values of the component parts—data Tables II, IV, and V 


covered gap, shown by the dotted line is superior at all wave 
fronts. 

The Covered Sphere. If a sphere gap is covered and shielded 
from the weather its protective value is greatly increased since 
the setting imposed by the condition that the normal line 
voltage must not discharge over the gap is cut in half. Such 
a gap, therefore, discharges lightning voltages of half the value 
of the uncovered sphere. This gap gives the highest degree 

of protection. It is not possible to use it with all types of 
_ arresters since a horn is often necessary to assist in breaking 


1144 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


the dynamic arc. See Fig. 5. A properly designed hemi- 
sphere may also be used in this type of gap. 

A gap not appreciably affected by the weather and still 
providing an arc breaking horn may be built as shown in Fig. 
6. The way this accomplishes the desired results will be de- 
scribed later. 

Since the gap requires two spheres in series, it is necessary 
to determine if such an arrangement has appreciable time lag 
and, therefore, high lightning-discharge voltages. Two 6.25- 
cm. spheres connected in series are shown in Fig. 7. If gap A 
is set at approximately 25 kv. and gap B at approximately 75 


segUUUeecE 


60 Cycle & Impulse 


“| 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE- MAXIMUM KV: 
s 


8 
sleet 


| 
| 


0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
SPACING CM. 


Fic. 5—SpHeRES—Wer anp Dry Spark-Over VoLracEs 


6.25 cm, spheres—covered gap—60 cycle and impulse—wet and dry—one sphere grounded 
—data Table V 


’ 


kv. the 60-cycle spark is not (25 + 7 5) = 100 kv. but is 75 kv.; 
the lightning or impulse spark-over is 91 kv. See Fig. 7. 

The two gaps break down at 75 kv., 60 cycles, instead of the 
sum of the two or 100 kv. because the applied voltage does 
not divide evenly between them. The voltage reaches 25 kv. 
across the low-voltage gap and breaks that gap down before 
it reaches 75 ky. on the high-voltage gap. All of the stress 
is thus transferred to the high voltage gap and it breaks down 
as soon as a total voltage of 75 kv. is reached. If, now, capac- 
ities are adjusted across A and B so that the voltage divides 
in proportion to their relative break down voltages both gaps 
will break down simultaneously. The break down voltage will 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1145 


be equal to their sum. This is called the “balanced” gap. 
When two sphere gaps each without appreciable lag are placed 
in series it is found that unless the gaps are “‘balanced”’ there 
is considerable lag. This would be expected because one gap 
breaks down first and puts resistance in series with the capacity 
of the other similar to the corona in the needle gap. Balancing 

the gaps causes simultaneous spark- 


Line ; over and there is no appreciable lag. 
oa | See Fig. 7. 


If two gaps are placed in series as 
in Fig. 6 and balanced by properly ad- 
justing their relative capacities there 
will be no appreciable lag. The rain affects only the outside gap. 
For example, if the outside gap is set at 10 kv. and the in- 
side gap at 50 kv. the outside gap may be reduced to 5 kv. by 
rain. If balanced wet, the total wet spark-over is 55 kv. 
while the dry spark-over voltage is about 60 kv. This gap 
is thus without appreciable lag and not appreciably affected 
by rain. The only object of the outside gap is, of course, to 


» Fic. 6 


A 


i 


Not Balanced 


Lecce 


Balanced 


DRY~ IMPULSE SPARK-OVER 
VOLTAGE MAXIMUM KV 


40 60 80 100 120 140 
60 CYCLE sog ag MAXIMUM 
Y 


BriG.e7 
Data Table III 


transfer the dynamic arc to the horn where it rises and breaks. 

The impulse and 60-cycle characteristics of this gap are shown 
in Fig. 8. ; 

The advantage of the sphere gap is that it gives equal pro- 
tection under voltages of all frequencies and wave front and 
is practically without lag. 

Selective Gaps. Various forms of selective gaps have been 
proposed from time to time. Probably the most interesting 
and important of these is that investigated by Mr. Allcutt 


1146 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


and shown in Fig. 9.2. In this gap the division of voltage is 
not greatly affected at 60 cycles by the auxiliary electrode. 
The auxiliary electrode is held at mid-potential because it 1s 
connected at the mid-point between two equal condensers. 
The capacity current is too small at 60-cycles to cause any ap- 
preciable “drop” across the resistance. If the condenser cir- 
cuit were opened on one side, the gap on that side would break 
down at about half voltage. This is exactly what happens 
under impulse. 
For steep wave fronts the resistance has the effect of opening 


— 


— 


IMPULSE SPARK--OVER WET & DRY MAXIMUM KV. 


40. 60 80. 100 120 140 
602 SPARK-OVER WET & DRY: 


Fig..8—Wet anp Dry Spark-Over Covprep DousLeE Gap BALANCED 
Data Table VI 


the condenser circuit on that side. See Fig. 10. The gap on 
that side breaks down. The voltage does not immediately 
disappear across the are. The gap has lag for the same reason 
as the double unbalanced gap discussed above. Whether 
it is above or below the 60-cycle setting depends upon the 
impulse. The effect is similar to that which would result 
from a needle gap which could be set at, for instance, 100 kv. 
for 60-cycle operation and instantly and automatically reduced 


2. “Lightning Arrester Spark Gaps,” C. T. Alleutt, Trans. A. I. E. E., 
1918, Vol. XXXVII, Part II, p. 855.! 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1147 


to a 50 kv., 60-cycle setting whenever an impulse came on the 
line. For moderately steep wave fronts the spark-over voltage 
would be greater than 50 and less than 100 kv.; but for very 
steep wave fronts, the impulse ratio of the 50 kv. gap would 
be greater than (2), or the spark-over voltage would be greater 
than 100 kv. The impulse ratio of the selective gap is always 
greater than unity; the “apparent” impulse ratio is greater or 


jeoahars ag ea 


Fig. 9 Fig. 10 


less depending upon the steepness of the wave front. The rea- 
son this distinction is made is discussed elsewhere.? The ap- 
parent impulse ratio should be used in comparing protective 
values. This characteristic for the selective gap is shown in 
Fig. 11 and compared with a sphere gap for the same dry 
60-cycle settings. The sphere gap spark-over voltage is prac- 
tically constant for all wave fronts. The spark-over voltages 
are the same for 60 cycles. At moderate wave fronts the selec- 


KILOVOLTS SPARK-OVER (MAX.) 


60 80 100 120 140 x 10° 
WAVE FRONT-VOLTS.PER SECOND 
Fig. 11—VariatTion or SparkK-OvEerR VouTace with Wave FRront— 


SPHERE AND SELECTIVE SPHERE— 
Data Table VII 


tive gap has about 5 to 20 per cent lower spark-over voltage 
than for spheres, while for steeper wave fronts the voltage is 
higher on the selective gap. The protective value of a gap, 
as already pointed out, depends not only on its lightning dis- 
charge voltage for a given 60-cycle setting, but also upon the 
setting which is imposed upon it by operating conditions. 
Fig. 11 shows the relative protective values of spheres and 

3. “Lightning Arrester Spark Gaps,’’ C. T. Alleutt, Trans. A. I. E. E., 
1918, Vol. XXXVI, Part II, p. 855. 


1148 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


selective spheres assuming equal dry 60-cycle settings are pos- 
sible. The settings must be such that the line voltage does not 
frequently spark-over and cause the destruction of the energy 
absorbing device under certain operating conditions. The 
effect of rain makes it necessary to set a non-shielded selective 
gap at about double the voltage that would be necessary in 
the protected gap. See Fig. 12. 

Other forms of selective gaps have been devised and it is 
possible to extend the selective principle to a number of gaps 
in series, theoretically (neglecting lag) making it possible to 
discharge an impulse at a small fraction of line voltage. Such 


So 
12° 60~Dry, 


2000 Ke. 
4 ry & Wet| 
D: 


10° “A 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE KV.MAXIMUM 
a 


‘AMEE 


e eae |e 
0 2 4 6 8 10 
SPACING CM. 


Fig. 12—Sr.ectrivn SpHern 
60-cycle and impulse—wet and dry—Data Table VIII 


a gap would of course necessitate high initial setting and give 
very little protection against lightning impulses. 


The selective principle may also be readily applied to covered 
gaps if it is deemed advisable. 


RELATIVE PROTECTIVE VALUES OF THE GAPS ALREADY 
DISCUSSED 

The following comparison of the different gaps is the result 
of extensive research. The tests were made with the impulse 
generator. The methods of conducting the tests, the pre- 
cautions, accuracy, etc. are the same as discussed in the 
former paper.’ For convenience the connection diagrams are 
shown in Fig. 13—(a) is used when the impulse only is ap- 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1149 


plied to the gap; (b) when the impulse is superposed on the 60- 
cycle wave. 

There are three cases which require consideration.® 

Case A. Where the impulse occurs at the zero point of the 
60-cycle wave and is thus not affected thereby. 

Case B. Where the impulse occurs at the maximum of the 
60-cycle wave and is additive. 

Case C. Where the impulse occurs at the maximum of the 
60-cycle voltage wave, but in the opposite direction. 

Case C is naturally the most dangerous case. Case A is 
equivalent to applying the impulse without 60-cycle voltage. 

In making impulse tests it is found that there is a certain 
minimum impulse voltage that will spark-over the gap only 
occasionally and that the voltage must be increased to cause 


Ei Swilenom si ong otvs 

IMPULSE GENERATOR + CASE A 
sa g J 60 Cycle 
3 Supply 

IMPULSE GENERATOR U CASES B & C + 


IMPULSE SUPERPOSED ON 60 CYCLE 


Blast Gap 


GENERATOR OF SUBSTAINED HIGH 
FREQUENCY OSCILLATIONS 


Fic. 13—Connectrions Usep In Maxine Tests 


spark-over at every application. This difference between 
minimum spark-over and spark-over at every application may 
be inappreciable for some gaps and quite appreciable for others. 
This is discussed in my former paper. It is, thus, obviously 
necessary to record the method of making the tests. The 
data for all of the curves with description of method of making 
-measurements will be found in the tables. Unless otherwise 
stated, the impulse voltage was increased until the gap sparked 
once in five applications. ‘Frequency” is used for convenience 
only. It means, unless otherwise stated, that an impulse 
approximating a single half sine wave of the frequency stated 
has been used. By applying a super-voltage or a voltage 
higher than the discharge voltage of the gap the steepness of 
4. “The Effect of Transient Voltages on Dielectrics,’ A. I. E. E., F. W. 
Peek, Jr., 1915. 
5. “Lightning Arrester Spark Gaps,’ C. T. Alleutt, A. I. E. E., May 
1918. Discussion, F. W. Peek, Jr., A. I. E. E., June 1918. 


1150 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


the wave or rate of application is increased. For instance a 
super-voltage at 100 kilocycles might be steeper than a lower 
voltage at 2000 kilocycles. In making measurements by ad- 
justing two gaps in parallel for equal spark-over, as is done in 
the case of super voltages, it is important to arrange the gaps 
symmetrically with equal length of leads; otherwise inconsistent 
results will be obtained. With steep waves and unsymmetrical 
leads it is possible to short-circuit one gap and still obtain 
sparks on the other. 

The over-voltages that cause insulation failures in practise 
may be divided into three classes: 

1. Gradual increase of voltage on the line due to static or 
low frequency surges. 

2. Very high frequency oscillations of voltages generally too 
low for any gap arrester to discharge, but which may cause 
very high internal voltages in apparatus. 

3. The form of voltage with which we are principally con- 
cerned—lightning voltages of very steep wave fronts where 
the voltage across the apparatus increases from normal to a 
very high value in perhaps a millionth of a second. 

' Condition. (1) is readily taken care of by any gap and 
need not be further discussed; (2) is of some interest but is a 
condition generally not taken care of by a gap arrester—some 
results of tests will be given however; (3) is the steep wave 
front condition that represents lightning proper and with which 
we are mostly concerned. 


Relative Protective Value of the Horn, Sphere-horn, Selective 
Sphere Gap and Covered Gap. 


Impulse Voltages of Steep Wave Front. The spark-over volt- 
ages of various types of gaps are plotted with equal wet 60- 
cycle settings in Fig. 14. Values are plotted for both wet and 
dry electrodes. The wave applied was a single half-cycle of. 
.a 2000 kilocycle wave with a 340-kv. maximum; that is, at 
super-voltage. The rate of application of voltage of the wave 
front was thus about 70 x 10" volts per second. I believe that 
waves steeper than this occur on lines in practise. In fact, 
I first noted that there was a difference between the 60-cycle 
and lightning spark-over voltages of various electrodes by the 
existence of such waves on an operating line. The bushings 
on the line always “protected” the lightning arrester horns al- 
though the horns had a lower 60-cycle spark-over voltage. 
By measuring the impulse spark-over voltages of the bushing 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1151 


and the arrester gap in the laboratory it was found that the 
bushing protected the horn for a wave front-at which the 
impulse ratio of the horn was over (2); this corresponds to a 
steeper wave than the one under immediate discussion. 

It will be noted that the covered gaps give by far the best 
protection under this condition. For example, when all the 
gaps are set on the line at 100 kv., lightning voltage discharges 
respectively at 100 ky. on the covered gap, 115 kv. on the bal- 


320 


Selective Gap 
280 Wet & Dry [ 
. ! 
eres of 280 
> aa re Horn |_+— Sphere phere-Horn 100 Ke. 
2 S 240 a 
= 
in re —— Selective Sphere 100 Ke: 
@ 200 5 = ‘sf Balanced Double 
3 }} rae oe 9 Sphere iF 200 Hora ofl Covered Sphere 
) Bal anc s et & Dry Q Spher'e-Ho 
= 160 3 500 Ke. 
3 = 160 
& = | | 
a 120 Ss overed Sphere 
w Covered Spheres = 120 | 
G iWet & Dry x y 
2 AG n Sphere-Horn 
s 80 A) { j 
= > 80 
a 
= 
40 
40 
2 in, | Rain = Minute 
%5 40 80 120 160 0 
60 CYCLE WET SETTING-MAX. 40. 80 120 160 200 
60 CYCLE WET SETTING MAXIMUM 
Fic. 14—Retative PROTECTIVE Fig. 15—ReELAtive Protective 


Vatures or Horns, SPHERE-Horns, VALUES OF SPHERE-HoRN, SELEC- 
SELECTIVE SPHERES. COVERED TIVE SPHERES, COVERED SPHERE— 


SPHERES—STEEP WAVE FRONTS Moperratre Wave Fronts 
2000 kilocycles—340 kv.—impulse—data Impulse—single half-cycle 100 kilocycles— 
Tables IX, X and XI non-grounded—data Tables IX, X and XI 


anced covered gap, 225 ky. on the sphere of the sphere horn, 
225 kv. on the selective sphere, and 320 kv. on a horn. 

Moderate Wave Fronts.. A similar comparison is given in 
Fig. 15 for moderate wave fronts. The impulses being single 
half cycles of 100 kilocycle waves, the average fronts ranging 
from 0.5 to 1. * 10" volts per second. 

It will be noted that here, also, the covered spheres give the 
best protection. For example, at a 100-kv. line setting the 
impulse spark-over voltages are respectively 100 kv. for the 
covered sphere, 110 kv. for the balanced covered sphere, 170 
kv. for the selective sphere, 178 kv. for a horn or the horn of 


1152 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


the sphere horn, 130 kv. for points of the sphere-horn, and 
222 kv. for thesphere. If these data are compared with that in 
Fig. 14 the value of the sphere horn combination is well illus- 
lustrated. For the steep wave fronts the sphere affords the 
better protection, while for the moderate waves the horn 
affords the better protection and a still greater gain is made by 
adding points. This comes about, of course, due to the differ- 
ence between the wet and dry setting. 


° _ Pe 
360 Sphere, 
| ft Selective |Sphere 

=f 


+ 


s 
leet | 
we overed Sphere 
ccf ‘eal aae 
: : | 
3s 


ny 
oo 
°o 


fealty esl ake 
Hp Impulse] imposed on &|opposite 


to the 60 Cycle Wave 


— 
i 
°o 


IMPULSE SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE 
ee 
Sees 


see 
Ei 
jaaeecee 
oP ha! 
A BS 
Oo x 
ae E 
cree 
a |32 


[ i 


ike 


~ 


Ue eC ois ere 
SPARK-OVER VOLTAGE 60 CYCLE 


s 
Fie. 16—Re tative Protective VALUES or VARIOUS GAPS 
Impulses imposed on and opposite to the maximum of the 60-cycle wave—data Table XII 


Ratio for Comparing the Relative Protective Value of Various 
Gaps. From the above discussion it is readily seen that in 
order to compare the relative protective value of various gaps 
two factors must be considered. 

i. The increased 60-cycle setting imposed by operating con- 
ditions to prevent the gap from continuously discharging due 
to rain or harmless surges. Let the ratio of the actual operating. 
setting to the normal setting be called @ where the normal 


setting is the setting that just prevents the line voltage from 
arcing over under ideal conditions. 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1153 


2. The impulse ratio (or apparent impulse ratio for the 
selective gap) for the wave under consideration. Let the im- 
pulse ratio be called 8 


1 Bi 
2 Be 

For example:—a gap must be set at 50 kv. a to prevent 
the 60-cycle line voltage from causing it to spark-over under 
ideal conditions. The relative protective values of a horn and 


The relative protective value of two gaps is then = 


280 


Sphere ts 

= 240 = 
= 
= 
= , Sphere Wet 
ts 200 
= Selective Sphere 
3 Wet & Dry 

160 
ea 
w 7 
= IOs Covered Sphere 
Bis TY / et & Dry 
= 120 LY 
= Y y alanced Double Sphere 
— et 
S : Wet 
> Z I. 
2 Points jof Sphere-Horn 
: | 
S 40 
= | 

Horn of Sphere-Horn 


0 
0 40 80 120 160 200 
WET SPARK-OVER KV. (MAX.) 
Fig. 17—Revative Discuakuk VALUES SPHERES, SELECTIVE SPHERES, 
CovERED SPHERES,—90,000 CycLe SusTaInEep OscILLATION— 


Data Table XIII 


a covered sphere for the 2000 kilocycle wave are obtained as 
follows from Figs. 3 and 5. 


‘Horn Covered Sphere 

a: = 75/50. = 1.50 a. = 50/50 = 1 

p= 133/ld. = 1577 B2 = 50/50 = 1 
a: f: = 1.50 ¥ 1.77 = 2.65 arb, =1 


ai Bi/a2 B22 = 2.65 

The horn permits the lightning voltage to rise to 2.65 times 
the value of the voltages permitted by the covered sphere. 

Combination of Lightning and 60-cycle Voltages. The lightning 
spark-over voltage is a minimum when it occurs at the maximum 
of the 60-cycle wave and in an additive direction (case B). The 
lightning voltage is a maximum when it occurs at the maximum 
of the 60-cycle wave but in the opposite direction (Case C). 
The relative effects are approximately the same for all of the 


1154 PEEK: TRANSIENT. VOLTAGES [June 27 


types of gaps discussed. If the lightning voltages for case A, 
Case B, Case C and the 60-cycle line voltage are called A, B, C 
and L respectively the lightning spark-over voltages are ap- 
proximately: 


aserA See. ce acy cahe coe A 
(Case. Beisctasucn ete ee cae A-—L 
Case esa ie Oe oe ee eee A+L 


Data for Case C are plotted in Fig. 16. 

High Frequency Oscillations. The-effect of sustained high 
frequency oscillations not very highly dampened is shown in 
Fig. 17. For connections see Fig. 13 (c). It is probably very 
rarely that oscillations with such a low damping factor occur 
on a transmission line. The arcing ground condition is more 
nearly approximated by a series of the impulses discussed above. 
Note that the horn and points give good protection for sustained 
oscillations. 


LINE INSULATORS, BUSHINGS AND INSULATION 


General. Line insulators and bushings should have a high 
impulse ratio or lightning arc-over voltage. The bushing men- 
tioned above as protecting the horn had a low impulse ratio. 
The 60-cycle and lightning spark-over voltages were nearly 
equal. The horn would have given protection in this case if 
the impulse ratio had been higher. Bushings are now designed 
with a high impulse ratio. 

The 60-cycle spark-over voltage of a bushing or insulator 
is often very appreciably lowered by rain. It is fortunate, 
however, that the lightning spark-over voltage is not appre- 
ciably changed by rain. 

- The data below were taken on different lengths of strings of 
Hewlett disk insulators. The impulse was a single half-cycle 
of a 200-kilocycle wave, or of very moderate wave front. 


SPARK-OVER VOLTAGES—DISK INSULATORS 
(One side Grounded—Dry) 


String 
No. of 60-cycle Impulse Impulse String efficiency 
units spark-over | spark-over ratio efficiency impulse 
200 ke, 60-cycle 200 ke, 

1 80 85 1.06. Res IRM 

2 142 167 1.18 0.87 0.98 

3 204 262 1.28 0.85 0.99 

4 261 345 1.36 0.81 1.01 

5 le 410 een 0.79 0.97 

6 368 0.77 


; Measured spark-over of string 
String efficiency = 


Number of units in string X spark-over voltage of one unit 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1155 


It is interesting to note that even with this moderately 
steep wave front the lightning spark-over voltage is approxi- 
mately the product of the spark-over voltage of a single unit 
and the number of units in a string. The impulse voltage 
increases with increasing steepness of wave front. 

The wet impulse spark-over voltage is approximately the 
same as the dry. 

Impulse ratios of three or more have been obtained on bush- 
ings. More complete data on line insulators have been pub- 
lished elsewhere.® 

CONCLUSIONS 

1. There is a great difference in the relative lightning spark- 
over voltages of different gaps as well as a great difference in 
the settings imposed by operating conditions. Both of these 
factors must be considered in comparing the relative protec- 
tive values. It is shown that if the lightning spark-over 
factor is represented by the impulse ratio GB, and the setting 
factor by a, the relative protective value of two gaps are 


(ea Bi 


inversely as . 
A> Bo 


2. 6 is due to time lag; a to the fact that the gap must be 
set so that the normal line voltage will not cause it to spark- 
over. Rain lowers the 60-cycle spark-over voltage of all gaps, 
and thus affects the ratio a. Rain does not lower the lightning 
spark-over voltage. 

3. All uncovered gaps require a high setting factor, because 
rain lowers the spark-over value at 60 cycles. The effect is 
. much less for points than it is for spheres. 

4. The covered sphere gives better protection than any un- 
covered gap, because both a and § are low. The protective 
value is constant under all conditions. 

5. The sphere-horn, having electrodes of points, horns, and 
spheres, gives very good protection over the whole range of 
frequency or wave front, due to the different values of a and 

G for its various electrodes. The spheres discharge the very 
steep waves, the horns the moderate ones, and the points 
continuous high frequency, waves of very slanting front and 
static. 

- 6. The protective value of the selective gaps, as the name 

6. “Factors Determining the Safe Spark-over voltage of Insulators 
and Bushings for High-Voltage Transmission Lines,’ F. W. Peek, Jr., 
General Electric Review, June 1916. 


1156 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


implies, varies with the wave front. Its protective value is 
a minimum for very steep wave fronts, and for waves of slant- 
ing front. Over a certain range its protective value is very 
good. 

7. The relative protective values of various gaps are shown 
in Figs. 14, 15 and 16. 

8. The relative protective values of various gaps are ap- 
proximately independent of the point on the 60-cycle wave at 
which the discharge occurs, as shown in Figs. 14, 15 and 16. 

9. Data are given on the steepness of lightning waves actually 
occurring on transmission lines in practise. 

10. Bushings and insulators with equal 60-cycle spark-over 
voltages may have entirely different lightning spark-over volt- 
ages. A bushing or insulator should be designed for a high 
impulse ratio or lightning spark-over voltage. 

11. The lightning wet spark-over voltage of a bushing or 
insulator is the same as the dry spark-over voltage. 


APPENDIX 


TABLE II 
SPHERE GAP 


Wet and dry 60-cycle and impulse spark-over. 
6.25-cm. spheres—One grounded 2 in. rain per minute. 


Spark-over voltage (maximum) 


Spacing 
60-cycle 60-cycle Impulse Impulse 
and impulse 8? ke. 500 ke. 
Inch Cm. dry wet wet wet 
0.5 1,27 40 
1s 2.54 68 33 71 72 
2. 5.08 103 51 105 106 
ae 7.62 121 61 126 130 
CASE B 
Impulse assisting and at maximum of 60-cyce wave. 
. Impulse 

dry 

500 ke. 
1 2,54 52 
2 5.08 60.5 
3 7.62 86 

pn aE Ne Ee ae eS i ee 2 ns ae 
: CasEe C 
Impulse opposing and at maximum of the 60-cycle wave. 

h 2.54 108 
2 5.08 148 
2 7.62 160 


No parallel gap—one discharge in five applicati i 
pplications 60-cycl L 
voltage of the gap in cases B and C. ec tak Pe 


FOTOS PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1157 


TABLE III 
60-CYCLE AND IMPULSE SPARK-OVER OF TWO GAPS-IN SERIES. 
6.25-cm. spheres. 


® One sphere grounded. 
Impulse 
Spacing 60 cycle spark-over spark- Impulse 
gap over ratio 
A B Sum | Measured 
—.—__ |——_. A B A A 500. 
Inch Cminf Tneh + «Cm, and B and B ke. 
Gaps not balanced for simultaneous spark-over 
0.45 £519, } 1.02 | 2.59) 35 68 103 72 86 1.20 
0.45 1.19 | 2.15 |} 5.46-] 33.7 107 140 106 129 sar 
Gaps balanced for simultaneous spark-over 
0.45 ¥519 } 1.02 72.59 | 35 67 102 101 103 1,02 
0.45 PD | 2015 | 6-46-1337. 107 140 136 144 1.06 


Impulse ‘voltages applied and increased in values until one spark-over occurred in five 
applications. No. 60-cycle voltage on the gap. 


TABLE_IV - 
HORNS 
Wet and dry 60-cycle and impulse spark-over 
Voltage of horns (3/8 in.) 
0.2 in. rain—one horn grounded. 


Spark-over voltage—maximum 


Spacing Dry Wet 
Inch Cm, 60 cycle 500 ke. 2000 ke. 60 cycle 500 ke. 2000. kc. 
0.25 0.63 19 Brae c ae ie 9.2 
0.5 1.27 35 39.7 44.5 19.7 Ree eoed 
1 | 2.54 50 53 63.5 31.0 see fe 45 
2 5.08 69 88 96.5 41.5 Reais 99 
3 7.62 74.5 105 148 52 117 148 


No parallel gap.—One discharge in five applications. 2000 kc. (b) wave Table XIV. 


1158 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


TABLE V 
COVERED SPHERES 
Wet and Dry—60-cycle and Impulse Spark-over Voltage 
6.25-cm. spheres—One sphere grounded. 


pacing Spark-over Voltage—Maximum 


60 cycles 500 ke. 2000 ke. | 60 cycles 500 ke. 2000 ke. 
In ches Cm. dry dry dry wet wet wet 


Case A—No. 60-cycle voltage on the gap. 


0.50 1.27 3 diy Bp oe $553 Blain sot Pee 
1.00 2.54 68 68 68 68 68 68 
2.0 5.08 103 103 103 103 103 103 
3.0 7.62 121 121 121 121 121 121 


Case B—Impulse assisting and at maximum of the 60 cycle voltage. 


1 2.54 52 =. 
2 5.08 60.5 
3 7.62 86 
Case C—Impulse opposed to and at maximum of the 60-cycle voltage. 
1 2.54 108 aoe 
2 | 5.08 148 Pb eee | 
3 7.62 160 


No parallel gap—One discharge in five applications—60 cycle voltage % dry discharge 
voltage of the gap applied in cases B and C. 2000 kc (b) wave Table XIV. 


TABLE VI 
Double Covered Sphere Gap—Balanced 
Balanced Wet 
(0.2 in, Rain—6.25-cm. spheres—One sphere grounded) 


Gap setting Impulse 
Total Ky.max. spark over 
60-cycle dry total kv. max. 
spark 6 
over Wet Wet 
max. A B [eee 
500 ke. 2000 ke 
50 14 42 59 63 
79 23.5 71 89 91 
124 35 105 118 IN7 
Dry Dry 
3 48 14 42 61 51 
80 ; 23.5 71 83 71 
123 35: 105 132 122 


Average measured voltages. 2000 kc. (b) wave Table XIV. 


= 


Ne 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1159 


- TABLE VII 
SELECTIVE SPHERE-HORN 
(6.25-cm. Spheres with Auxiliary Electrode). One side grounded. 


Gap setting 
60-cycle 60-cycle Impulse 


spark- spark- spark- Apparent 
over over over impulse Impulse 
In. Cm. ky max. % gap total tatio ratio 
ky. max. gap 


Single half cycle 83 kilocycles 


’% Lee 38 23 28 0.74 1521: 

2 | 5.08 105 67 | 81 0.77 1.20 

3 762 121 88 vibe} 0.94 1.29 

Single half cycle 500 kilocycles 

% 1,27 38 23 32 0.84 1.40 

2 | 5.08 | 105 67 87 | 0.83 1.30 

3 7.62 121 88 109 0.90 1,24 

Single half cycle 2000 kilocycles (a) wave 

y% 1.27 38 23 34 0.90 1.48 

3 1.62 121 88 114 0.94 1.30 
Impulse Apparent Wave front 

spark- impulse volts 

over ratio sec, 

total gap 

3 (bal Sy 121 88 113 0.94 0.4 x 10 
3 7.62 121 88 109 0.90 2.1 X 10" 
3 7.62 121 88 114 0.94 9.1 XK 10 
3 7.62 121 88 110-—120* .91-1.00 60 XX 101 
3 7.62 121 88 106-133* | 0.88-1.10} 110 %* 10u 
3 7.62 BAL 88 130-132* '1.07-1.10! 133 10” 


Above data for Case A—Impulse applied at zero of 60-cycle wave. 
(*Range of equal spark-over.—Super Voltages, (b) wave Table XIV.) 


1160 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


TABLE VIII 
SELECTIVE SPHERES 


Wet and Dry 60-cycle and Impulse spark-over 6.25-cm sphere—One Grounded 
0.2 in. Rain per minute 


Case A 
60-cycle Impulse 
Spacing spark-over spark-over 
Kv. max. kv. max. 
Dry Wet 
Inches | Cm. Dry Wet 
f 500 ke. 2000 ke. 500 ke. 2000 ke. 
0.5 1,27 aes Cee 32 34 re ee Ue 
if 2.54 68 33 49 =e 4l 48.5 
2 5.08 103 51 87 oe 74 89 
3 7.62 121 61 109 114 104 113 


Case B—Impulse assisting and at the maximum of the 60-cycle wave. 


1 2.54 aoe 54 #038 
2 | 5.08 gees | 54 eh | 
3 7.62 ar 67 went 
Case C—Impulse opposing and at max. of 60-cycle wave. 
1 2.54 te 97 
2 5.08 | A oft | 115 | 
3 7.62 a 147 


Applied 60-cycle voltage % dry 60-cycle voltage of the gap and impulse one discharge 
in five applications. (2000 ke (a) wave Table XIV.) 


TABLE IX 
SELECTIVE SPHERES 
12,5-cm. Spheres—Non-Grounded Impulses 


Case—A 
Setting Impulse Spark-over 
60-cycles 
spark-over 2000 ke. 100 ke. 
Inches Cm. Ky. (max.) 340 kv. (max.) single-half cycle. 
Dry Wet Dry Wet Dry Wet 
2.80 7.10 162 66 133 153 107 109 
5.34 13.5 227 102 233 242 170 174 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1161 


TABLE X 
COVERED DOUBLE SPHERE GAP—BALANCED 


7.6-cm,. spheres—Non-grounded 


Total 60-cycle Impulse spark-over kv. max. 
spark-over Setting—60-cycles 
kv: (max.) kv. (max.) 2000 ke. 100 ke. 
340 kv. 
Outside | Outside | Inside Sum 
Dry Wet dry wet dry wet Dry Wet Dry ‘|Wet 
130 63.0 34 101 136 160 168 142 138 
100 51.0 Zane 75 100.2 | 123 109 109 105 
85 38.3 19.8 61 80.8 85.5 96.7 93 88 
65.5 29.6 nee 49.6 beh ic 71 62 (Gl 73 
44 14.1 Pod Shed oe 46.5 46.5 50.5 


Super-voltage impulses measured at equal spark-over. (2000 ke (b) wave Table XIV.) 


\ 


TABLE XI 
SPHERES—IMPULSES 
12.5-cm. Spheres—Non-grounded 


Spark-over 
Spacing kv. max. Impulse Spark-over voltage kv. max. 
(2000 kc.) 100 ke. 
60-cycle 60-cycle 340 kv. max. 
Inch Cm ss ) 
Dry Wet Dry Wet Dry Wet 

2.80 7.10 162 66 164 162 
5.34 13.5 227 102 227 227 


Super-voltage impulses measured at equal spark-over. 
2000 kc (b) wave Table XIV. 


ns) poe 
on. 


1162 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


TABLE XII 


IMPULSE SPARK-OVER VOLTAGES WHEN THE 60-CYCLE LINE VOLTAGE 
IS ON THE GAP.—CASE C. 


Ap- 
60-cycle plied Impulse spark-over kv. max. 
Spacing spark-over 60- 2000 ke. 

cycle 

Case C 

Case A Sum measured 
Inches |Cm. | Kv. max. Ky. No. 60-cycle A&L. impulse 
Dry | Wet Tt Dry 


Wet Dry | Wet Dry Wet 


Selective spheres 12.5-cm. 


2.80 “7.10 162 66 50 138 | 135 | 188 185 160 161 
5.34! 13.5) 227 102 76.5 227 303 303 296 305 


Spheres 12.5 cm. 


sad 7.10] 162 | 66 | 50 164 | 214 aS 204 217 
5.34] 13.5 | 227 102 | 76.5 227 227 | 303 303 | 305 305 
Covered Spheres 6.25-cm. 
0.70 ( 50 | 37.5.| 50 | 50 | 87.5 : 87.5 | 87.5 | ¢ 8725 
1.58" | -4:, ; ur 100 75 100 100 | 175 175 175 175 
Horns 
1 Bose 5. 30.7 | 23 58.5 60 81.5 | 83 69 76 
2 5.08 | 40.6| 67.5 | 30.5 | 105 110 | 135.5 | 140.5 | 124 153 
3 7.62 | 52 75 39 145 150 | 184 189 175 196 


eee 


Case C—Impulse applied opposed to the maximum of the 60-cycle wave. 
Applied 60-cycle kv. 75 per cent of wet 60-cycle spark-over. 

Gaps not grounded. One discharge in five impulses. 

2000 ke. (b) wave Table XIV. 


1919] PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES 1163" 


TABLE XIII 
SPARK-OVER VOLTAGES OF GAPS FOR SUSTAINED HIGH FREQUENCY 
OSCILLATIONS. 


ee. SE eee 


Gap-setting Frequency of oscillations— 
Spark-over kv. max. 


160,000 from 


Inches | Cm. 19,600 50,000 100,000 200,000 high freq. coil 
Dry Wet Dry | Wet Dry | Wet Dry | Wet Dry | Wet 
Selective Spheres 12.5-cm. 
250 A ot ( T12 105 100 95 77 90 77 92 108 125 
5.34 | 13.5 | 200 | 143 ist 123 126 127 120 122 | 170 186 
Spheres 12.5 cm. 
2.80 7.10| 162 106 162 [126 163 106 162 118 163 tne 
§.34 | 13.5 | 227 | 173 227 164 |12.27 | 173 227 169 | 227 | 
Double gap—Balanced—Covered 
Setting E 
Kv-60 cycles 
Wet 
100 amas 98 ema lee 50/5 betes lw OZ 93 100 112 112 
130 BP Nae 74 be wi E403 wcse | 128 132 124 147 150 
Covered ‘Spheres 
50 | 50 50 [pacer rea a pe-*-| 50 50 50 50 50 
100 100 100 Sieh aL OOD 100 100 100 100 
Inches Cm. Horns 
i 2.54 58 33.5 
2 5.08 82 54 | 
3 7.62 97 67 
Points 
A Oe A a edie sistas 28.5| 28.5 
2 SOSH ore ace ett es 46 46 
3 Wis O2be secteur a|h. here 64 64 
4 SO eager) Sill ayeesco 74 74 
5 PAST Nea al (eee 88 88 


* 
1164 PEEK: TRANSIENT VOLTAGES — [June = 
at - it 
TABLE XIV 
P, IMPULSE GENERATOR CONSTANTS ~~ i> 
: Capacity Inductance . 
Impulse Wave — farads henrys - Resistance 
- > 7 = Loa “+ 
83 Single Half deze Oe 3.73 X 1073 1000 ] 
Cycle—Sine a 
- 100 Single Half ERS <5 La) 2 Sse 10 oom 2000 
Cycle—Sine a ; 
500 Single Half 0.62.X 10% | 0.28 x 1073 750 j 
Cycle—Sine a : 
2000 | Singlehalf | 0.625 X10% | 2.34 x105 | — 450 so 
Sine (a) 2 


2300 (b) wave 1,25 X10% © 8.7 x105 | 


POLO DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1165 


DISCUSSION ON “THE EFFECT OF TRANSIENT VOLTAGES ON 
PR eeTRICS IY’ (PEEK), LAKE PLacip, N. Y., JUNE 27, 


Wm. A. Del Mar: Mr. Peek showed a series of curves giv- 
ing the spark-over voltages for different gaps. I want to ask 
him whether it may be deduced from these curves that the In- 
stitute standard spark-gaps are correct with either dry or wet 
spark balls for voltages having a frequency of one million or 
more cycles per second. 

F. W. Peek: Replying to Mr. Del Mar, the Institute 
standard sphere gap curves read correctly for either 60-cycle 
or transient voltages when the electrodes are dry. When 
the sphere surfaces are wet the gap sparks over at about 
half this value at 60 cycles, but for transients of the order of 
a single half cycle of a one-mlliion-cycle sine wave the 
spark over voltage is practically as given on the standard 
curves. There would, of course, be considerable error for 
continuously applied undamped high-frequency voltages. 

C. T. Allcutt: Perhaps the most serious fault with Mr. 
Peek’s paper is the presentation of a large amount of experi- 
mental data on discharge gaps, without giving any description 
whatever of the actual gap structures tested by him. He gives 
a diagrammatic representation of his ingenious balanced dou- 
ble-sphere gap and describes the theory of its operation, but 
his description of the gap structure itself is limited to the fig- 
ures regarding the size of spheres employed. Whether the gap 
tested was a laboratory model or a commercially practicable 
gap such as might be applied to an electrolytic arrester has been 
left to the imagination of the reader. It is impossible for other 
experimenters to check Mr. Peek’s results without further in- 
formation concerning his apparatus. 

Even more objectionable is his failure to describe the struc- 
ture used by him in testing the type of selective gap now known 
commercially as the impulse gap. I wish particularly to call 
attention to the data given in Table VII. These data were 
given by Mr. Peek at the Atlantic City Convention last June, 
in his discussion of my paper on ‘Lightning Arrester Spark 
Gaps.’”! These data, which apparently contradicted my own, 
were presented by Mr. Peek without any description being 
given of the gap structure used in his experiments, the natural 
inference being that he had used a gap structure built exactly 
according to the description given in my paper. The fact that 
he presented these apparently contradictory data without giv- 
ing sufficient information to enable the reason for the discrep- 
ancy to be pointed out was called to his attention in the closure 
to;that discussion.’ It is unfortunate that Mr. Peek has not 


panna MEm Pak a DEA 2 2 OA ee A ee 
- 4. C. T. Alleutt, “Lightning Arrester Spark Gaps,”, TRANSACTIONS, 
A. I.E. E. Volume XXXVII Part II, p. 833. F. W. Peek, Discussion, 
otions A. I. E. E., Vol. XXXVII. Part II, p. 855. 
sure T. Alleutt, Discussion Trans. A. I. E. E., Vol. XXXVII. Part 
II, p. 867. . 


1166 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


taken advantage of this opportunity to correct the omission. 
Following are a few of the facts that should have been included 
in his paper and without which his data are of little value. 

(1) Nature and capacity of condensers employed. 

(2) Nature and resistance of unbalancing resistors em- 
ployed. 

(3) Size, shape and position of auxiliary electrode. 

(4) Position of the various conducting elements of the gap 
structure which determine the capacity between the various 
electrodes. . 

The same objection applies to the data given in Table IX, 
although in this case there is no direct implication that the gap 
tested was substantially the same as the one described by me 
last June. In fact, some of the data given in Table IX check 
fairly well with some results of tests that have been made in 
our laboratory on the standard commercial impulse gap struc- 
ture so it is entirely possible that some of Mr. Peek’s tests were 
made on such a gap. The difference existing between Mr. 
Peek’s results and those given in the curves accompanying this 
discussion may then be due either to a gap structure differing 
materially from the one used in my tests, or, to improper ad- 
justment of the gap electrodes and the fact that Mr. Peek’s 
tests were made with non-grounded impulses. It is obvious 
that under service conditions one of the electrodes is at ground 
potential until after the discharge across the gap has taken 
place, so any tests made should be with one electrode grounded 
if service conditions are to be properly simulated. 

The use of non-grounded impulses is also open to criticism in 
connection with the tests on the balanced, double-sphere gap 
recorded in Table X, although in this case it is not believed that 
the test results would be much changed by the use of grounded 
impulses. 

_ As I do not believe that Mr. Peek’s data on the selective gap 
In any way represent the characteristics that are obtained in 
practise with the commereial form of impulse gap, I am pre- 
senting here curves showing the discharge characteristics of a 
standard 44-kv. impulse gap. For comparison with Mr. Peek’s 
data I have plotted the curves showing the impulse discharge 
voltage as a function of the 60-cycle discharge voltage under 
rain conditions. I heartily endorse Mr. Peek’s contention that 
this is the only proper basis of comparison for gaps used out of 
doors. _For some time past in our laboratory we have been 
comparing protective gaps on the basis of what we have termed 

protection factor’’ instead of on the basis of “impulse ratio.” 
Protection factor is defined tentatively as the ratio of the im- 
pulse discharge voltage to the 60-cycle discharge voltage under 
rain conditions. For in-door gaps the protection factor is the 
same as the impulse ratio. Mr. Peek’s quantity is proportional — 
to the protection factor. 

Fig. 1 is a photograph of the gap tested.. Fig. 2 is a sche- 
matic diagram of the electrical circuit of the gap. The capaci- 


PLATF XLI. 
AgTEs Es 
VOL, XXXVII, 1919 


[ALLcuTT] 
Fria. 1—44-Ky. Imputse Gap. 


\ 


1919] DISCUSSION- AT LAKE PLACID 1167 


tance for maintaining the auxiliary electrode at the proper 
potential is furnished by the pin type insulators (a) and (0). 
These insulators have an electrostatic capacity of about 2 10-" 
farads. Due to the effect of capacity to ground, the auxiliary 
electrode is not maintained at a potential half way between the 
potentials of the two main electrodes by the condensers (a) and 
(b). It has been found by experiment that the proper position 
of the auxiliary electrode is such that its distance from the 
sphere horn ‘‘m’’ is six-tenths of the gap length. In this 
position it does not disturb the field when a 60-cycle voltage is 
applied across the gap. The unbalancing resistance is furnished 
by the resistors (c) and (d). These resistors have about 
250,000 ohms resistance each. The resistors are about 12 in. 
(30 cm.) long and are of a special composition that retains its 


Fic. 2—DIAGRAM OF IMPULSE GAP 


high resistivity under the most severe conditions of high voltage 
and high frequency. They are enclosed in porcelain tubes 
mounted on the porcelain pillar (e). The auxiliary electrode 
(f) isa pointed brass rod 0.0808 in. (0.2 cm.) in diameter held in 
a 3 in. (0.95 cm.) diameter brass support member (g), which is 
in turn mounted on an arm (h) of 1 in. (2.54 cm.) angle iron. 
The hemispheres (7) mounted on the horns are made of brass 
and are 12.5 cm. in diameter. In practise the charging resist- 
ance of the arrester is connected between the horn members (k) 
and (1). For the purpose of test, (k) and (/) were connected 
together and grounded to the frame of the gap structure. 

The impulse discharge voltage of the gap was determined 
by direct comparison with a 12.5 cm. sphere gap connected in 
parallel with it.. The high-tension electrodes of the gap under 
test and of the sphere gap were connected together by astraight 
lead and the connection to the impulse generator was brought 
out from the middle point of this lead. The impulse generator 
itself was connected as shown in Mr. Peek’s Fig. 3 (Case A). 
The following circuit constants were employed: 

For 100 kilocycle impulse, c = 5 < 10- farads. 

L = 1.25 x 10-* henries and R = 1000 ohms. 


1168 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


For 420 kilocycle impulse, C= 5 x 10° farads. 

L = 83 X 10> farads, R,= 320 ohms. 

For 3000 kilocycle super-impulse, C = 5 X 10~ farads. 

L = 8.3 X 10-* henries and R = 4800 ohms. 

The condenser employed consisted of a stack of one hundred 
impregnated paper condensers connected in series. Each con- 
denser had a capacity of 0.5 microfarad. Single layer sole- 
noids were used as inductances in the oscillating circuits and 
water tube resistances were employed. The test-methods fol- 
lowed were those outlined in my papers.* 


NON aa —_—_____— 


100° KILOCYCLE IMPULSE 


nm 

[=] 

oa 
= 


80 


IMPULSE DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KV. MAX. 


40 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
60 ~~ DISCHARGE VOLTAGE-WET KV. MAX. 


Fic. 3—ImMpuLsE GAp CHARACTERISTICS 


_ Figs. 3, 4 and 5 give the results of tests made with impulse 
voltages of different steepness of front. The lowest curve, 
marked “Impulse gap with extra capacity,’ gives the results 
of tests made on the standard gap structure but with additional 
capacitance connected between the auxiliary electrode and each 
horn, bringing the total capacity on each side of the auxiliary 
electrode up to about 10-" farads. This capacity is about the 
_ same as that employed in the experimental gap described inmy . 

Ae paper and these results check quite well with the results 
pu ished in that paper. It will be seen that the improvement 
on te the additional capacity is slight at 100 kilocycles and 

ilocycles (Fig. 8 and 4) and, since it is believed that this 
represents the range of frequencies to be expected in practise, 


Bipot Bi i ” 
ALE. a Spark Gaps,” C. T. Alleutt, TRANSACTIONS 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1169 


240 


420 KILOCYCLE IMPULSE 


200 


KV. MAX. 


160 


80 


IMPULSE DISCHARGE VOLTAGE 


40 


0) 20 40 60 80 100 120 
60~ DISCHARGE VOLTAGE-WET KV. MAX, 


Fic. 4—ImMpuLseE Gap CHARACTERISTICS 


the added expense of the extra capacity was not believed justi- 


fied in the commercial design. 
Fig. 5 is given for the purpose of comparison with the tests 


240 


3000 KILOCYCLE 
SUPERIMPULSE 


DS) 
fo} 
So 


3 


120 


oo 
o 


IMPULSE DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KV. MAX. 


40 


80 100 120 


40 60 
60~ DISCHARGE VOLTAGE-WET KV. MAX. 


Fic. 5—ImpuLse Gap CHARACTERISTICS 


1170 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


kilocycles, upon which Mr. Peek lays such stress. The 
ee ee: ade ‘ith a 213-kv. wave having the same initial 
steepness as Mr. Peek’s 240-kv. 2000-kilocycle wave. I be- 
lieve this wave to be much steeper than any that can be ex- 
pected in practise. The initial steepness of Mr. Peek’s 2000- 
kilocycle wave is about 1.2 x 107% volts per second. This is 
equivalent to a 340-kv. sine wave of more than 5000 kilocycles. 
From the data given by Mr. Steinmetz in his recent paper‘ it 
may be shown that an infinitely steep wave front of 340-kv. 


350 


Peek's 2000 Kilocycle Wave. 


300 


250 


Wave 


KILOVOLTS 


0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 
TIME MICROSECONDS 


Fic. 6—CoOMPARISON OF WAVE FRONTS 


~ magnitude will be reduced to a maximum steepness of 3.2 x 10—”” 
volts per second after travelling 30 meters. This is only one- 
third as steep as the wave used by Mr. Peek. Even if we ad- 
mit the possibility of starting an infinitely steep wave front in 
a transmission line, it would have to be started within a few 
feet of an arrester in order to apply as steep a wave front to the 
gap as Mr. Peek used in his laboratory tests. For this reason 
it is not believed that the results shown in Fig. 5 in any way 
. represent a condition liable to occur in practise. Fig. 6 shows 
the wave fronts used by Mr. Peek and myself. A 2000-kilo- 
cycle sine wave front is also plotted for comparison. 


4. “General Equations of the Electric Circuit,’ C. P. Steinmetz, 
Trans. A. I. EK. E., Vol. XX XVIII, p. 191. ; 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1171 


Figs. 7 and 8 show the discharge characteristics of the selec- 
tive gap in comparison with the covered or indoor sphere gap 
and- Mr. Peek’s balanced double-sphere gap. Fig. 7 shows a 
covered or indoor impulse gap as compared with a covered or 
indoor sphere gap. Fig. 8 gives the characteristics of a double 
balanced sphere gap in comparison with those of one of a num- 
ber of forms of protected impulse gaps that are being experi- 
mented with. Fig. 9 shows diagrammatically the protected 
impulse gap tested. The gap structure shown in Fig. 1 was 
used for the main gap and a 6.25 cm. sphere gap connected be- 
tween the auxiliary electrode and one of the main electrodes. 
The sphere gap (g) shunting one-half of the main gap may be 


120 


420 KILOCYCLE IMPULSE 
Covered or Indoor Gaps 


80 


3 


IMPULSE DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KY. MAX. 
> 
3 


_ 20 


40 80 100 120 
60~ DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KV. MAX. 


0 20 


Fic. 7—CovERED' OR INDOOR IMPULSE GAP 


protected from the weather. A discharge across (g) is followed 
immediately by a discharge between the auxiliary electrode (a) 
and the horn (b). The rising are quickly transfers from the 
auxiliary electrode (a) to the horn (¢), shorting out the arc 
across (g) and effectively extinguishing it. This construction 
has been found to secure a very quick and effective suppression 
of the arc across (g), this permitting the use of a relatively small 
er. 
ae the present state of development, however, there is some 
doubt as to the efficacy of the protected gap structures pro- 
posed. We have found that merely wetting the surfaces of the 
electrodes of a gap will reduce the discharge voltage to prac- 
tically as low a value as will actual rainfall. It is obvious that 


1172 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


a shelter which merely protects a gap from direct rai 1iall cannot 
prevent the formation of moisture on the electrodes in foggy 
weather, and unless the electrodes can be kept dry under all 
conditions the purpose of the shelter -will be defeated. 

In his discussion of the balanced double sphere gap Mr. Peek 
apparently loses sight of the fact that an unbalanced double 
sphere gap actually has a lower impulse discharge voltage than 
a balanced double sphere gap with the same gap setting. The 
higher impulse ratio of unbalanced gap is due to the fact that 
unbalancing the gap causes a greater reduction in the 60-cycle 
discharge voltage than in the impulse discharge voltage. This 


80 


foal 
o 


> 
oa 


IMPULSE DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KV. MAX. 


20 40 6 80 100 120 
60~ DISCHARGE VOLTAGE KV. MAX. 


Fic. S—COMPARISON BETWEEN PROTECTED IMPULSE GAP AND BALANCED 
DoubLE SPHERE GAP 


may be illustrated by reference to Mr. Peek’s Table III. Mr. 
Peek finds that two gaps in series set at 0.45 em. and 2.59 em. 
respectively, will spark ove on 60 cycles at 72 kv., unbalanced, 
and at 101 kv., balanced. On a 500-kilocycle impulse the same 
gaps will discharge at 86 kv., unbalanced, and 103 ky., balanced. 
It is obvious from these figures that the best protection would 
be obtained by having the gaps unbalanced for impulse volt- 
ages and balanced for 60-cycle voltages. This can be accom- 
plished by connecting a high resistance or a reactance in series 
with one of the condensers used for balancing the voltage across 
the gaps, 7.e., by applying the selective principle of the impulse 
gap. a 

Following the line of reasoning given in his discussion at At- 
lantic City, Mr. Peek again maintains in his present paper that 
the impulse ratio of the selective gap is an “apparent” impulse 
ratio. We look in vain for a statement of his definition of true 


_ 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1173 


impulse ratio as applied to a selective gap. From the figures 
he gives in Table VII we may infer that Mr. Peek’s definition of 
impulse ratio as applied to such a gap reads something like this: 
“The impulse ratio of a selective gap is the ratio of the impulse 
spark-over of the gap to the 60-cycle spark-over of a sphere gap 
having one-half of the gap setting of the selective gap.” What 
is the reason for this arbitrary definition? Certainly not be- 
cause the impulse gap may be regarded as consisting of two 
distinct gaps in series. The balanced double sphere gap also 
consists of two gaps in series and yet its impulse ratio is com- 
puted according to Mr. Peek’s original definition of the term 
(See Table III). Suppose this same balanced double sphere 


Fic. 9—D1aGRAM OF ONE Form oF Protected IMPULSE GAP 


gap were made into a selective gap by the simple expedient 
mentioned in the preceding paragraph. What-would be the 
definition of its impulse ratio? I believe it will be found sim- 
pler to use the term “impulse ratio” in accordance with Mr. 
Peek’s original definition than to attempt to evolve a new defini- 
tion for every new type of gap that may be devised. 

In discussing the theory of operation of the selective gap, Mr. 
Peek falls into the error of assuming that the discharge voltage 
from the auxiliary electrode to one of the main electrodes is 
one-half the discharge voltage of the whole gap. In the select- 
ive gaps which I have described and tested the discharge voltage 
of the half-gap was approximately one-quarter the discharge 
voltage of the whole gap, since the half-gap is, in effect, a needle 
gap while the whole gap is a sphere gap. Experimental data 
showing this fact are given in the discussion previously referred 
to. If the half gap of the selective gap tested by Mr. Peek did 
have the characteristics that he ascribes to it, (in Table VII, 
for example), it must have been quite different in design from 


the one tested by me. 
5. C. T. Alleutt, Discussion, Transactions, A. I. H. B., Vol. XXXVI, 
page 868. 


y 


1174 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [June 27 


F. W. Peek, Jr.: My object in writing this paper was 
to put into convenient practical form, spark-over data for 
various transient and lightning voltages for different types 
of gaps. The gaps discussed range all the way from the needle 
gap and the horn to the large sphere. It is pointed out that 
the protective value of a gap depends not only upon the light- 
ning spark over voltage, but also upon the setting imposed by 


Fic. 10 


operating conditions. A ratio is given dependent upon both 
of these factors. This ratio gives the true relative protective 
value of a gap and may, therefore, be called the protective ratio. 
I have also given measured data on the steepness of waves 
actually occurring on operating transmission lines. Much 
steeper waves than any used in these tests have been observed 
on transmission lines. In fact, I first noticed that the lightning 
spark-over of certain gaps was much higher than the normal 
spark-over voltage by such waves on a large transmission 


system. 


Fre. 11 


I called attention to the importance of considering the effect 
of rain on the spark-over voltage in my discussion at Atlantic 
City last year. Complete data are now given for the effect 
of rain, etc. The relative protective values of the various 
gaps are given in Figs. 14, 15 and 16 in my paper. 

Mr. Allcut has asked a number of questions with particular 
reference to the selective gap, which I will try to answer. I 
have always tried to give complete data as to methods and 
constants. Much of this will be found in my 1915 paper, my 
discussion at Atlantic City, and in the appendix to the pres- 
ent paper. I believe that all of the data necessary to dupli- 
cate the work are given. 

Various types of condensers were used such as glass plates 

of very large capacity and high-capacity line insulators. The 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1175 


condensers used in the test ha i 
sein Meas da capacity of the same order 
Water tube resistance was used. Anything above 200,000 
ohms gives satisfactory results. The resistance should be as 
large as possible without giving an appreciable drop due to 
the 60-cycle capacity current. 
The auxiliary electrode was placed between the spheres and 


ae 


Fic. 12 


set to give maximum 60-cycle spark-over and minimum 
lightning spark over voltage. 

It is true that careful adjustment of the auxiliary electrode 
is necessary. It is not, however, especially difficult to make 
this adjustment and keep it in the laboratory. The gap is 
also quickly thrown out of adjustment due to leakage by rain 


O— 


poe 


Fie. 13 


on the condensers. I have not found the exact size of the 
center electrode of the utmost importance. Tests were made 
on wires varying from 0.035 in. to 0.25 in. The smaller 
sizes were used on the 6.25-cm. spheres. A small enough 
electrode was used to give the best results. Some difficulty 
was had with the very small ones due to vibration caused by 
the 60-cycle voltages, 


1176 TRANSIENT VOLTAGES [ June 27 


The sphere part of the gap was always arranged so that 
distortion did not take place and the spark-over voltage thus 
corresponded to the standard curves. 

Some of the tests were made as a matter of convenience 
without grounding one sphere. Check tests with one sphere 
grounded show that the relative protective value is the same 


ey 


Fic.'§14 


for both cases. The method of making tests ‘is al indi- 
cated on the data. : age 
Regarding Mr. Allcutt’s question on the break down voltage 

30 e 


ee 


Time in Microseconde. 


Fic. 15 


of “one-half” the gap, in i i i i 
L ; practise the lightnin It 
between line and ground or. i . Recapni hen 
the two a sheeee gr or, In other words, is applied between 
operating voltages the auxiliar electrode 
proper potential because of the wo cgndeneeketedtiice 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LAKE PLACID 1177 


transients are applied the resistance acts as an open circuit so 
that the potential of the auxiliary electrode is fixed by one 
condenser as in Fig. 11. In determining the break-down 
voltage of one-half the gap, therefore the voltage should be 
applied as in Fig. 12, and not as in Figs. 13 or 14. 

The field due to the lightning voltage across the two spheres 
greatly decreases the stress on the center electrode. The 
break-down voltage is much higher for Fig. 12. When the 
test is made as in Fig. 12, the break down is approximately 
one-half the break down for the total gap; when made as in 
Fig. 13 it is approximately one-third that of the total gap. 

I do not know how Mr. Allecutt’s measurements were made, 
but his figures indicate by either method 138 or 14. The 
size of the electrode over a considerable range does not materi- 
ally affect results. 

The term frequency may .be misleading. It is not the 
frequency with which we are principally concerned, but the 
rate or steepness at which the voltage is applied up to the 
breakdown point. As shown in Fig. 15, a very high voltage— 
500-ke. wave—may be less steep in effect than a 2000-kc. 
wave at a lower voltage. 

I am interested to note that Mr. Alleutt now checks with 
me in the fact that the spark-over voltage of the selective gap 
increases with the steepness of the wave front. For instance, 
at 80 kv., in his Figs. 3, 4 and 5 the spark-over voltages are 
100, 120 and 165 at respectively 100, 420 and 3000 kc. His 
former tests indicated that the effect of wave front was not 
material. Our data in general agree qualitatively. 

It is of interest to note that the importance of the setting 
factor may be well illustrated in his Fig.13. If the needle-gap 
curve is plotted on this figure, it will be found to give better 

* protection than the impulse gap under this condition, due to 
the effect of rain. See Fig. 15 in my paper. 


7 fe, - 
4 + 
‘. ; 
i py 
¢ 
ay = 3 
< s 
- (SAQA >t u 
E a 9 
‘ 
‘ 
; ‘ 
~ - ; E ; 


~— 4 ‘ hs le 
“2 ' * t 
z 4% , + re] 
2 3)? 4 
“Ty9 - 
. é = 
: = ev, ‘ss » 
= “ J yt [245 1,173 a ¢ 
* , WES ' . Te er « pw gees . _—— At by —— 
~ : . ett hk oe, 20% eé 


| ; : Soy est oe fiw Tate pst} 

on ; He: ¥ éf- yw oi se ANaphe 4 HLT 

“ ; - oy > ; : 4 = . Wii ah art og vash dead . r . 
ane oe ee aa ee Tl ov RR a . 

oe te: SNE ae ron oars ttt 2 1g. age 


a MGCL, Ji Ta sion, oF baseetipame Rp 


OReeny oy ‘ KyV 3 fey. de 
ieee ee aah ENE Abd EO ED 4O*5 TGA Sth 1G ee: 
(ESS SOIR S Yes ih. ous (Ada) 
eee es) erry = hn iy p ET a Pees ied - hes rene el. Lt att. Bi 
= iy & Tee o> 1 


ca ; > pets os Ne fk tic Std f- Reage & pemer i | nist i be 

Yoemeas fe DURE hel OC NOL ‘evite zn se? ee SAGE: 

oe = 2 Oth 4B. her. aFBvede, JeaBe aly 2° bateoibn 
ae ie as asters pp 9 a 

wat iz, ae aty-3 24) 271k es are 

oe ear atitoans 4 cbs 3- ants cs 

fish exh orien ody bontg 


Presented at the Pacific Coast Convention of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Los Angeles, Cal., September 18-20, Igorg. 


Copyright 1919. By A.I. E.E. 


ORDER AND AMPLITUDE OF HARMONICS IN 
VOLTAGE WAVE FORMS WITH INDICATING 
INSTRUMENTS 


BY LESLIE F. CURTIS 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The author presents a method for the determination of the 
order and percentage of the various components of an alternating 
wave of e. m. f., using indicating meters and other inexpensive 
apparatus. 

_ Two examples are given. Oscillograms are included to show 
interesting phenomena and to check the results of the caleula- 


tions. 
The value of so-called standards for the indication of wave 


form is questioned. 


INTRODUCTION 


ANY writers have discussed the relative merits of various 
combinations of resistance, inductance and capacitance 
when used as devices for indicating the deviation of alternating 
wave forms from the sine curve. They have also defined 
-certain terms such as form factor!, deviation factor, distortion 
factor’, etc., applicable to the above devices when used with 
indicating meters as standards’. (They have, however, failed 
to show any method by which the order and amplitude of the 
various harmonics might be obtained by indicating meters.) 
Each of the proposed standards is also open to the objection 
that the result obtained by its use is entirely dependent upon 
the order of the harmonics in question and upon the size of the 
reactances used. 

The maximum distortion, which, in practise, might result 
from the resonance of a certain harmonic in a long transmission 
line with distributed inductance and capacity, would be 
produced by such devices in test only by chance. It is, how- 
ever, only this resonant condition for the higher harmonics that 
can cause disturbances which can be charged to generator wave 


1. See references at end of paper. 


1179 


1180 CURTIS HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


form. In the absence of oscillograms, it is therefore necessary 
to produce resonance of the various harmonics generated within 
the machine before its worst behavior can be predicted. 

In making an oscillographic study of the charging currents 
for condensers of various sizes from the same source of alternat- 
ing current it was found that the current wave forms varied 
greatly with the size of the condenser used. The ratio of the 
apparent reactance to the true reactance of the same condenser 
when supplied with a sine wave of voltage at the same fre- 
quency, as suggested by a previous writer?, likewise depended 
upon the size of the condenser. It was also found that the 
resistance and inductance of the generator circuit had a decided 
effect on the indications. A method was then developed which 


To Oscillograph 


Fig. 1 


gave a solution for the order and amplitude of the harmonics 
present in a given form from the readings obtained with 
inexpensive indicating meters and other apparatus. 

It is the purpose of this paper to present this solution 
together with two examples of its use with oscillograms taken 
to show the various wave forms of current and voltage. The 
method outlined below gives no indication of the relative phase 
positions of the components and therefore no accurate indica- 
tion of the maximum value of the resultant wave. In figuring 
the maxima of voltage or current waves the relative phase 
position is important only for the lower harmonics, the third 
and fifth. Thus for most purposes, the phase position of the 
components 1s not required and their order and percentage is 
a sufficient indication of the character of the wave:~ 


1919] CURTIS: HARMONICS 1181 


METHOD 


The method is that of obtaining resonant conditions for the 
nth harmonic in the generated voltage by several separate 
adjustments of inductance and capacitance in series with a 
certain amount of protective resistance. When resonance has 
been obtained, a second reading is taken with added series 
resistance. 

The diagram of the connections used is shown in Fig. 1. 
The alternator supplying the wave to be tested is assumed to 
have an inductance L, and a resistance Ry. Resistance R and 
inductance L may be added to the circuit at will by means of 
switches S,and S;. Vand F indicate a voltmeter and frequency 
meter connected to the machine by throwing switch S, to the 
left. On throwing S, to the right an adjustable condenser 
C — C, is connected in the circuit. In parallel with this is a 
small fixed condenser Cy, the current in which may be measured 
by a small hot-wire meter A of negligible resistance. C is 
therefore the total capacitance. 

For a given initial voltage and frequency the resonant points 
for the harmonics are indicated by a maximum deflection of 
meter A. If R, is not sufficient for protection of the condenser 
from abnormal voltages at resonance, more resistance may be 
added and considered as a part of the generator. If Lo is not 
large enough to produce resonance of the lower harmonics with 
the amount of capacitance C available, more inductance may 
be added and considered as a part of the generator. 

The calculation consists of two parts; the determination of 
the order of the harmonics present and the calculation of their 
amplitude. Table I gives a summary of the notation used in 
the calculations. 


TABLE I—NOTATION 


L Known inductance. 

R Known resistance. 

Co Known fixed capacitance. 

C—C, Known adjustable capacitance. 

C Total capacitance. 

C,, etc. Particular value of C. 

a) Angular velocity of fundamental wave. 

n Order of harmonic. 

Cn Effective nth harmonic in generated voltage. 


lage Percentage of nth harmonic in terms of fundamental 


1182 CURTIS: HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


E Effective value of resultant generated voltage. 
dn Effective value of nth harmonic in current. 

ne Effective value of resultant current. 

D Deflection of hot-wire meter. 

K Calibration constant for A (See Fig. 13). 

ie Resistance of circuit to nth harmonic. 

Sie SN Reactance of circuit to nth harmonic. 


ORDER OF THE HARMONICS 


The order of the harmonics present may be found from the 
values of capacitance, C, and C2, necessary to produce reson- 
ance with and without the known inductance L in series. 


In the first case 


a 1 
Lnw+tbnw= a —- (1) 
in the second 
= 1 
MIRE rk Syste (2) 
from which 
n= T/oJS/1/L (1/C; — 1/C2) (3) 


If the result is not exactly a whole number it may be cor- 
rected as it is known that » must be an integer and probably 
odd. If another harmonic is present, its order may be deter- 
mined in the same way from new adjustments of capacitance, 
C; and C,, with and without the inductance L. An alternative 
method is to continue the curve upon which C, or C, produced 
resonance after one of the harmonics has been determined and 


take one additional reading of capacitance for the resonance of 
the other harmonic. 


In this case 


CLs e apy preriverindiant: (4) 
and 
ieee WWD 1 
Ly n ® Cae IOs ie eas wines (5) 
from which 


W=nV/C./Cp= 0 WV ENG; (6) 


- 1919] : CURTIS: HARMONICS “1183 


AMPLITUDE OF THE HARMONICS 


Having found the order of the harmonics present it is easy 
to determine their amplitude by taking additional readings of 
the current-squared meter with a known resistance inserted in 
the circuit and with the capacitance adjusted for the resonance 
of the harmonic in question. 

In order to introduce no errors due to current in circuits in 
parallel with the capacitance and to necessitate no correction 
therefor, no voltmeter or other device should be connected when 
the readings of the hot-wire meter are taken. 

For resonance of the nth harmonic 


* Z 
ae gh Cont hi ~ 
and 
Res G5/T, (7) 
= (8) 
1= 8 
1 1 2 

ret ( C27? w Cy. ) ; 

ee ae ee ae ee 

J Se oe ee ae 
3 Tg.\3 (9) 

\t(aas- wow) 


It will be noted that the resistance of the circuit is assumed 
to depend upon the frequency of the harmonic. In practise it 
is shown that the resistance increases with the frequency. In 
most practical cases the resistances 7, r;3, etc., are so small 
compared to the other terms under the radical that they may be 


neglected. 
Therefore 
e1 1 : 
C.n? w Cy w : 
and 
zs é3 = e1 P; F 
C, n* w) 3 C. Ww 
But 


Day erase ea ee 8S (2) 


1184 CURTIS: HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


therefore 


ie Eas tees Se aie (13) 
v1" v3" ; 


I= e 


The resultant voltage E is 
E= Jevtegt+....@27+.... 
=" Oy 4/ det Po* ba eee (14) 


and when no harmonic exceeds 10 per cent of the fundamental, 
e; may be replaced by E with less than 1 per cent error. 
Now 


1s aa 15) 
therefore 
2 P22 e 
fae = fe ee 


v1" L3" Tn 
_ When a resistance F is placed in series a new reading D! is 
obtained and the corresponding equation is 
EOD Peet P3? 


Ek? Ce? x? an 


EE ae (17) 


therefore 


Danan tg Eel Seen gr cich Ce egy 


(18) 
and 
Pe= (ry +R) 
KDC? 1 Pz ) 
(ee ee ges So (19) 


Now usually all terms except those containing constants of ; 
the fundamental and the nth harmonic are negligible, therefore 


ae KDC. 1 ) 
Fat coe ( EO? on Paes (20) 
and 
iL KD ae ) 
En os TEP ( BOs Ee (21) 


1919] CURTIS: HARMONICS 1185 


from which numerical values of r, and P,, may be obtained. 
If the other terms are appreciable, an approximate solution 
may be made by equations (20) and (21) for all of the harmonics 
and then corrected by using equations (18) and (19). 

It is suggested that if a calibrated condenser is not available, 
that the adjustments be made for the current maxima and that 
the corresponding capacitance be measured on a sine wave 
before changing the condenser setting. If no adjustable 
condenser is available, a fixed condenser and calibrated induc- 
tance may be substituted. The equations should then be 
modified to use inductance as the abscissa of the reson- 
ance curves. 

Example1: The open circuit wave form of a delta-connected 
alternator, 1200-rev. per min., 220 volts, run at normal speed 


80 


fea) 
oO 


DEFLECTIONS 
a 
Oo 


20 


Chie 80 Mes Soe es ay 5 7 AO Ht AS 
CAPACITANCE IN MICROFARADS 


Fig. 3 


but at 100 volts, is shown by the oscillogram in Fig. 2. The 
resonance curves for this machine by the above method without 
and with the known inductance L in series are shown in Fig. 3. 

The inductance L, when measured separately on a 180-cycle 
wave gave a reactance of 12.6 ohms, and therefore had an 
inductance of 0.0111 henry. During the test an additional 
inductance of unknown value was permanently connected in 
the circuit. Cy was 0.72 microfarads. 

a. Order of the Harmonics: 

Maximum points A and B, in Fig. 3, corresponding to 3.53 
and 3.11 microfarads, are evidently due to the same harmonic. 
The equation for the determination of its order is (3). | 


1 al 1 aR, ) 
Substitute and n = Seen. iii ‘Car Sen 


1186 CURTIS: HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


from which n equals 4.9 and therefore indicates the fifth 
harmonic. 

Maximum points C and D, at 1.78 and 1.57 microfarads in 
Fig. 3 are due to the presence of another harmonic. A similar 
solution to that above gives a value of 6.9 for n and therefore 
indicates the seventh harmonic. 

An alternative solution is, since we know that point A is due 
to the fifth harmonic, 


From these solutions it is therefore known that resonance 
points A and B are due to the fifth, and points C and D, to the 
seventh harmonic. 

b. Amplitude of the Harmonics: 

The readings for the determination of the amplitude of the 
above harmonics are given in Table II. Consider the condi- 
tions for point A. 

From equation (4), 


408 


Low saa xe x27 60 ~ 30 chms 
1 106 


C0 3.53 x2060  -/49 ohms 


x1 = 749 — 30 = 719 ohms 
Substitute in equation (20) and 


deat 0.01214 x3 53" 1 
Ps i, rs” (ee = ==) 
100 Ore, 719° 
Likewise for point A!, when a resistance of 2.66 ohms is 
placed in series, substitute in equation (21) and 


Solving 


Pe= (rs + 2,66): (OST Sees. Ht ) 


10020 7o in as: 
Solve and r; equals 7.9 ohms and P; equals 4.1 per cent. . 


Points B and B! give similar results, 9.1 ohms and 4.1 per 
cent. 


PLATE XLIi. 
A. 1B. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 2—Orren Circuit VottagceE—EXxamp.e 1 (Errective Vauus, 100 
VOLTs) 


[curRTIs] 
Fig. 4—Cuarcine Current—Pornt A, Exampre 1 (Hrrecrive VALUE, 
0.54 AMPERES) 


PLATE XLII. 
A. |..E. E. 
VOL. XXXVI, 1919 


Fig. 5—CuHARGING CURRENT—POINT C—EXAMPLE | (HK FFECTIVE VALUE 
0.24 AMPERE) 


Fic. 6—Cuarcine Current—Pornt M—Examptp 1 (EFFECTIVE VALUE, 
0.15 AMPERE) 


Bie [curTIs] 
7—OPpeEN Circuit VoLTaGE—EXAmPLp 2 (Errective Vauug, 100 


Vouts) 


Fig. 


LOLS CURTIS: HARMONICS 1187 


Solving in the same way for the constants for the seventh 
harmonic from the values for points C and C! and r, equals 
9.7 ohms and P, equals 1.7 per cent. 


TABLE II 
CRITICAL VALUES FOR EXAMPLE 1 


Point (% Co R D KD n Ti 
Al 3.53 0.72 0.00 78.0 0.01214 5 0.540 
Al 3.53 0.72 2.66 44.0 0.00713 5 0.415 
B 3.13 0.72 0.00 76.0 0.01183 5 0.470 
Bi 3.11 0.72 2.66 46.0 0.00745 5 0.373 
G 1.78 0.72 0.00 57.0 0.0091 a 0.236 
ca 1.78 0.72 2.66 36.0 0.0059 7 0.190 
D 154 0.72 0.00 53.0 0.00848 7 0.201 
Di 1.57 0.72 2.66 35.0 0.00574 if 0.165 
M 2.62 | gee A 0.00 10.0 0.0018 5&7 0.149 


From points D and D', the corresponding values are 10.8 
ohms and 2.1 per cent. 

Oscillograms were taken to check the above results and to 
show the charging current for the various total capacitances. 
Fig. 2 is an oscillogram of the no-load voltage of the machine 
and is the true generated wave form of the machine as no 
capacitance was connected and the resistance was at least ten 
times as great as the reactance of the circuit to the seventh 
harmonic. An analysis of this wave gives 3.5 per cent of the 
fifth, and 1.6 per cent of the seventh harmonic, no others being 
appreciable. 

Fig. 4 is the wave of charging current (0.540 ampere) for 
point A and shows the predominance of the fifth harmonic.. 
Fig. 5 is a similar curve of charging current (0.236 ampere) for 
point C showing the seventh harmonic. Fig. 6 is the wave of 
charging current (0.149 ampere) for point M corresponding to 
2.62 microfarads, Fig. 3 showing the reduction in theamplitude 
of the harmonics in current and the beats due to both fifth and 
seventh harmonics. 

The resistance of the circuit used was measured with direct 
current and found to be 5.2 ohms for points A and C, and 6.2 
ohms for points Band D. The solutions given above show that 
the resistance to the higher frequencies was very materially 
increased. 

A summary of all of the above calculated data is presented in 
Table III. 


1188 CURTIS: HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


Example 2: The machine used for this test was a synchron- 
ous motor, 1800 rev. per min., 110 volts, run as a generator at 
100 volts. The open-circuit wave form of this machine 1s 
shown in Fig. 7, which upon analysis gives 3.5 per cent of the 
fifth, 1.4 per cent of the seventh, 7.0 per cent of the eleventh 
and 2.5 per cent of the thirteenth harmonics. 


‘ _— 
= me a | 


go }-- +- 4 4+} xr! 


60 


DEFLECTIONS 
S 
oO 
| 


ee eae 
° 1.0 igs 80) 2.5 3.0 3.5 40 4.5 5.0 
CAPACITANCE IN MICROFARADS 


Fie. 8 


Unfortunately the machine was fitted with carbon brushes, 
the resistance of which varied with the current density, so that 
no check could be made of the above percentages by the method 
described. It was, however, possible to solve for the order of 
the harmonics which are indicated in the resonance curves 


= ap 
Oo 


DEFLECTIONS 
mM 
Ss) 


(oe) 


1.0 1,5 2.0 29 S19) es ASKS) 4.0 4575 75.0 55) 
CAPACITANCE IN MICROFARADS 


Fia. 9 


shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. In Fig. 8 a large unknown induc- 
tance is connected in the circuit to make possible the resonance 
of the lower harmonics (points I, J, K) with small capacitances. 
This was omitted in taking the curves of Fig. 9. 

In Fig. 8 points I and J, corresponding to 3.52 and 3.10 
microfarads, show the resonance of a harmonic without and 


PLATE XLIV. 
A. I.E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 10O—CuareGine Current-Point] —Examp.e 2 (EFFECTIVE VALUE, 
0.34 AMPERE) 


Fic. 11—Cuarcince Current—Point F—Exampte 2 (EFFECTIVE 
VaAuue, 0.97 AMPERES) 


[cuRTIS] 
Fig. 12—Cuarcing Current—Pointr H—Exampite 2 (HFFECTIVE 


VALug, 0.31 AmpEREs) 


te 


IRS) CURTIS: HARMONICS 1189 


with the known inductance L in series. A calculation shows 
this harmonic to be the fifth. Point K, corresponding to 
1.55 microfarads is on the same curve with point J (3.10 
microfarads) and therefore indicates the seventh harmonic. 
An oscillogram of the charging current at point I (0.342 
ampere) is shown in Fig. 10. In the above Cy was 1.0 micro- 
farad. 


TABLE III 
CALCULATED VALUES FOR EXAMPLE 1 
Points n Ym R Mean Pz .|PnbyOscillograph 
A-Al 5 7.9 5.2 
4.1 ea) 
B-B! 5 9.1 6.2 
Cc-Cl 7 9.7 5a2 1.9 16) 
D-D' a 10.8 6.2 
1 100.0 100.0 
TABLE IV 


CRITICAL VALUES FOR EXAMPLE 2 


{ 


Point e: Co D kD n I 
E 4.27 0.20 21.0 0.0035 11 1.260 
F 2 34 0.20 42.5 0.0069 11 0.971 
G 3.10 0.20 723: 0.0013 13 0.559 
H 1.65 0.20 8.0 0.0014 14 0.309 
I ( 3.52 1.00 81.0 0.01255 5 0.394 
2 3.10 1.00 1 6o0)} 0.1020 5 0.340 
K 1.55 1.00 16.5 0.0028 té 0.082 


Similar solutions for points #' and F, corresponding to 4.27 
and 2.34 microfarads, and points G and H, corresponding to 
3.10 and 1.65 microfarads, as shown in Fig. 9, give indications 
of the presence of the eleventh and thirteenth harmonics. An 
oscillogram of the charging current at point F (0.971 ampere) 
is shown in Fig. 11 and that for point H (0.309 ampere), in 
Fig. 12. In the above C was 0.2 microfarads. Fig. 12 is 
particularly interesting since it shows the beats due to the 
eleventh and thirteenth harmonics even when the thirteenth is 
in resonance, that is, the eleventh is not, in this case, negligible. 
This might also be surmised from the shape of the resonance 
curve near point H in Fig. 9. 

A tabulation of the readings at the critical points in the above 
example is given as Table IV. : 


1190 CURTIS: HARMONICS (Sept. 18 


A calibration curve of the hot-wire meter is given in Fig. 13 
so that further calculations may be made if desired. 


CONCLUSIONS 


It is practicable to test for the order and amplitude of the 
harmonics in any alternating wave of voltage by the use of 
inexpensive indicating meters, a known inductance and an 
adjustable condenser without knowing the resistance and in- 
ductance of the machine itself. 

A small change in the capacitance or inductance of any of 
the so-called wave form standards may result in a great change 


0.016 


S 
oO 
= 
nm 


CURRENT SQUARED 
8 
i=) 
@ 


Oo 
(=) 
Oo 
> 


o 
°o 
3 
o 
° 


20 40 60 80 100 
DEFLECTIONS 


Ha. 13 


in the current in the circuit, making such devices unreliable. 
The resistance of any circuit may change with the frequency 

of the harmonics present and this fact may introduce an error 

in making measurements with any of the so-called standards. 


REFERENCES 


1. Form Factor and Its Significance, by F. Bedell, Trans. A. I. E. E., 
Vol. XXXIV, 1915, pp. 1135-1142. 

2. Distortion Factors, by F. Bedell, Trans, A. I. E. E., Vol. XXXIV, 
1915, Pp. 1143-1157, and “An Analytical and Graphical Solution For 
Non-Sinusoidal Alternating Currents, by F. M. Mizushi, Trans. A. I. B. E., 
Vol. XXXIV, 1915, pp. 1159-1170. 

3. Characteristics of Admittance Type of Wave Form Standards, by F. 
Bedell, Trans. A. I. E. E., Vol. XXXV, 1916, pp. 1155-1170. 


4. A Proposed Wave Shape Standard, by C. M. Davis, T 
: pelvis 4 socpi 
E. E., Vol. XXXII, 1913, p. 775. REN 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1191 


DISCUSSION ON “(ORDER AND AMPLITUDE OF HARMONICS IN 
VOLTAGE WAVE FORMS WITH INDICATING INSTRUMENTS” 
(CuRTIS), Los ANGELES CAL., SEPTEMBER 18, 1919. 


N. S. Diamant: I will call attention to a few points 
which may be of interest from a theoretical and practical point 
of view. Considering the latter first, namely, the actual 
practical value of the method described by Mr. Curtis, I am 
afraid the method is not quite as useful, convenient and in- 
expensive as he seems to imply. When you consider the fact 
that you need known inductances, known resistances, known 
capacitances, some of which must be adjustable, it will easily be 
appreciated that the method is not so very simple or conven- 
lent; unless it should just happen that a given laboratory is 
fairly well equipped as to available inductances and capaci- 
tances, but does not happen to own an oscillograph. In any 
case, it would seem that one can safely venture that the practi- 
cal value of the method is rather limited. 

Now coming to the second consideration, namely, the theo- 
retical and academic value of the paper, it is to be greatly 
regretted that the author does not make any reference whatso- 
ever to the important contributions made on this subject years 
ago by men like Blondel, Pupin and a great many others. It 
is discouraging to find that the author gives references at the 
end of his paper, but really the references he gives have very 
little to do directly with the subject of the paper and refer 
more to the standardization of wave form; thus when Mr. 
Curtis states that “they have also defined certain terms such 
as. form factor, deviation factor, ete.’’ but “they have failed 
to show any method by which the order and amplitude of the 
various harmonics might be obtained by indicating meters,” 
I am afraid he is not quite doing justice to the men who did 
considerable work along this line before and after the perfection 
of the oscillograph. The above remarks are not intended in 
any way to detract from the value of the paper, which I think 
is considerable from the point of viéw of an instructor of an 
electrical laboratory. Before closing may I ask Mr. Curtis 
what per cent variation he has in mind when he assumes that 
the resistance of the circuit under consideration depends upon 
the frequency of the harmonic. In radio work this might be 
so, but in ordinary electrical work it is not probably very bad 
practise to assume the resistance as independent of the fre- 
quency except in case of very heavy bars. When it is con- 
sidered that in the method outlined by Mr. Curtis we are 
expected to use ordinary indicating meters and inductances and 
capacitances whose value, I suppose, will have to be determined 
by means of ordinary methods and further when it is con- 
sidered that if the result which indicates the order of the har- 
monic does not happen to be an integer, the author just assumes 
it to be the nearest odd number, I say that when all these ap- 
proximations are considered as permissible, the effect of fre- 


1192 HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


quency on resistance seems to be not a very important or ra- 
tional refinement to be taken care of. 

J. C. Albert: Mr. Curtis’ paper presents an apparently 
simple and practical method for determining the order of 
harmonics in generator voltage waves, but his failure to ob- 
tain the amplitudes of the wave in Example (2) leads to several 
questions. . 

The author states that the variable resistance of the carbon 
brushes introduced unavoidable errors in the calculations of 
amplitude. It would be interesting to know how much the 
carbon brushes affect the results, and whether Mr. Curtis 
has made any experiments to determine how great this error 
might be. I would also like to ask whether there have been 
other experiments made on_ generators not having carbon 
brushes but having an appreciable eleventh and thirteenth 
harmonic. 

In Example 1 in obtaining point A’, a resistance of 2.66 
ohms was added in series with the capacity and inductance. 
I assume this to be the resistance offered to the fifth harmonic, 
and it would be instructive to know how this is measured. 

In deriving equations (20) and (21) the statement is made 
that, ‘Usually all terms except those containing constants of 
the fundamental and the nth harmonic -are negligible,’ and 
concludes by stating that, “If the other terms are appreciable, 
an approximate solution may be made by equations (20) and 
(21) for all the harmonics and then corrected by using equations 
(18) and (19).” 

As shown in the oscillogram Fig. 12, in which the thirteenth 
harmonic is in resonance, the eleventh has considerable effect. 
Now in the derivation of formulas (16) and (17) the resistance 
component of impedance is assumed negligible in all terms 
except the mth which is in resonance, and, therefore, has only 
resistance and no reactance. 

It seems from Fig. 12 that in dealing with two successive 
harmonics of high order, as the eleventh and thirteenth, that 
even if resonance of the thirteenth is obtained the effect of 
resistance on the eleventh might be large compared to the 
effect of reactance on the same, and should-enter into the cal- 
culation after the first approximation is obtained by equations 
(20) and (21) or, in other words, the impedance instead of the 
reactance only should form the denominator of the (n—1)th 
term of the series in formulas (18) and (19). 

For example, the point marked ‘“‘E”’ in Table IV for critical 
values, the author shows result of the eleventh harmonic ob- 
tained with the capacity of 4.47 microfarads. To. balance 
this capacity, assuming the eleventh harmonic on a 60-cycle 
circuit, an inductance of approximately 0.013 henrys would 
be required. These values of capacitance and inductance com- 
bined show a reactance to the thirteenth harmonic of only a 
little over eight ohms. While the paper does not state the 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1193 


resistance used in obtaining this point, we find that the resis- 
tance in Example (1), point A, was 7.9 ohms, so that the 
reactance might be little greater than the resistance for this 
particular case. 

_Another point which might introduce error in the calcula- 
tions, when two successive harmonics of high order are present, 
is that the hot-wire ammeter does not necessarily indicate 
that the nth harmonic is in resonance, but indicates that the 
impedance to the complex wave is a minimum near the point 
of resonance of the nth harmonic, or, as shown by the F. M. 
Mizushi (authors reference No. 2) that 

w= /o2+SLC 

where @ is the integral distortion factor 

and 6 is the differential distortion factor 

w—2afmn near point of resonance of nth harmonic then 
equation (4) would become. 


oO 


BET. oe 5 2 fai", 


This solution for the unknown reactance of the generator 
in terms of C, involves two unknown quantities, the integral 
and differential distortion factors. 

_ The author states in his conclusion that, ‘“‘A small change 
in the capacitance or inductance of any of the so-called wave 
form standards may result in a great change in the current in 
the circuit, making such devices unreliable.” Is not the 
same true of his method? Will not the amplitude for the 
different harmonics vary with the variation of the amount of 
inductance and capacitance used to obtain their resonance? 

Mr. Price: From what little time I have had in reading 
over this paper here I don’t think the method would be very 
good for anything that was not recurring. That is, for in- 
stance, where you take the oscillogram of a switch action, or 
short-circuit conditions; or something of like nature, you 
couldn’t get conditions like that because you couldn’t adjust 
your condensers or inductances rapidly enough to get that 
condition. You would have to have a recurring condition. 

I would like to ask the author how difficult it is to obtain 
resonance with his method. How much time it takes. 
Whether this method could be adapted to taking curves on 
high-voltage circuits and the possible effect of the current 
’ potential transformer on the results obtained. tif 3 

D. I. Cone: Perhaps the first proposal along this line 
was that given by Dr. Pupin in the 1894 TRANSACTIONS em- 
ploying a somewhat similar method to the one presented in 
this paper. He employed an inductance and a variable con- 
denser to determine by resonance the frequencies present in 
the voltage drop across a resistance. He placed this resistance 
either in series to measure current waves or in shunt, to measure 


1194 HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


potential waves. He used an electrostatic voltmeter to de- 
termine the resonance points by indicating the settings of 
capacitance to give maxima of voltage across the condenser. 

The California Joint Committee on Inductive Interference 
made extensive use of a so-called ‘‘resonant shunt’’ consisting 
of a large inductance in series with a variable condenser and a 
telephone receiver. Each harmonic was resonated in turn by 
setting the capacitance for maximum current of the particular 
frequency in the telephone receiver. The amount of current 
for each harmonic was measured by comparing the sound in 
the telephone receiver to that from an auxiliary source of the 
same frequency. Knowing the impedances in the circuit, or 
arranging so that unknown ones were of negligible effect, fairly 
accurate determinations of frequency and size of harmonics 
could be made. Considerable apparatus was required for that 
work and an analysis of harmonics, ranging from the third 
harmonic up to perhaps the nineteenth, could be run through 
in about twenty minutes. 

That particular method does not take care of the fundamen- 
tal component at all, which could be obtained with the aid of 
an indicating meter. 

The method given by Mr. Curtis makes use of relatively 
simple equipment and procedure for determining the more 
prominent harmonics. However, in the wave analysis of in- 
ductive interference work, harmonics of the order of one-half 
per cent may be important to determine. 

The simplicity of the equipment and the method of solution 
which he employs for amplitude and frequency are the distinct 
contributions made by his method. He presents it with special 
reference to the open-circuit voltage of generators. However, 
1t can be applied to the determination of the harmonics of any 
System and the limitation which he states on page 1183, of his 
Paper, regarding the presence of a voltmeter or other devices, 
when the readings are taken, does not appear to be necessary; 
especially if such devices are normally in the circuit. 

Now, referring to his introductory paragraph. The last 
sentence of his first paragraph reads: ‘“‘Each of the proposed 
standards is also open to the objection that the result obtained 
by its use is entirely dependent upon the order of the harmonics 
in question and upon the size of the reactances used.” 

In the telephone interference factor meter which was de- 
scribed in the paper beginning page 261 of this volume, by Mr. 
Osborne, that objection is met in that the impedances within 
the meter are fairly large and the distinct effort is to sum up 
all the frequencies in the circuit as they normally exist; so that 
the objections here stated do not apply to that particular wave 
factor meter. It is recognized that such a meter has limita- 
tions. It serves but one definite purpose, and that is par- 
ticularly true of the telephone interference factor meter. 

The last sentence on the first page of the paper reads: “It 


- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1195 


is, however, only this resonant condition for the higher harmon- 
ics that can cause disturbances which can be charged to genera- 
tor wave form.”’ 

I assume that in making that statement the question of 
possible damage to the power circuit itself was in the author’s 
mind. Of course when we consider the question of harmonics 
in reference to interference to the communication circuits, 
the detrimental effect is felt whether a particular harmonic is 
in resonance or not. Of course, the detrimental effect is ag- 
gravated for harmonics in resonance. 

_Mr. Curtis points out that it is desirable to resonate the 
circuit for a given harmonic in order to develop what he calls its 
“worst behavior.” However, he employs, and quite ap- 
propriately, a protective resistance to prevent the current in 
the meter becoming excessive. Hence it is not clear that the 
setup he employs actually develops the worst condition, al- 
though by studying the effect of the variation of the effective 
resistance in this circuit upon the behavior of the harmonic, 
one might get an idea of what its “‘worst behavior’ would be. 

H. A. Barre: It seems to me that there is in this paper 
a method of attack on two or three problemsI have in mind. 
One problem is the finding of the cause of flash-over on the 
insulators of the Big Creek line. These flash-overs occur 
probably twelve or fifteen times a year. The current consists 
simply of the arcing over of the insulators and a heavy flow 
to ground. The effect on the system is not great and I do not 
think a single case of injury to apparatus has occurred. We 
seem to be unable to associate these flash-overs with any set of 
conditions. The line will be operating smoothly when ap- 
parently out of a clear sky will come a flash over and current 
flow to ground. 

The attendants at the stations realize that this is the only 
trouble to be expected on the Big Creek lines, so when trouble 
arises they assume a flash-over and apply the cure. 

This flash-over cure consists in lowering the voltage to a 
point, determined by experience. The are goes out and im- 
mediately normal voltage is resumed, taking care not to over 
run. An automatic means of doing this work has been devised 
but has not proved as successful as the manual method. At 
the receiving station the operator also assumes a flash-over. 
In order to keep from boosting the voltage with the condensers, 
he opens the field thereby assisting the voltage drop. When 
voltage at receiving station becomes normal again, he assumes 
trouble is over, and resumes normal operation. In practically 
all cases he is right. 

There is one interesting fact in connection with these flash- 
overs and that is their occurrence in a limited section | of 
the line, the two middle quarters of the line,—very seldom 
close to the ends. : : 

If this method of calculation can be applied to the investiga- 
_ tion of this phenomena it will be of great assistance to us. 


1196 HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


This method might also throw some light on the double 
frequency effect found at San Fernando. The-circumstances 
were as follows: Test was being made on 36 miles of line, 
built for 15,000 volts and energized through a bank of star-star 
transformers with about 4000—25,000 volts in the legs of the 
wire. It was energized through a separate delta-delta trans- 
former for the purpose of isolating the system. On closing 
the switch nothing apparently happened at first. After an 
appreciable time a disturbance occurred in the system, lasted 
several seconds, then died out. Once in a long while it re- 
curred. The oscillograph showed that their transient current. 
or whatever it was, was in the form of a flow through the 
ground connection which, after passing the common point 
of the star of the transformers, divided into three currents and 
fed through the line. 

The frequency of this current was measured at about 100 
cycles, twice the fundamental frequency. The voltage be- 
tween the cross and the legs of the wire increased to three or 
four times normal without, of course the voltage between 
wires increasing. 

A practical application of this principle might show what is 
going on. 

Leslie F. Curtis: In answer to Mr. Diamant let me say 
that the known inductances may be wound, the known re- 
sistances constructed from nichrome wire, and the known 
capacitances arranged from telephone condensers in any 
electrical repair shop. 

It is true that the author was more concerned with the 
articles referring to standardization of wave form than to the 
work of Drs. Blondel and Pupin because he felt that the 
standards for wave form suggested within the last few years 
were faulty and that if the order and amplitude of the harmonic 
components of a wave are known, other standardization is 
unnecessary. The statement should have been made that 
“others have failed to show a simple and readily applicable 
method by which the order and amplitude of the various 
harmonics might be obtained with ordinary indicating meters.” 

The variations of the resistance with frequency for the 
machine tested. are noted in Table III of the paper. It is 
there found that the resistance to the seventh harmonic, that 
1s, seven times the fundamental frequency, or approximately 
400 cycles per second, increases from 6.2 ohms to 10.8 ohms. 
I believe that in an investigation of a circuit of this sort that 
such a variation of resistance must be taken into account. 

The values of the capacitance and inductance used were 
measured by ordinary indicating instruments from a source | 
of alternating e.m.f. at 60 cycles, which was so arranged as 
to eliminate most of the harmonics,—in other words, a sine 
wave of e. m. f. was employed for a simple voltmeter, ammeter 
and wattmeter measurement. 


Mr. Albert asks concerning the calculations forgtheSampli- 


- 1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1197 


tude in example (2). Even with the variable resistance of 
the carbon brushes in the circuit, it would have been possible 
to make calculations for the amplitude if several more readings 
had been taken—readings with small successive additions of 
resistance to the circuit. By the use of cross curves and fur- 
ther calculations the amplitude might have been obtained. 
I omitted such calculations because of their complexity. 

Mr. Albert also refers to the effect of the 13th and 11th 
harmonics in producing an error in the measurement for 
amplitude. I believe that the paper shows that the order of 
the harmonic is obtained without an appreciable error, even 
when the harmonics are of nearly the same order, that is, as 
he stated, the mth and the (M+1)th term. The effect of 
the resistance in the circuit may then be introduced in the 
proper equation; though I am not certain that it is justified. 
The added known resistance is a high resistance wire of such 
a cross section as_to be independent of frequency. Therefore, 
the 2.66 ohms which Mr. Albert mentions holds for all fre- 
quencies. 

Mr. Albert also mentions the equations presented by Mr. 
Mizushi showing that the impedance of thé circuit is a minimum 


at some other frequency than ‘a The circuit used, 
novLC 

however, is different. The calculation for the maximum cur- 

rent in the meter used in this paper shows that such maxi- 

mum occurs at a point very close to the assumed resonance 

point. The current in the complete circuit is not necessarily 

maximum at the same instant. 

Mr. Albert speaks of the variation of amplitude of the har- 
monics in the circuit with the amount of inductance and 
capacitance introduced. It is assumed by the author that 
the generated or initial value of the harmonics in e. m. f. 
remain constant. The magnitude of the harmonics in the 
current, of course, depend upon the inductance and capacitance. 

Mr. Price asks concerning the time required to make a test 
of this sort. With the ordinary apparatus at hand in most 
testing departments, the variable or adjustable condenser is 
the only piece of apparatus which would offer any difficulty. 
One may be made from an extra good grade of telephone 
condensers and when provided with the proper switches for 
adjustment, a complete test might be made in possibly an 
hour. The measurements of inductance and resistance can 
be made by ordinary indicating instruments, they do not offer 
any particular difficulty. 

Mr. Cone notes that the presence of the voltmeter should 
offer no difficulty. I should explain that the voltmeter indi- 
cated in the diagram of connections was used simply to indicate 
the constancy of voltage on open circuit. The voltmeter 
might be connected at all times and would offer no difficulty 


1198 HARMONICS [Sept. 18 


if the readings of the meter were taken only when the resonant 
circuits were open. 

At the time my manuscript was prepared the telephone 
interference factor had not been suggested. Therefore, I 
did not intend to include a circuit giving the telephone inter- 
ference factor among the objectionable standards. 

Mr. Cone also notes that I assumed that damage might 
result, or rather that interference might result only from res- 
onant condition of the harmonics. I intended to indicate that 
_ such interference would be a maximum during periods of res- 

onance. 

I believe I am unable to answer Mr. Barre’s question con- 
cerning the trouble—the double frequency effect—at San 
Fernando. I hope some use may be made of the circuit in 
solving his problem. 


Se 


Presented at the Pacific Coast Convention of 
the Américan Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Los Angeles, Cal., September 18-20, Toro. 


Copyright 1919. By A.I. E. E. 


THEORY OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO FAILURES 
OF SUSPENSION INSULATORS 


BY L. M. KLAUBER 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

Nothwithstanding the recent improvements in porcelain insu- 
lators, failures are sufficiently common so that allowance must 
be made for them. A certain factor of safety is required, in the 
shape of extra insulation, to provide for the electrical unreliability 
of the insulators themselves aside from conditions of abnormal 
operating stresses. 

There are a wide variety of operating conditions which affect 
the amount of over-insulation required, and after having found 
the minimum number of insulators per string required for any 
given operating conditions the author points out a method of 
determining the amount of’ extra insulation desirable from an 
insurance standpoint according to the law of probabilities. 
Equations are developed from which the probability of failure 
for any given case or the ratio between such probabilities for 
any pair of cases may be determined directly. A numerical 
example is also given which shows the development of the 
theory of minimum annual cost for combined mechanical and 
electrical failures. 


T THE present time there exists a diversity of views as to 

the primary cause of failure of suspension insulators of 

the disk type. Extensive investigations are being carried 
forward to determine the causes of failure in order that such 
causes may if possible be eliminated in manufacture. Unfor- 
tunately, however, while recent types have shown a notable 
improvement over those produced but a few years ago, failure 
is still sufficiently common to require allowance therefor in all 
specifications covering new lines. That is, it is not advisable 
in any construction to limit the number of insulators in a string 


to a quantity just sufficient to withstand the line pressure 


under service conditions, and thus cause failure if one member 


of the string fails. On the contrary, under present conditions, 


it is good practise to allow a certain proportion of extra insu- 
lators, a factor of safety required by the electrical unreliability 
of the insulators themselves, rather than by the necessities of 


~ abnormal operating stresses. 


1199 


1200 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS (Sept. 18 


Obviously, the degree of over-insulation which should be 
indulged in depends on a variety of factors which cannot be 
directly expressed in mathematical terms. It is necessary to 
consider the first cost of the extra insulation and the fixed 
charges on such cost; also the counter-balancing expense 
involved in shut-downs, both prearranged and unforeseen. 
The requirements of continuity of service, and the availability 
of duplicate lines and stand-by power sources, have an im- 
portant bearing on design. Also there is the factor of climatic 
conditions, the occurrence of lightning, temperature ranges, 
both daily and seasonal, humidity, the frequency of cleansing 
rains, the presence of salt fogs, wind-carried dust or the fumes 
of industrial plants. The nature of the line supports must be 
considered; we must know if the towers are of steel or wood, 
and if of wood, whether the support ends of the strings are 
electrically connected together. The transformer connections, 
whether with grounded or isolated neutral, must be noted. 
Mechanical stress is of importance. These, and many other 
conditions all affect greatly the degree of over-insulation 
necessary or advisable, and show why in some cases a 66-ky. 
line requires only three units per string, while under other 
conditions seven may be insufficient. 

But having determined the minimum number of units per 
string required for a given voltage and set of operating condi- 
tions, it becomes interesting to investigate the value of addi- 
tional units, purely from an insurance standpoint; and this 
investigation may be best performed by calculations of the 
chances of failure under the laws of probability. The physical 
condition under which the line operates will of course affect the 
rate of failure, but these conditions may be grouped and allowed 
for in the depreciation rate assumed. 

In order to permit employment of the simpler laws of prob- 
ability, it is necessary to assume that. the successive failure of 
units in any string does not increase the liability to individual 
failure of the remaining members of that string until a minimum 
is reached which permits complete. breakdown. At first 
glance this appears a most incorrect assumption, since, after 
the failure of one unit it is evident that there is an increased 
electrical strain upon the balance. Nevertheless, it is the 
belief of many investigators that the particular type of elec- 
trical failure which is today one of the great difficulties of 
transmission line operation, is in small degree hastened by 


_ 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1201 


increased electrical duty. In fact this opinion seems borne out 
by the relative frequency of occurrence of multiple failures 
which is usually found to be in the ratio expected under the 
laws of probability governing independent events. Further- 
more, it has been the experience of some companies that insula- 
tor failures in lines out of service or in stocks held in the store- 
room, have been in the same proportion as those experienced by 
units of the same lot in active use. So that while in some 
cases successive failures of members of the same string may 
not be considered independent events, in general we will not 
go far wrong in so considering them. 

In consideration of the general case of insulator strings, 
consisting of any number of identical units, we may utilize the 
general expression of the probability of independent events 
happening or not happening: 


Be phe pg 


n (n — 1) n—2 772 n—N yn 
oo tag.) CTA ieee OF So hemi! Mae @ ©) 


in which p is the probability of an event happening out of a 
single trial, g = 1— pis the probability that it will not happen 
and n is the number of trials under consideration. In this 
expression the first term is the probability that the event will 
happen n times consecutively or every trial, the second that it 
will happen n — 1 times out of n, the third n — 2 times out of n, 
etc. The probability of an event happening exactly r times 
out of n will be represented by the (n — r + 1)th term in the 
above equation, or 


n! 
= ‘ Y qn-r 2 
ie iit tle (2) 


and the probability of an event happening at least r times out 
of n trials is the summation of the terms up to and including 
the (n — r + 1) th term. 


Thus: P= pin. pq = a BGT Ui pees tegen 


1 ayaa ty 
sors =ar ake cee (3) 


Translating these equations to terms of suspension insulator 
failures, we may let n represent the number of units per string. 


1202 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


Likewise assume that if r units fail, a line failure will result, but 
that if less than r units fail the remaining insulation will 
be sufficient to “hold” the line and failure will not result. 
Then if p= the probability of individual insulator failure 
(electrical) based on experimental data or experience with 
insulator depreciation, equation (3) gives directly the proba- 
bility of line failure per string of insulators installed and the 
total probability of line failure will be found by multiplying the 
chances per string (P,) by the number of strings (N) in the 
line or 

Py= N Pz (4) 
From equations (3) and (4) we may determine directly the 
probability of failure for any given case, or the ratio L be- 
tween such probabilities for any pair of cases. 

It will be noted that where p is small compared with q, as 
with depreciations of the order under consideration, only the 
(n — r + 1) th term is of importance, the preceding terms being 
of such small value comparatively that to consider them is to 
assume an accuracy not warranted by the original data. We 
have, therefore, as a simplified equation of the chances of 
electrical line failure: 


poe BH 


pire Phar it 22 
Numerical examples are more easily solved, using this equa- 
tion in the equivalent form: 


= n! CLE Dane 
ONT a= Op a 
as this will usually involve powers of integers rather than 
fractions. ; 

The application of formula (6) to specific cases will often 
give interesting results. Fig. 1 indicates the range of example . 
values of P, plotted for three sets of values of n—r and p 
Because of the minute values of P, at the higher values of n 
the curves are plotted in terms of log 1/P,. Naturally where 

nN 
n—T 
of little practical interest. 

Fig. 2 is a diagram for the solution of the equation 


the safety factor 


is large 1/P, attains values which are 


y= Pie cih ys r qn—r 
mT NC EEE 


Se 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1203 


From this diagram values of the probability of failure per 
string can be quickly determined, with reasonable exactitude. 
The solution is based on a straight line diagram deduced from 
this equation in the form: 


log 1/Pr= n [2 — log (100 — s) ] 
100— s n! 3 
Ae log s — log | ri(™m—r)! | 


where s = 100 p or the depreciation in per cent. 
Of equal interest with the probability of failure in any 


12 


oe 
Ye 

[ r 
YA. 4 
0 1 2 


3 4 5 6 7 8. 


{5 


Fig. 1—Propasinity or ELecTRICAL FAILURE PER INSULATOR STRING— 
EXAMPLE VALUES OF Pr 


specific case is the determination of the ratio L between the 
probabilities of failure in related cases and in particular the | 
decrease in probability of failure (or insurance) derived from © 
the addition of extra insulators. In determining the ratio — 
between probabilities it will be sufficiently accurate to employ — 


_ the approximate formula (5) and noting that in any assumed 


case having to do with a specific line, the quantity n — r, that 
is, the number of insulators at which failure will occur is con- 
stant, it may be readily shown that 


Meg Ly Cy. Dynes ie EL) 
ee eS 2) . (rf. + 1) 


dhe prin (7) 


KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


1204 


O98) Sas eee ee eS eae ee ee eee eee ¥ ¥ 
“ 


j(4 — UW) js 
UVa UAd ONINLG UAd AUATIVY JO ALITIavVaOUg = —ub.d ee = Yq dO NOWATOY IVOIHAVAH AOA WVAONVIG—Z “DIY 
i 


00'00T SI 28 ¥S92 8 601 


cL UA || Da Gai 


[ Fes 


! 
/ eeecligEnET 


a a2 Babee 
Poh ah et yee 
Hj POE 
ie 1 | ae ELS 
[ | a 
AHH KEELE 
Z | Ae SeeGeeGee8 
a } big: A ek Poses ee 
SISTER Ls SREB DOS 
ace. EHHEEEE EEE 

IN i - " ce = d : 
HEISE ls Ee ‘lg mene BE 
CARS SSO OEBEGEEERC fbi. 

Nae My 

MERREER SHEL... RENSAEEE 
SS PATRICK ~TAINNNAD Esa 
| ia SSA RATS BINS ET 
/ | | 6 | ae y al : \ fel u Jo sone ls BNNNNS Oe 
ie BACAES EIGER 7D 3: PRS 
an + | ae iw HERE RESSAREH 
51) eal ila ine a he EEE 
qe CCIE EERESSAN 
ey Ct) a ee ae BERMMREMBEiac 


QO) hs (Oneness to Gee eB a en Ol 0% 1. %2 6" steGe oe 2s aeomsul Ol 6 
4 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1205 


in which the subscripts 1 and 2 indicate the two conditions 
assumed as to number of units per string. 

It is evident that in most practical cases n, — m2 = 1 or 2 since 
usually it will be desired to determine the reduction in proba- 
bility of failure secured by increasing a string by one or two 
insulators. In Table I will be found values of 


nN, ! 

Ti !(m—7,)! 

foe i! (m 1) 
Hop 

T2!(M2— 72)! 


for 2;— %.= 1 and varying values of n — r, and since when 
Ni— = 1, L= C,p, any problem having to do with the 
insurance derived by the addition of a single unit may be 
determined directly from the table. 


TABLE I—VALUES OF COEFFICIENT Cr for m1 — n2 = 1 (1 insulator added to 
string) 


n—r 

Number at 

which break- n2 = Number of insulators in string before addition of one unit 

down occurs 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

1 2 pes et Rees ey ode bole | Lele eh te ead 
2 he 2) 2 1.67 U5 | 1.4 Ios | 1.29 2541 1.22 
3 a 4 2.8 2 yor 176 1.5 ae le 
4 i 5 3 Deore 1.8 E67, | a.357 
5 6 3.0 AO teal en | 2 1.83 
6 & 7 4 3 2.5 2.2 
is , 8 4.5 3.33 | 2.75 
8 9 15) 3.67 
9 . 10 5,5 
10 eee Bl 


Figure 3 shows some example curves plotted from the use of 
Table I. 

In addition to these conclusions as to the insurance derived 
by adding units to strings of insulators in transmission lines, it 
may be noted with reference to dead-ends in higher voltage 
distribution lines, that where a single unit is adequate to normal 
service, but is subject to failure at the rates to be expected 
amongst suspension units, that is, of an order of magnitude of 
from one-quarter of one per cent to 4 per cent per annum, the 
single unit is no longer to be considered as economically 
sufficient; for the line reliability will then be only the relatively 


1206 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


low reliability of the individual units multiplied by the number 
of units. With two units the probability of failure is greatly 
reduced and in a general way it may be said that with lines of 
sufficient voltage so that line failures almost invariably follow 
the failure of the principal insulating member at any point of 
support (that is in lines of 10 kv. and up where subsidiary 
insulators in the form of wood pins, cross-arms or poles will 
not withstand normal line voltage) it is never economical to 
use single suspension units as dead-ends. Even insulators of 
weaker design (electrically) are in such cases to be preferred 
in pairs to a single unit, provided that one unit of the weaker 


1 if J 
70. A 4 

a 60 i aie 
>= 
Sz —— | | i 
(7p YN oe 
ae : 
SF n-r-2 p: Sees SS 
=S 
oz 40 = 
eS n-r-9- pes -—+-—J 
zB} aie 
Fan n-r=8 AN 
ee | n-r-2 pa nr=7 ps \ 
Zi = n-r=6 a\ 
ag m-r=] p= 
az BS TW\\ 
2G 20 
ui 2A | 
aad = iu =i 

> 
Wo -ps at \ 
a 19 n-r-2 px eae - a see a — 
2B nr=3 pgs " 4 

n-r: paz ~. ee aly 
. <3 n-r=5 pee 


1 2 3 4 5 6 ? 8 9 10 
no=NUMBER OF INSULATORS IN STRING BEFORE ADDING ONE 


Fic. 3—Insurance Acarnst ELecrricaL FarLbuRE BY ADDING ONE IN- 
SULATOR TO STRING—EHXAMPLE VALUES OF L 


pair will withstand normal operating stresses in case of failure 
of the other. For instance, if the rates of depreciation are 4 
per cent for the small units and 1 per cent for the large, the 
ratio of line failures in the two cases will be 614 to 1 against the 
single large unit. 

These considerations likewise show why an insulator string 
composed of a number of virtually independent units is gener- 
ally to be preferred to any form of support consisting of a 
single unit or group of interdependent units. 

It may be said that it is difficult to determine n — r or the: 
number of insulators which is one less than will “hold” the ~ 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1207 


line upon which the use of this formula rests. The ordinary 
10-in. suspension insulator is usually rated as having a dry 
flash-over value of 90 kv. and a wet value of 70 kv.; in pairs 
the corresponding values are respectively 160 kv. and 110 kv. 
Yet we know from experience that two of these insulators would 
not stand up on a 66-kv. line under the most favorable condi- 
tions for more than a short period. Line surges, weather condi- 
tions, etc., all reduce n — r, and it is important in choosing a 
value for n — r in these formulas that the quantity be under- 
stood to represent not the number of insulators at which 
break-down will occur instantly, but rather the number at 
which break down will occur under normal operating condi- 
tions within a short period subsequent to the failure of the 
(n— r + 1)th unit of a string. This break-down may always 
occur subsequent to surges which are to be periodically expected 
in any line and if these surges are sufficiently frequent to 
greatly outnumber the expected string failures, as they will be 
in almost every practical case, simultaneous failures will not 
be sufficiently frequent to render the formulas incorrect. The 
finding of numbers of shattered strings after a total failure is 
not generally an argument in favor of the occurrence of simul- 
taneous failures, but rather these shattered strings represent 
previous unexplained momentary failures. Furthermore, the 
- tendency of surges to produce simultaneous failures and thus 
reduce line outages, is to a certain extent balanced by the 
original assumption of successive unit failures being entirely 
independent events, which is not strictly true. In general, it 
may be said that owing to the difference between test and 
laboratory conditions, and further because of surges, which 
tend to give any line a true voltage as regards effects on insula- 
tors in excess of its rated voltage, we will not go far wrong in 
basing n — r on half the wet flash-over rating given by manu- 
facturers to their product. It may be noted from Table I that 
a variation of one in n — r does not greatly affect the value of 
L in most practical cases. 

As we increase the number of units and thus decrease the 
chances of electrical failure, we increase the chances of mechani- 
eal failure. Mechanical failures are of two general classes,those 
due to lack of strength or inherent defects in the insulator or its 
supports, and those due to external causes, such as the malicious 
use of firearms. Obviously, any mechanical failure means a 
line failure, particularly at dead-end points where mechanical 
failures of the first type are most likely to occur. 


1208 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


By mechanical failure is meant the complete breakage of a 
unit as a means of support. Mechanical failures of the several 
types which are the initiating causes of electrical break-down 
(as, for instance, those which follow cyclic temperature changes) 
but which do not in themselves cause the line to fall, must be 
considered the equivalent of electrical failures and must be 
allowed for in the choice of the value of p, (the probability of 
electrical failure per unit), since they affect line failures under 
the same laws. But for true mechanical failures the chance of 
failure per string is the chance per insulator times the number 
in the string, or 

Resspon Dali (8) 
or for the whole line 
Pym = Nn Dm (9) 

Since electrical and mechanical failures as above defined are 
independent and exclusive events, the probability of failure of 
both kinds is equal to the sum of the probabilities of failure of 
either kind, or 

Pw Ni, +N Bd 


t douse) aleataciael (10) 


This equation may be most easily investigated for the value 
of n which will give a minimum of annual failures for any set 
of values of p,,, p-.and r by plotting, particularly as short cuts 
have been given for determining values of Py;. But in general 
we are not as much interested in the value of » which in any 
case will result in a minimum number of failures. For many 
values of p, and p,, this will give impractical or impossible 
results. What we are interested in is the reduction of cost of 
service, including all elements of fixed charges, maintenance 
and depreciation. 

Formula (10) may be applied to a practical problem in the 
following manner: 

Assume a line emit: 1000 insulator strings. Two good 
insulators in a string will result in a line failure; three will hold 
the line. It is required to determine whether four or five insu- 
lators per string will result in the most economical installation. 

Let it be assumed that insulator units in the line as con- 
structed will cost $3.00 each. The fifth unit is also estimated 


*The subscripts m and e are used hereafter to distinguish between 
mechanical and electrical failures. 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1209 


to cost $3.00, no additional cross-arm length or tower height 
being required for clearance owing to the extra 51% in. of 
length of string. Fixed charges are taken at 12 per cent, this 
figure including functional depreciation of insulators, but being 
exclusive of physical depreciation, which is taken care of under 
maintenance. The cost of replacing an insulator unit which 
has failed electrically, but which has not resulted in a line 
failure, is estimated at $5.00, it being assumed that the line is 
gone over with suitable testing apparatus annually, all defec- 
tive units being replaced at that time. The cost of field testing 
insulators is taken at 10c. each. The cost of an unexpected line 
failure, including location of the failure, replacement of the 
broken units, loss of business and stand-by plant operation, is 
taken at $150.00. Naturally, this amount is subject to wide 
variation, being made up of a number of items, some of which, 
like the value of continuity of service from a public policy 
standpoint, cannot be expressed directly in terms of money. 
In fact it is conceivable that in some cases the cost will be less, 
but in many cases greatly in excess of the above figure, particu- 
larly where service is dependent on a single line and the cost of 
stand-by energy (if available at all) is considerably in excess of 
the cost of energy secured over the transmission line. Assume 
an electrical failure of four per cent per annum, and a mechani- 
cal failure (as above defined) of one-fortieth of 1 per cent as an 
average for units both in suspension and in strain at dead-ends. 
We now have the following tabulation of annual costs: 


Quantity Amount 

Four Five Unit cost Four Five 

units Units units units 
Pind) CHATRLES sieeve bie > 055 4000 5000 12% of 3.00 | $1,440.00 | $1,800.00 
Total electrical failures (4%)..| 160 200 5.00 800.00 1,000.00 
Electrical line failures (PNe)... 8.85 0.59 150.00 1,327.50 88.50 
Mechanical line failures (PNm). i 2525 150.00 150.00 187.50 
Insulator testing, /......0.7.. 4000 5000 0.10 400.00 500.00 
Total.anmtial.cOsb.s.i.01s anc. a $4,117.50 | $3,576.00 


Tt will be noted that all of the above items of cost, with the 
exception of those due to electrical line failures, vary directly 
with the number of units in use, and may therefore be grouped. 
In the above schedule these items total 23.25 per cent of the 
first cost of the units installed, and the same result would have 


1210 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


been secured by taking annual charges at that figure instead of 
12 per cent. Summing up the terms of this nature, we have. 


! 
y= F,ANn+ BN pe ge” (11) 


ri(m—r) 
in which y is the total annual cost, F, is the per cent covering 
fixed charges and items of maintenance varying directly with 
the number of units installed and determined as illustrated in 
the table above, A is the first cost per unit installed and B the 
cost per unexpected failure. Differentiating with respect to n 
and equating to 0 for a minimum we have: 


ETE Car) Roeet ees 
1 1 1 
je-ai(t+5 ee + yy) 
+ loge de |- 0 (12) 


This equation is too involved to, be used conveniently in 
solving for n and it is more practical to determine the value of 
. n which gives a minimum total cost in any case by using Fig. 2 
in connection with equation (11) and solving by plotting or 
tabulation. For instance, in the example above discussed we 
have: 


. KaotNnt EN Pe 

3 ~ $2,092.50 | $16,595.00 
A 2,790.00 | — 1,327.50 
5 3,487 .50 88.50 
6 4,185.00 5.30 


A casual inspection shows that n= 5 gives a minimum 
annual cost in this case. 

In the utilization of the formulas proposed, it is essential to 
differentiate between electrical depreciation failures and line 
condition failures. The first affects the selection of p., the 
second of m—r. The first is usually although not invariably 
characterized by failure by puncture, the latter by failure by 
flash-over. In some districts, notably along the California 


1919] KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS 1211 


coast, climatic and atmospheric conditions are such that any 
line, regardless of the degree of over-insulation used will 
ultimately fail by flash-over, if not given continued attention. 
The gradual accumulation of salt and dust, particularly on the 
under side of the units, beyond the reach of the infrequent 
winter rains, will eventually result in flash-over. In other 
words, as time goes on, if the insulators are not artificially 
cleaned, r becomes zero and line failures result in great numbers 
without the occurrence of a single failure of the other type. 

It is therefore necessary in considering a problem of this type 
to note the value which n — r will reach before natural causes, 
such as a cleansing rain, or some artificial means is used to 
reduce this quantity to its original value. 

On the other hand it should be emphasized that in this dis- 
cussion the probability p, of electrical failure is intended to 
cover those types of failures variously attributed by insulator 
specialists to porous porcelain, to expansion difficulties induced 
by cyclic temperature changes or to combinations of the two. 
In any lot of insulators under a specified set of conditions a 
certain proportion will become defective, due to these or similar 
causes, and the balance will remain intact. There is at any 
given time a reasonably sharp line between the good and the 
bad; that is to say, between those that will fail when moisture 
and line conditions are favorable to failure and those that will 
not. In general, insulators deteriorated in this manner under 
no circumstances will return to their original quality, although 
failure may not be instantaneous, and although testing by the 
several common methods (high-frequency, high-potential and 
megger) may indicate a variety of degrees of deterioration. 
But under conditions of incipient failure of the surface leakage 
type all the individual units will be found uniformly deterio- 
rated (within fairly narrow limits), and in this type of deteriora- 
tion of condition there is no sharp line between a “‘good”’ and a 
“bad” unit. Furthermore these units may at any time prior to 
damage by a power arc be returned to their original quality by 
cleaning. It is evident at once that while failures of the punc- 
ture type may be and probably are independent events, failures 
of the surface leakage type can under no circumstances be so 
considered. Under flash-over conditions individual units do 
not act independently. 

Although nearly every insulator failure is finally a flash-over 
there is little practical difficulty in differentiating between 
the two types of failure. The flash-over due to deteriorated 


1212 KLAUBER: SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


line conditions shows a heavy foreign deposit on the insulator 
surface. In almost every case the bottom member of the string 
will be shattered; often the top member also, but rarely an 
intermediate member. Unbroken units will before cleaning 
give a zero reading with a megger and a very low flash-over 
with a high potential test. Subsequent to cleaning, however, 
unless badly burned by the power arc, they will give as high a 
megger and flash-over test as when new. Lines subject to 
difficulties of this kind cannot be tested with a megger in the 
field even on a clear, dry day, unless each unit is wiped off 
before test. 

In the other type of failure we have the fundamental condi- 
tion that r units have failed by material depreciation (usually 
puncture) and the balance (n — r) being unable to hold the line 
have subsequently flashed-over. The characteristic differen- 
tiating this class of failure from the other is the number of 
punctured units which occur at random throughout the string. 
Even if subsequently shattered by the power arc they may 
usually be readily distinguished from units shattered by the 
other type of failure. 

In testing and renewing insulators on the line it is desirable 
that results be recorded in detail. The distribution of failures 
between strings, their location in different sections of the same 
line and the relative frequency of failure of units.in correspond- 
ing positions in the string, all will be of interest in deducing the 
causes of failure. It is desirable to know whether bottom, top 
or intermediate units fail most frequently, and in what ratio; 
whether units in greater tension at dead-ends fail more fre- 
quently than those in suspension; whether units with bolts 
exposed to the direct rays of the sun fail more frequently than 
those on the same tower but with bolts toward the north and 
consequently protected from the sun by the porcelain shells. 
It is of interest to note whether failures follow hot spells, 
whether they are decreased by cleansing rains and other effects 
of the weather. If lines operating under similar conditions 
contain units differing in manufacture, it is of course important 
to determine separately the percentage of failures for each type. 
Also by noting the relative frequency of single and multiple 
failures, it is possible to determine whether failures follow the 
laws of probability for purely independent events, as above 
outlined, or whether successive unit failures are to a certain 
extent dependent events. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1213 


DISCUSSION ON “THEORY OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO 
FAILURES OF SUSPENSION INSULATORS” (KLAUBER), Los 
ANGELES, CAL., SEPTEMBER 18, 1919. 

W. D. A. Peaslee: It would bea very serious obstruction 
to the progress of insulator development if the viewpoint 
expressed by the author were to be adopted in general by 
the operating engineers charged with the care of high-voltage 
transmission lines. 

In the first place, the author seems to take the mental 
attitude that the development of the high-tension insulator 
has reached its ultimate and that more admittedly poor in- 
sulator units are to be the solution as against fewer units of a 
better type with wider margins of safety in the individual unit. 

His main contention seems to.be expressed in the sentence, 
“Tt is not advisable in any construction to limit the number 
of insulators in a string to a quantity just sufficient to with- 
stand line pressure under service conditions, and thus cause 
failure if one member of the string fails.’ 

This statement pre-supposes the acceptance of the statement 
’ that when a string is just sufficient from an engineering stand- 
point, the failure of one unit of the string will cause the failure 
-of the string. With a properly designed insulator, this is not 
the case. 

In almost all cases, except where excessive salt, dust andf ogs 
are encountered, the determining factor in selecting the num- 
- ber of units of a string is the voltage stress on the end ‘units. 
Too few engineers appreciate the actual numerical values of 
voltage strains on the end units and there is too little published 
data on the subject. In this connection, the writer will say 
that a paper is in preparation giving these distributions on 
strings up to ten units and under various conditions that it 
is hoped will be of interest to the engineering fraternity. 

The end unit of a string must be operated at a voltage stress > 
below that at which corona appears. I think all the men who 
have been studying this subject will agree on this point. If 
N is the number of units in the string to meet: this condition, 
a string of N-1 units, caused by the failure of one unit will, 
it is true, probably operate with some slight corona on the end 
unit of the N-1 string; but with a properly designed unit, this 
will not be the case, and even under slight corona the unit, will 
operate for an indefinite time if properly designed and made. 

It would seem better to work towards the development of 
such a unit than to accept the present thin porcelain insulator 
as the ultimate and pay for extra unit insurance that is only a 
time function anyway. 

It will be of interest generally, I think, to state here some 
progress that has been made, and show briefly what can be 
realized with an insulator of proper design and quality. 

The function of an insulator is three-fold: 

1. It must support the line mechanically, 


1214 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


2. It must insulate the line. 

3. It must resist all possible temperature changes that may 
be met in practise, both as to range of temperature and time 
in which the range is encountered. ; 

To support the line a simple mechanical strength is necessary, 
and for ordinary cases a unit with an ultimate mechanical 
strength of 10,000 pounds is considered ample. Every unit 
should be tested to 5000 pounds before the electrical_tests 
are applied. 


Section “B" “B” E-7 Insulating Porcelain 


Glazed all over 
: Grey Glaze-Standard 
cee Chocolate Brown Glaze-Special 


HH 
Wy 
YY YY 
Yj Yi; 


E-59 Square Shank Link-Drop Forging 
Fic. 1 


In the matter of insulating the line, the problem becomes 
extremely complex. Irregular distribution of the electric stress 
on units of a string, lightning, transients, dust, etc., etc., are 
factors that must be taken into consideration. One of the 
most serious causes of failure of thin porcelain insulators is, 
the puncturing power of transients of extremely abrupt wave 
fronts. The writer has presented to the Institute two papers 
on this subject from a laboratory and operating experience. 
It may be said that the general answer to this series of factors 
is an ample thickness of homogeneous porcelain properly fired. 
A very few years ago the manufacture of such porcelain was 
admittedly impossible, but that is not the case today, as porce- 
lain of almost any desired thickness can be made absolutely 
homogeneous and of the highest quality, free from porosity. 

The temperature cycle resistance is solved by eliminating the 
cement cap and pin type of construction with its several 
materials of different coefficients of cubical expansion in rigid 
contact and its hydroscopic material for further trouble. 

A further electrical requirement is a rational electrical design, 
avoiding zones of high dielectric flux concentration and pro- 


‘ 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1215 


ducing a unit in which the dry flashover and first appearance 
of corona are as close together as possible. In a laboratory 
type, these may be made the same, but commercial considera- 
tions of manufacture make this ideal condition impossible of 
realization in quantity production. 

Consider, then, an insulator of the design shown in Fig. 1 
ore of the following electrical and mechanical character- 
istics: 

Mechanical Strength................ 10,000 pounds 
(Each unit tested to 5,000 — before 
electrical test) 


Dry flash over 60 cycles............. 100,000 volts 
Wet flash over 60 cycles............. 50,000 volts 
Dry flash over 200,000 cycles........ .120,000 volts 
First leakage corona................. 45,000 volts 
Easily visible corona................ 60,000 volts 
aD AE Ey he nace, cere tLe ar pis 250,000 to 300,000 volts 


Thickness of porcelain between elecrodes 214 inches. 

If, now, we use five of these units on 110,000 volts, (a 
line has been in successful operation for some time under these 
conditions) the stress on the end unit will be approximately 
33,000 volts. This unit then .operates with the following 
safety factors: 

Safety Factor 


Dry flash over 3. 

Wet flash over 1.5. 

(If the distribution were the same wet as dry), but as the 
distribution is better wet than dry, the safety factor as indi- 
cated by measurements taken under standard rain test con- 
ditions indicate that the safety factor due to reduction of 
stress on this unit reaches 2.1. 

Puncture 7.5 to 9. Due to the very thick porcelain which 
reduces the flux concentration on the electrodes, the effect of 
transients is less and the thickness available for resisting them 
much greater than in the thin porcelain type. 

Margin to Corona voltage 12,000 volts Safety Factor 


Dry flash over of string 340,000 volts 2.8 

Wet flash over of string 220,000 volts 1S 

The alloy used in fastening the spider legs into the porcelain 
has the same coefficient of cubical expansion as the porcelain 
used in the insulator and this, with the spider support, makes 
an insulator that can be plunged from boiling to freezing water 
as often as desired without fracture or chipping. 

Suppose now that a lightning stroke or rifle bullet cracks 
aunit. We find ourselves: with four units supporting the line 
and the following conditions, remembering that total destruc- 
tion of eight spider legs is necessary before the line will drop if 


a unit fails. 


1216 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


Volt nend unit, approx............41,000 volts 
ides ae Safety Factor 
Drydiash overidac ee: Ful. Se eee 2.44 
Wet flash over (as discussed before) .. . . 1.8 
Puneture-6 tovie6 > Wy 1 Oe 
Margin to coronas - 2007 See eee 4,000 volts 
Safety Factor 
Dry flash over of string 280,000 volts . .. 2.55 
Wet flash over of string 185,000-volts .. . 1.68 


Under these conditions no corona would be visible though 
there would be a leakage corona. This string would operate 
indefinitely but is not the correct number of units for 110,000 
volts. 

Considerable has been said regarding the danger of using 
porcelain in tension and its supposedly excessive fatigue when 
in tension. Research laboratory tests now partially finished, 
indicate that there is no foundation in fact for these fears, as 
indeed there is none in logic. The results of these and other 
tests will be published at an early date. 

It would seem then that the basic contention of Mr. Klauber’s 
paper is wrong and that there is relief at present available for 
the condition he describes. We should look to improvement 
in insulators rather than to more units of inferior characteristics 
«sa solution for the insulator situation. . 

I am very glad to see a recognition by one of the operating - 
engineers of the fact that “‘any line, regardless of the degree of 
over-insulation used, will ultimately fail by flash over, if not 
given continued attention’ along the California coast regions. 
This is a fact that I think some engineers have lost sight of in 
their enthusiasm for adding more units to a string to take 
care of this creepage condition. 

C. O. Poole: Would say that as I view the situation, Mr. 
Klauber has endeavored, and I think has worked out a principle 
upon which we can calculate a certain factor of safety upon 
the ordinary insulators as they are used, and, by varying, it 
very probably can, with some uncertainty, be applied to 
different climatic conditions. ' 

This subject of climatic conditions, I think, has a great deal 
to do naturally with the operation of insulators, as well as 
with any attempt that may be made to formulate a definite 
equation that might cover all conditions. As a matter of fact, 
I think it is impossible to make a definite equation that will 
cover all conditions with any degree of accuracy. However, I 
think Mr. Klauber has accomplished one thing and that is the 
fact that he would eliminate excessive investment for a given 
insulation on a line. We must, however, acknowledge that 
with the uncertainties of manufacture and the uncertainty of 
types of insulators, it throws an element of uncertainty into 


1919] - DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1217 


the whole proposition. While I feel that we will get some good 
out of the paper, yet I think it is open to betterment in this 
respect. 

J. A. Lighthipe: The insulator game is progressing. Of 
course, every new insulator manufacturer that comes to the 
coast has finally developed the only perfect insulator. How- 
ever, it usually takes some experience to get at the truth of the 
matter. The insulator game is one we have been watching 
very closely for the reason that all our service throughout 
Southern California and middle of California, is depending 
on the insulators doing their proper work. 

Even with the tools that people have contrived to test these 
insulators, just as Mr. Barre said in the discussion of the preced- 
ing paper, out of a clear sky comes a flashover. Sometimes 
it is serious and interrupts service. I rather agree with Mr. 
Klauber in his idea. Three insulators will stand up one or 
two years; perhaps four will stand up six or seven years. That 
extra three or four years means a great deal to the operating 
company. What we have been working on as much as any- 
thing else is to try and get a careful record of the breakdowns 
of the insulators and, if possible, find out why they break 
down in that locality. 

We all have our own theories. Perhaps this terrible catas- 
trophe we are experiencing with insulators happened over the 
oil well sections. We all know that in our oil well sections, 
_ especially in the East, there is a constant flow of helium which, 

is an emanation from radium and, passing our insulators, 
may ionize them. 

I thought my theory just as good as Barre’s, but at the same 
time we are awaiting an insulator which will hold up and we 
are glad to say they are holding up a little better today, and 
without doubt a great deal better than those we had a few 
years ago. The unfortunate part of the test is that it takes 
two or three years to find out absolutely, whether they are good 
or bad. Any insulator is good for the first season; most of 
them last two seasons without any breakdown. But, with all 
your careful testing, it is expensive to root out the bad insula- 
tors. Every improvement that can be made in these insulators 
which will hold up the line another year means that much re- 
duction in the operating expenses. east 

J. H. Anderton: From Mr. Barre’s remarks regarding in- 
sulator flashovers on the Big Creek line, it would appear pos- 
sible to tie Mr. Klauber’s and Mr. Curtis’s papers together. 

If I am not mistaken, this question of flash-overs on the Big 
Creek lines was first noticed in 1915. It is perhaps difficult, 
if not impossible, to definitely explain it. I have, however, a 


’ theory which may apply to it as follows: 


The length of the Big Creek lines is approximately 241 miles. 
At 50 cycles a quarter wave length of the fifth harmonic would 
be 187 miles or 54 miles from one end of the line, and I under- 


1218 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


stand from Mr. Barre that these flash-overs occur at approxi- 
mately this distance from the end of the line. The transformer 
connections at both ends of the line suppress the third harmonic 
and some others; they do not, however, suppress the fifth, 
which is often found in generators.. The current in the fifth 
harmonic wave may be very small, in fact, such that the line 
offers no appreciable resistance to it and my theory is that a 
condition of local resonance is set up in the line due to the 
fifth harmonic which is, of course, superimposed upon the funda- 
mental voltage and causes the flash-over. There are, of course, 
innumerable frequencies which could set up resonance condi- 
tions in the line such as lightning and similar disturbances, 
some of which may travel comparatively short distances before 
causing flash-overs. The recurrence, however, of flash-overs 
at or near a certain point in the line would usually indicate 
something inherent in the system. : 

This question of flash-overs naturally brings up the question 
of insulators. The selection of suitable insulator string in- 
volves the selection of a suitable factor of safety. The line 
may be so insulated that transient waves of voltage may be 
carried along the line to the power house and thus destroy 
apparatus. In general, it would appear preferable to select 
a factor of safety such as will give a reasonable degree of 
security against the break down of units in a string but will 
not prevent the flash over and consequently the dissipation of 
extreme high-voltage waves which might destroy transformers 
and generating equipment. In other words, it is preferable 
to have an occasional string of insulators destroyed than to 
-have apparatus in the generating station destroyed. 

H. A. Barre: There is a very pronounced family of har- 
monics in many systems. There is a very pronounced 11th 
and 13th and there was a strong third originating with the 
_ bank of compensators when the 50 and 60 cycles were tied 
together. That has been corrected to some extent by inter- 
connection between this bank of compensators and the bank 
of transformers located in the same station, the compensators 
being star-star connected and the transformers star-delta. 
The 38rd harmonic current that circulates in neutralizing, at 
Kagle Rock, was measured at 1.8 amperes; that 1.8 amperes 
distributing itself through three large transformers in the ratio 
of 1000 star and 150,000 volts delta. This made the trouble 
negligible. 

J. B. Fisken: On the last page of Mr. Klauber’s paper, 
he makes this statement: “It is desirable to know whether 
bottom, top or intermediate units fail most frequently, and in 
what ratio.” We have heard nothing on it and I am sure 
that I have nothing to offer. 

I would like to know, from those who can tell us, something 
about the potential gradient through the string. That seems 
to me to have a direct application in the safety effect which is 
to be obtained by adding units. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1219 


There is something I do know about, however, and that is 
Mr. Klauber’s next point: ‘Whether units in greater tension 
at dead-ends fail more frequently than those in Suspension.”’ 

The Washington Water Power Co. does. not have very 
many suspension units on its system. It has, however, a 
short line about 2814 miles, a steel tower line with suspension 
insulators, operated at 60 kv. Now that line of itself is short 
and does not introduce many difficulties, but that is not true 
of the rest of the system, consisting of about 600 miles of 
60 ky. line, and it is liable to get any surge that may originate 
on other parts of the system. The line has been in operation 
for nine years and the company has yet to find, the first case 
of failure of the suspension units other than those caused by 
lightning and the small boy with a rifle. 

On.the other hand, some two years ago it had a great deal 
of trouble with the same units used as strains and it was neces- 
sary to replace, or rather it was decided to replace all of the 
strain insulators at that time. These were taken down without 
the particular position on the line or the particular position in 
the string of any particular unit being noted and a rough test 
was run on them, first with the megger and then by direct 
application of 90 kv. ‘Thirty-three per cent failed under the 
test. The balance were put back into stock and so far as I 
know they have been used up and are on the lines today. I 
think that, perhaps, answers in part this question as to the 
relative difficulties on string and suspension insulators. 

R. W. Shoemaker: We have made quite a number of tests. 
on this very subject. You can take a string of ten insulators 
54-inch spacing, without arcing horns on high voltage, and, 
commencing with the insulator next the wire, the potential 
across number one unit will be about 20 per cent, or in other 
- words, twice too much, the insulator third or fourth from the 
tower will have the least stress. With arcing horns the second . 
insulator from the wire will have the highest stress and not the 
one next to the wire. i 

We have a device that is going to be used on our 150,000-volt 
transmission line now building by which the potential gradient 
in a string of insulators can be controlled and consists of a 
metallic disk that may be interposed between any two insula- 
tors and in metallic connection with the insulator hardware. 

It is possible with this device to make the stress across each 
insulator in a string exactly equal if such a condition were 
desirable or necessary. 

For example, a disk 12 inches in diameter interposed between ~ 
the wire and the first insulator reduces the stress on that in- 
sulator from 20 per cent to 16 per cent, if the disk is 26 inches 
in diameter the stress will be 14 per cent. Of course this latter 
disk is too large for practical purposes, but by using two disks 
located between the wire and first insulator and between the 
first and second insulators (counting from the wire)the stress 
_on these insulators may be kept to below 15 per cent. 


1220 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


We have taken a string of insulators and put potential on 
them until the hardware, without disks, about the wire began 
to fire, then putting the disks in place the string under the 
same potential as. previously applied would be perfectly quiet 
even in a dark room. ; 

Mr. Klauber’s paper gives methods for figuring out the 
probability of certain conditions that may obtain using as 
basic data the percentage of failure. It seems to me that any 
results based on this method would be of little value as the 
“percentage of failure” is an extremely uncertain quantity and 
varies over a wide range with different types of insulators, 
conditions of service, etc., so that using this method no predic- 
tion of continuity of service could be made for a line without, 
first, several years’ experience with that particular line on which 
to obtain necessary data. 

E. F.Scattergood: In determining generating plant capac- 
ity we first figure out the demand or load requirements 
throughout the year and then give consideration to the question 
of reserved units, or per cent of reserve plant capacity giving 
consideration to the importance of the continuity of service 
as against the cost. 

The subject matter of Mr. Klauber’s paper relating to the 

number of units in a line insulator is, it seems to me, a direct 
parallel; first, an insulator unit, or string of units, has a certain 
working voltage capacity or rating as we call it, which takes 
into account the question of not over stressing the insulator 
under ordinary operating conditions. Then the question arises, 
shall we add a unit or two as reserve units? Giving reserve 
strength, rather than capacity in this instance, which may 
result in the prevention of service interruption by testing 
the units on the strings along the line every six months or 
so and replacing bad units before the string fails. 
._ If an insulator deteriorates to the point of worthlessness in 
the interum, we have a reserve unit there ready to take up 
the work and avoid interruption of service the same as starting 
up the extra steam or hydroelectric unit, or extra per cent of 
plant capacity. 

The objection is made that such added insulation throws 
a higher duty on the station arresters causes a greater menace 
to station equipment, which is true but the benefits may far 
outweigh the objections, which of course, would depend 
upon the circumstances, the length of the line and the im- 
portance of the distributing point at the end of the line. 
~ Ona short line the cost of an extra unit or two is quite nom- 
inal. The city of Los Angeles, in constructing its power trans- 
mission lines from its present large generating plant, 46 miles, 
by transmission from the city, and from the second large plant 
now building in approximately the same location, allowed — 
extra insulation for the above purpose. We believe in it, es- 
pecially in a short line. It adds to the duty of the lightning 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1221 


arrester, no doubt, but it does reduce the interruption of 
service on the line to a minimum, and that is important. 

In considering the paper we must distinguish between insu- 
lators, or insulation, necessary to take care of the ordinary 
conditions of operation, allowing the proper factor of safety, 
and the proposition of adding one or two units in excess of that. 
We apply the principle generally in engineering and I see no 
reason why it should not be applied in line insulation provided 
we can protect the station equipment from the higher voltages, 
which are possible on the line through the use of lightning 
arresters. 

L. C. Williams: Insulators, after having been in service 
for a period of years, will depreciate much more rapidly than 
those which have been in service for a period of one year. I 
would like to ask Mr. Klauber if he has taken that point into 
consideration? 

From the manufacturer’s standpoint it is quite possible 
to manufacture suspension insulators which will have much 
greater electrical and mechanical efficiency than those we have 
at present but it is also well known that those insulators will 
be prohibitive in cost from an operating standpoint. 

Mr. Peaslee does not mention the unit costs of his insulators. 
Mr. Klauber takes the unit cost of $3.00 per unit installed on 
his line. If Mr. Peaslee’s insulator being considerably heavier 
costs considerably more installed on the line, it should be taken 
into consideration that an economic comparison, even pre- 
supposing that four of his units will do the work electrically 
as against five of the ordinary cap and pin type, could not be 
accurately made without having the unit cost to base figures 
on, I cannot make the comparison myself but it is a point 

‘worth considering. 

Now, as to Mr. Fisken’s question of differential. There 
have been experiments made which give the curve practically 
the same as shown by Mr. Shoemaker’s remarks. In a string 
of twelve insulators the unit nearest the line wire will take ap- 
proximately twenty-six per cent of the duty without arcing 
horns. By adding arcing horns to the lower end of the string 
alone, that unit will take approximately ten per cent of the 
duty over a string of twelve and the next unit to the line will 
take approximately fourteen to sixteen per cent. 

I have no data whatsoever on the failures with relation to 
the position on the string. F 

Mr. Peaslee mentions a line in. successful operation at 
100,000 volts with five units in a string of the type he advo- 
cates. One of the principal points of Mr. Klauber’s paper is 
climatic conditions which have a decided bearing on his laws 
of probability. Unquestionably, under certain conditions, that 
type will operate satisfactorily on 100,000 volts, but on the 
Pacific Coast experience has shown that puncture value is not 
necessarily the governing factor, but leakage surface is much 
more so than the puncture value. 


1222 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [Sept. 18 


I think it possible the addition of extra units should be taken 
into consideration as insurance against the leakage over the 
strings rather than the puncture value of the units in the string. 

L. M. Klauber: With reference to Mr. Peaslee’s remarks, 
he would seem to think that I am a pessimist with regard to 
insulators. Of course,’ I know from experience and from 
discussing this matter with the representatives of nearly all 
manufacturers, that the manufacturers have indeed made 
great progress in the last few years in their product. If a 
person is a pessimist I think he is usually a pessimist between 
two and four o’clock in the morning when the insulators 
fail and the lines go out. We all know that they do go out. 
No one hopes more than I do that the manufacturers will 
make perfect insulators. Probably they are making perfect 
insulators today, but the last ones we got day before yesterday 
were not perfect; and we rather fear that when tomorrow 
comes and the insulators of today have failed we will again 
be told to overlook the past and think only of the perfection 
of the present. 

With reference to Mr. Anderton’s remarks on the subject 
of over voltage: this paper, being based as it is upon the 
determination of minimum annual cost, not only specifies 
what the minimum number of insulators in a string should 
be but also the maximum. It would seem that dependence 
on having insulators fail in order to protect station apparatus 
is a reflection on the manufacturers of lightning arresters. 
The great difficulty in depending on the insulators is not that 
they will not fail; they do that readily enough. But it is 
difficult and expensive to locate a failed string after breakdown 
and it would seem best to protect against high-voltage strains 
by other means especially designed for the purpose. 

As to the ratio of failures in different members of the string 
and the effects of unequal stress distribution: our own results 
and extensive data given us by other companies would tend 
to show that there is virtually no difference in failures; in 
spite of the fact that the insulators close to the line are the 
more highly stressed, they fail no more rapidly than the 
others. Failure of the type under discussion is not primarily 
induced by electrical stress and may be almost as trequent 
amongst units in the storeroom as those on the line. 

In reference to a remark made by Mr. Shoemaker as to the 
cost of an interruption, the particular problem worked out 
in the paper as an example must be taken as such. I did not 
mean to indicate that $150.00 would be an average cost of 
interruption. In using these formulas the values assigned 
the constants must be based on the particular conditions under 
which a line is to operate. 


Presented at the Pacific Coast Convention of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Los Angeles, Cal., September 18-20, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I.E. E. 


PREDETERMINATION OF SYNCHRONOUS PHASE- 
MODIFIER PERFORMANCE 


BY HUBERT V. CARPENTER 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The author reviews the method for showing the behavior 
of transmission lines first given by Perrine and Baum and then 
shows how it can be used in determining the effect of the use of 
a synchronous motor operating without load for improving the 
power factor. The effect of the losses in the motor are shown 
both in their effect on the line alone and on the line with the 
step-up and step-down transformers included. 

The diagram given shows both the improvement in voltage reg- 
ulation and the change in power factor due to the phase-modi- 
i for any assumed condition of loading for the transmission 
ine. 

The errors of the method are discussed with methods for de- 
termining their magnitude, and the advantages of the graphical 
treatment pointed out. 


APIDLY growing demands upon our transmission systems 
for more power arid better service have made it impera- 
tive in many cases that increased capacity be provided without 
delay. Increasing the capacity means in most cases improved 
regulation, but frequently demands also a better efficiency of 
operation in order that the maximum possible fraction of the 
output of the generators may be delivered. This is usually 
thought to demand higher voltages or heavier lines or duplica- 
tion of lines, all of which require time as well as money. 

It is not perhaps fully appreciated that a synchronous motor 
operating upon the system may, if properly proportioned, 
improve the efficiency as well as the regulation, thus accomplish- 
ing both of the things desired. 

While the theory of the synchronous phase-modifier has 
been fully treated before the Institute it is hoped in the follow- 
ing to make its general effect upon a transmission system a 
little more easily grasped. 

In the consideration of transmission problems the writer 
feels that far too little use has been made of the remarkable 
diagram first proposed by Perrine and Baum, (TRANS. A. I. E. E. 
_ May 1900.) 
; 1223 


1224 CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER [Sept. 18 


The peculiarities of this treatment are that the voltage at the 
receiver is assumed constant and that at the generator solved 
for, and that the current is treated throughout as made up of 
three independent parts, charging current, J,; load current, 
I cos ¢; and reactive or wattless component delivered, J sin @. 
The electromotive force required to force each of these com- 
ponents of current through the line is then figured, first for the 
resistance and then for the reactance of the line, thus giving the 
Ri, 0 XLS 

ae AS a 
RIcos¢; XIcos¢; RIsingd; and X Ising. The charg- 
ing current values are divided by 2 because J, distributes itself 
over the line in a way assumed here to be uniform. 

To make up the regulation diagram, Fig. 1, the e. m. f. at the 


following components of e. m. f. required; 


Fxg. 1 


receiver, H, is assumed as the vector of reference and the above 
values. added to get the total voltage needed at the generator. 


. dae ee ; ¢ . 
In Figs. 1 and 2 ab is 5 bois ,cgis RI cos¢, gd 


is X I cos ¢, deis RI sin @ and ef is X I sin ¢, the last two 


tede dey 
5 and 5 
are plotted first since they are closely constant and assumed to 
be exactly so here. . . 
The total volts required to force the working component of 
current through the line is ¢ d, and is equal to ZI cos¢. The 
value of cd will therefore vary directly with the kilowatts 
delivered since E’ is assumed to be held constant. A scale of 
kilowatts may be therefore used along cd as in Figs. 2 and 3. 


being shown for 0.8 power factor, lagging. 


1919] CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER 1225 


An ampere scale may also be added if desired. In the same 
way a scale of reactive kv-a. may be laid off along d f as shown. 

The advantage of the method lies in the fact that the entire 
performance of a line for all conditions of load is shown by one 
solution, and further that the effect of any change of load is 
shown directly for any assumed case. The thing really most 
desired in studying a design for a line is to learn the effect which 
will be produced by the greatest sudden change in load that 
may be expected. Questions of this sort are answered directly 
by this diagram. . 

Fig. 2 shows that the diagram as there made up is really a 
chart in which distances along the axis, c d, represent power in 


REACTIVE KILOVOLT-AMPERES DELIVERED 


° ° ° ° Ss 

S ro) S ro} S 

SRO SOU Sete. a a 
LEADING LAGGING 


POWER FACTOR 
ye 0950.98 1 0.98 0.95 0.9 0.85 0.8 


KILOWATTS DELIVERED 


kilowatts, while distances along the axis, d f, represent reactive 
kv-a. Thus, the point, d, Fig. 2, represents 16,000 kw. at 
unity power factor, and, from the scale below requires 100.8 
per cent of the receiver voltage at the sending end. Also point, 
j, shows that an addition of 6000 reactive kv-a., requires the 
generator voltage to be increased to 106 per cent of E. Further, 
‘a load of 12,000 kw. at 0.8 power factor, lagging, can be 
handled without drop in the line if a pure condensance requiring 
8250 kv-a. be connected to the system. See points k and k’. 

The time thus spent in rehearsing the workings of the 
Perrine-Baum diagram is considered well spent for we are now 
ready to apply it directly to the problem of this paper. 


1226 CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER [Sept. 18 


In order to get reasonable accuracy in calculating the effect 
of an over-excited synchronous motor running on the line 
without load it is necessary to include the power losses in the 
machine itself. 

To do this in a way best adapted to use with the regulation 
diagram just shown, the performance of the machine can be 
plotted in the form shown in Fig. 4. This represents the same 
current values as determined in the test for the “V’’ curves for 
the machine except that they are plotted according to their 
respective power factors and a scale of kw. one way and kv-a. 
the other used. In other words this plotting shows the active 


REACTIVE KILOVOLT-AMPERES DELIVERED 


Oo (oo | oO So oO 
S = Ss So) ae = 
20 StS T ; 
LEADING [LAGGING 
18 POWER FACTOR 
095 0.98 0.98 0.95 0.90 0.85 0, 0 
16000 95 1 8 0.85 
[= 
ow 14 
> 
= 12000 - r ~ 
a 
10+ = 
wn 
E 8000 
= 
So 6 
* 4000 | ++ 
=, 2a) 135 
2 1100 8 130 
0o|-—-+—+— 105 110 S\N PERC eed 
5 100% R vOut LTS 
oe) ek 99 _9° “GENERATOR eceNvER VO 


Fig. 3 


and the reactive components of the kv-a. taken by the machine 
for any total value, either over or under excited. The slight 
difference between leading and lagging losses shows the effect 
of the varying loss in the field windings for different excitations. 

It will be noted that the data for the machine are now plotted 
in the same form as is used in the Perrine-Baum chart, that is, 
with kw. for one axis and reactive kv-a. for the other, so that 
it can be drawn in directly to proper scale on the chart. This 
is done in Fig. 3. This figure shows, for example (see points s 
and r) that the addition of the phase-modifier working at full 
capacity of 12,000 kv-a. changes the load from 12,780 kw. at 
0.7. power factor lagging, to 18,500 kw. at 0.99+ power 


1919] CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER 1227 


factor lagging, and the line drop from 23 per cent to 2 per cent. 
It is evident that a condenser of one half this size would bring 
the line drop down to about 12 per cent and the power factor 
up to 0.88. 

A study of the diagram shown and of the properties of the 
different sizes of line conductors will bring out the fact that a 
transmission line made up of very large conductors will respond 
more directly to the corrective action of a synchronous phase- 
modifier than one using small conductors. That is, if we 
substitute a conductor of one-half the cross-section of that used 
in the line figured above the resistance will be doubled but the 
reactance will be only about 6 per cent greater. This means 
that with the smaller wire the line, ¢ d, of Fig. 1 will be much 
more inclined toward the horizontal and d f toward the vertical. 
This further tilting of the axes of the diagram makes the effect 
of a synchronous motor much less, so far as its usefulness in 
correcting regulation is concerned. It will still be effective in 


oa _ FEET 
2 < 9000 1 || Peake byt |} 
8 2 tooo LEE re ee 

0 a. it SSE Se oS os t 
12000 8 4 0 4 8 12000 
DING LAG 
REACTIVE KILOVOLT -AMPERES 


Fic. 4 


reducing the power lost in the line simply by its effect in reduc- 
ing the value of the total current flowing in the line. This also 
applies to cases where the power line is made up of underground 
cable where the reactance is usually less than the resistance. 

Owners of small overhead lines may expect the same disap- 
pointing results in varying degrees depending on the material 
of the line, the size, and the spacing. 

In all high-voltage systems where the use of phase-modifiers 
is most advantageous it is necessary to associate step-up and 
step-down transformers with the line whenever operated, and 
usually the transformer sets used with any line are the same 
from day to day. In all such cases there is no need of figuring 
the line behavior as a separate matter from that of the trans- 
formers which are really a part of the line. The resistance of a 
transformer, if taken over the ordinary range of working 
temperatures is only slightly variable, and its reactance, 
depending as it does on the relative positions of the windings 


1228 CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER [Sept. 18 


and the dimensions of the non-ferrous portions of the leakage 
paths, is also quite constant and independent of changing load 
conditions. If then the same transformers are usually used 
with the line under consideration there is no reason why their 
resistance and reactance should not be included with the 
resistance and reactance of theline. Valuesfor the low-tension 
coils must be changed to high-tension equivalents before adding 
them in. 

In Fig. 3 is given the behavior of the same line as shown in 
Figs. 1 and 2 with the transformers included. The difference 
shows the futility of making an exact solution for the perform- 
ance of a line alone which can never be used without its trans- 
formers. It also shows the faulty economy in trying to get a 
very good regulation in the line when the transformers will 
prevent it anyway. 

Figs. 2 and 8 give the performance of a three-phase line 140 
miles long with 300,000-cir. mil. stranded conductors spaced 
12 ft., operating at 60 cycles and 110,000 volts between wires. 

Fig. 3 includes the transformers which are assumed to 
handle 16,000 kv-a. at 0.8 power factor and to havearegulation 
of 1 per cent at unity power factor and 6 per cent at 0.8 power 
factor lagging. 

It will be noted that under most conditions the ratio of X to 
FR will be higher for the transformers than for the line. This 
may mean that a phase modifier will give good service in 
_ improving regulation where a study of the line alone would not 
make this apparent. 

It seems that the reason more use has not been made of this 
method of studying transmission problems is based on the fact 
that it is considered inaccurate. The inaccuracy lies in the 
fact that the static charge which makes up the charging current 
is assumed to be uniformly distributed along the line, disre- 
garding the variation in voltage, and also in the fact that the 
charging current is assumed for convenience to be just 90 
degrees ahead of the receiver voltage. Inaccuracy is much 
more feared when the extent of the error is unknown. This 
difficulty is removed by the exact analytical methods available 
when needed, any of which may be applied to any one particular 
condition out of the variety which the chart represents and 
thus show the error for that point, in fact this is the way to 
learn to appreciate the graphical method which answers all 
questions with one solution. As a matter of fact it can be 


1919] CARPENTER: PHASE-MODIFIER 1229 


easily shown that the terms calculated in making up the Perrine- 
Baum diagram are, neglecting line leakage, nothing moreor less 
than the first three terms of the following series which repre- 
sents the behavior of a line to any required degree of exactness. 


pas YZE YZ I YZ? ss 
For any of the lines now in use the error of the method outlined 


will be found to be well within all useful limits. 


1230 PHASE MODIFIER [Sept. 20 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘PREDETERMINATION OF SYNCHRONOUS PHASE- 
MOoDIFIER PERFORMANCE” (CARPENTER), LoS ANGELES, 


SEPTEMBER 20, 1919. 


H. B. Dwight: A diagram drawn up to show the particu- 
lar characteristics of an individual transmission line, as de- 
scribed by Mr. Carpenter is very useful in the design and 
operation of an electrical transmission system. An additional 
valuable feature is that the average power factor observed for 
various fractional loads may be plotted directly on the diagram, 
thus showing the generator voltage, or the phase-modifier 
kv-a., required at any load under usual working conditions. 

The diagram described in the paper is based on the so-called 
“‘split-condenser method” of calculation, in which one-half of 
the capacitance of the entire line is assumed to be concentrated 
at the receiver end. It is stated in the paper that the diagram 
is not used>to a greater extent because of the inaccuracy of 
this method. However, it is not necessary to use the “split 
condenser,” or any approximate method. A diagram which 
is the same in its essentials as that described in the paper, 
but based on the complete hyperbolic transmission line theory, 
has been published by the writer.* This diagram is called a 
“circle diagram,’ and the circle corresponds exactly to any of 
the circles shown in Fig. 2 of Mr. Carpenter’s paper, except 
that accurate transmission line equations are used. 

The equations which have been published by the writer for 
drawing the diagram are as follows: 


. ee ae Xie. Syd tee 
Find E’ + jE -H(1+ 5 4 34. + etc.) 


272 
and R’ + jX' = (R+5X) 1+ 54 +545 + ete.) 


Describe a circle with center (a’, b’) and radius Cc 


where os Be ROA Ee 


1000 GRRE oa) 
b! - i BX’ = E’R’ k 
1000  R? + xX® SYA 
and c= baa eee lov 


1000 VRe axe 


where FE is the receiver voltage, and EF, the supply voltage. 


pth Caleulation of Constant-Voltage Transmission Lines,” by H. B: 
wight, The Electric Journal, Sept., 1914, and ‘‘Constant-Voltage Trans- 


mission,” by H. B. Dwight, 78 and 9 ; : 
lishers, 1912. ght, pages 78 and 99, John Wiley & Sons, Pub 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1231 


The equations for a’ and 6’ show that the position of the 
center is independent of the supply voltage. The equation for 
c’ shows that the radius is directly proportional to the supply 
voltage. Therefore, after one circle has been drawn corres- 
ponding to a certain supply voltage, a series of circles may easily 
be drawn about the same center, with radii proportional to 
the supply voltages which the circles represent. 

If the first equation is shortened, so as to omit the terms of 


the series after = and if the second equation is shortened 


so that 
R’ + 9X’ =R+ 9X 


the results are exactly the same as those of the “‘split-condenser’’ 
method. The length of some of the lines of the diagram will 
be changed by one or two per cent. This error is appreciable, 
and while it may seem a small amount for practical work, 
there is no reason why this mathematical error should be in- 
corporated in a diagram which is drawn up to show the charac- 
teristics of a ,;particular transmission line. It may be said 
that it is generally admitted that.the ‘‘split-condenser’’ method 
is superseded by the complete hyperbolic theory, and that the 
small amount of additional work required for the latter method 
of calculation is worth while in any case where capacitance is 
worth considering at all. 

M. O. Bosler: In the mechanical construction of the 
energy diagram the distance OE in Fig. 1 when applied to the 


2 


kv-a. scale of Fig. 2is Z .10-* and the distance of the supply 


voltage circle from O, OF, is zs u *10-%. The slope of the volt- 


age line OE, Fig. 1 across the energy diagram Fig. 2 is a : 


By keeping the line impedance Z- constant and increasing 
the ratio of X to R, the power capacity of the line for a given 
E and E, is enormously increased when supplying power at 
a high or a leading power factor. When a line of this sort 
gets into trouble, the power factor drops to practically that of 


the line 3 , and limits the effect of the disturbance by the ex- 
cessive voltage drop that occurs at such a low power factor. 
This point, which can be so clearly illustrated by means of 
this diagram, should be of importance when operating an 
inter-connected system of large power capacity. 


1232 PHASE MODIFIER [Sept. 20 


J. A. Lighthipe: The operation is usually reversed. That 
is, you get a condenser, or you have a condenser,.or you buy 
as large a one as you can, and then figure back and see how much 
you can improve the line with this condenser. 

We are endeavoring to scatter our condensers as nearly to 
the center of our load as possible and we have something like > 
five or six condensers scattered into various parts of our system. 
We have adopted for the small size, about 2000 kw., partly 
because it can be thrown on a line with a minimum amount 
of disturbance; in some cases we have put a second one at the 
same substation. 

The method of figuring just what effect your condenser will 
have is what we really need and want, but to figure out a 
certain size condenser for a given size transmission line which 
is loaded constantly throughout the year, why we usually 
work backwards, that is, get the condenser and then figure 
out what good it will do. Then, if necessary, we put another 
condenser a few miles away or sometimes in the same power 
house. 

The old condenser method brings up the early days 
in the Spokane Coeur d’Alene transmission. There we had 
one of the first regulators to hold the voltage constant at 
Spokane but up the other side of Coeur d’Alene in the mining 
section the regulation was poor. It was finally decided to 
put a condenser up there with a regulator. This was brought 
out in the discussions at the Monterey convention. 

We are using a great many of them on our system, although 
most of them are regulated by hand and not by general regu- 
lators, except our main substation at Eagle Rock. 

I have always figured in the rough that to about every 10,000- 
h. p. induction motor we should install at least a 2000-kv-a. 
condenser, aS near as we could get to the load center, and it 
is working out pretty well. 

P. M. Downing: My experience has been that synchronous 
condensers are nearly always afterthoughts. They are put in 
when voltage conditions force a change. They are limited 
in capacity and corrective effect and, therefore, it is a case of 
doing the best with what you have. 

They have been generally used on our system in the north 
central part of the state for a number of years. It is hard to 
predetermine on that system just exactly what will happen 
because of a more or less complicated network of lines and 
the large number of power sources. Where installed however, 
they are equipped for automatically taking care of voltage and 
they do it successfully. The growth of the business has been - 
such that they have not been given an opportunity to show 
just how they would work under ideal conditions. 

J. H. Anderton: I note in Mr. Downing’s remarks he 
refers to synchronous phase modifiers as afterthoughts. This 
may be true to a large extent on.some systems, as for instance, 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1233 


the one with which Mr. Downing is identified, since with the 
gradual growth of such a system and the increased radius of 
transmission, phase modifiers are installed as required. How- 
ever, this does not generally apply to phase modifiers. In 
most instances this apparatus is of such prime necessity as 
to be the determining factor in the economic possibility of a 
development. Phase modifiers modify the phase of the total 
load with respect to the generators without necessarily varying 
the amplitude of the voltage so that it becomes possible by ~ 
their use to transmit power any distance with constant voltage 
at both ends of the line or at any point ona line. Such systems 
as the Big Creek and Great Western Power Company systems 
would be economically impossible without their use because 
of the impossible conditions of voltage regulation. 

You are all more or less familiar with the usual computations 
of a transmission line and I have no doubt you all try to use 
the simplest methods of obtaining the results. For prelimi- 
nary work I have found the so-called approximate method quite 
suitable. This consists of computations showing the various 
generator voltages required for given loads and constant re- 
ceiver volts. These are then shown as points on an ordinate 
of generator voltage, an assumed condenser ky-a. is then taken 
as abscissa, and for the same receiver volts a second point 
for the generator voltage obtained; plotted this gives the fa- 
miliar transmission line diagram. By reading off the diagram a 
suitable condition of generator and receiver volts with a given 
kv-a., condenser capacity may be selected. Since reading from 
a diagram usually involves some inaccuracy, the selection of 
the kv-a. condenser from these curves is perhaps not permis- 
sible. However, the condenser kv-a. may be obtained mathe- 
matically for each assumed load by a modification of the genera- 
tor voltage equation, the mathematics for which does not in- 
volve anything beyond the quadratic form. 

P. M. Downing: In explanation of my remarks, I might 
say that the lines I spoke of were those of the Pacific Gas and 
Electric Company, practically all of which are 150 miles and 
operated at 60,000 volts. Therefore we do not have the same 
condition to contend with that would be met on the higher 
voltage lines. 

Leslie F. Curtis: Professor Carpenter is to be thanked for 
bringing to our attention the fact that a graphical representa- 
tion of any computation is to be desired. Whether the method 
developed by Professor Carpenter or that suggested in the 
previous discussion is used, the graphical method shows the 
calculator a picture of what is taking place on his line. It, in 
any case, is useful in checking his computations. 

Professor Carpenter also notes that it is of advantage to 
include the transformers in calculating a line. I think that 
some of us have not kept this in mind.. The calculation of 
the line involves not only the conductors at the proper spacing, 


1234 PHASE MODIFIER [Sept. 20 


but also the transformers and all of the apparatus connected 
thereto. ; ares. 

J. F. Wilson: I might refer, briefly, to Mr. Dwight’s dis- 
cussion. Mr. Dwight’s transmission line formulas involve 
only simple arithmetical calculations which will, I think, give 
practically the same results as does Professor Carpenter’s 
graphical method. 

Relative to the suggestion that Mr. Lighthipe made, about 
working backwards on the proposition, I think that is probably 
true, but as the application of the synchronous phase-modifier 
extends and becomes more accepted in its general application, 
I doubt if that proposition will hold because, as was brought 
ut here in the other discussions, it will certainly be advan- 
tageous, if not necessary, to determine before the line is built 
and put in operation what effect you are going to get from a 
given condenser, or rather, what size condensers you are going 
to require to produce a given per cent regulation, or required 
power factor. 

H. L. Melvin (by letter): Several years ago the writer 
learned the use of the Perrine-Baum Chart and its adaptation 
to the predetermination of synchronous phase-modifier per- 
formance. Since that time I have had opportunity to use it 
quite extensively and to check its accuracy. It is sufficiently 
accurate for all.practical purposes for transmission lines now 
in operation. 

The chart is very easily and quickly constructed and once 
made for a line a vector picture of the performance of the line 
for any load is given at a glance. Thecharging current, resist- 
ance, reactance and impedance of the line must be determined 
and if standard cross section paper is used for the kilowatt and 
reactive kilovolt ampere scales it is necessary to determine the 
voltage scale. The line drop due to the magnetizing current 
for the receiver transformers must be calculated, and since the 
current lags practically 90 degrees, it can be subtracted from 
the drop caused by the line charging current, giving the vector 
ac (Fig. 2). It will be noted that if arcs of circles be drawn 
with a (Fig. 2) as a center they will be loci for constant current, 
kilovolt amperes and J?R line loss (the loss due to the charging 
current neglected). On the scale of generator volts actual 
voltages may be used, or if the step-up transformers are in- 
cluded, low-tension bus voltages or even switchboard voltmeter 
readings. When superimposing the synchronous condenser 
characteristic, the point where the decrease in line loss is equal 
to the losses in the condenser may be determined. The use of 
synchronous condenser capacity beyond this point for the im- 
provement of voltage regulation will decrease the efficiency 
of transmission. If a transformer bank is installed for the 
condenser only (the load current not passing through it) its 
regulation and losses can be included in the condenser charac- 
teristic curve (Fig. 4). When. the maximum load change is 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1235 


known the minimum synchronous condenser capacity required, 
operating lagging and leading, may be determined and also the 
proper voltage to be held at the generator. 

Practically all the information which the chart will give is 
needed in the analysis of the performance of a transmission 
line and it is really a remarkable solution that will give the 
results accurately. 


Re ic 

* x 4 

s S . 

é 7 

’ 7 2 
e +7. 
a 
: : . 24 
: ; . 
ee 

= ' 
id q 
4: i 
: . 
~ ‘ 7 
: 


Presented at the Pacific Coast. Convention of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Los Angeles, Cal., September 18-20, Tgrg. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. BE. 


CALIFORNIA 220,000-VOLT — 1100-MILE — 1,500,000- 
KW. TRANSMISSION BUS 


BY R. W. SORENSEN, H. H. COX AND G. E. ARMSTRONG 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


This paper summarizes the power resources of California and 
the probable loads to be supplied within the next six or seven 
years. For the purpose of economically distributing the neces- 
sary power and supplying the load, a long high-voltage transmis- 
sion line is proposed. As this line would interconnect a number 
of different companies, it assumes the nature of a bus bar. The 
authors show how the proposed line may link with some of the 
lines now in service and enumerate the advantages of such inter- 
connection. A comparison is made between the 240-mile Big 
Creek line now operating at 150,000 volts, 50 cycles, and the 
operation of this line at 220,000 volts, 60 cycles. Operating 
data on the Big Creek line are shown to indicate the character of 
the construction necessary for California conditions. Conclu- 
sions are drawn as to the particular features to be observed for 
successful operation of 220,000-yolt lines. 


INTRODUCTION 

UELS, particularly oil, must soon be used for isolated power 

only in places where electric power is not available, as 

in the propelling of air and ocean craft. In large power sys- 

tems, especially in the West, the'use must be limited to standby 

service, for peak loads, low water periods, and other emergen- 
cies. 

POWER RESOURCES 

California has available ample hydroelectric power to supply 
the industrial and agricultural demand for many years. 

Small developments aggregating 325,000 kw. have been com- 
pleted and many others of this type are available. There are 
also four large projects as indicated in Table I. which can 
readily be developed to a capacity of 1,500,000 kw. in the near 
future. 

The data for the following tables of resources and loads, of 
the Northern part of the state, are taken from various reports 

1237 


2 


> 


1238 SORENSEN, COX AND ARMSTRONG: [Sept. 18 


which have been published and no attempt has been made to 


verify them. 
TABLE I—LARGE POWER RESOURCES 


Now Developed Proposed Reasonable 
and Under Developments Future Develop- 
Construction 1926 ment (Not Ulti- 
mate Capacity) 
if, kw. kw. kw. 

Pitt <Rivetonsncurat ayes aha, None 200,000 500,000 
Feather (Riveticcs cies sie cess 100,000 200,000 300,000 
Bigc@reelks: ja.) sigiove eects 100,000 300,000 500,000 
Colorado Rivet: ccc <sinerisis None None 200,000 
Total. ene io dee evs 200,000 700,000 1,500,000 


Total 1926 hydroelectric power development including small 
projects is 1,025,000 kw. 


LOAD DEMAND 


The best available information indicates a demand in 1926 
approximately as shown in Table II. 


TABLE II. 

J, Sacramento Valley, northerm portion... .....0.<.e.s.sesn ee omee 70,000 kw. 
204 Fruckee River electrification... cc.cn cee footer ee on ee 40,000 “ 
3. Sacramento Valley,southerm portions... ~s0x. vs<cavreeeoeces ae 125,000) 75 
45Sani Francisco: Bayelistrichen.qeeesrapy-nelaan se Ot oot oa ee 250,000. -* 
bs resto Distriets.ccwapye ewe Moe coe oh oon ee eerie eens LenS 90,000 “ 
6. Bakersfield District, including Tehachapi electrification........... 125,000 “ 
Volos Angeles: Districts t1< cota s ate tora cro none eee wien nen ee ee 300,000 “ 
8. Barstow and Needles District, including railroad electrification.... 40,000 “ 

Making atotal of. tasme ntact hurr ee a eae Ree et eee 1,040,000 “ 


In order to carry this load, approximately 500,000 kw. ad- 
ditional in hydroelectric capacity will be required. 

A demand for power such as shown in Table II can be sup- 
plied most economically by power developed in large units. 
Large power units require transmission lines of the highest 
possible economic voltage. 

*It has been shown that, for long transmission, 220,000 volts 
is economical under conditions which require a much more. 
expensive construction than has proven adequate for the 
150,000-volt lines of the Southern California Edison Company. 


*Silver, Problems of 220-kv. Power PKG a de page 1037, 


1919] CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS 1239 


CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION Bus 
On this basis, a plan as shown on the map, Fig. 1, is proposed. 
In this plan the interconnection of all the California Power 
Companies has been assumed, as an economic necessity for 


NEEDLES \ 


OO sGenerating raat 
© — Substation 


Fig. 1—Cauirornia 1100-Mite—220 Kinovo~rt—Transmission Bus 


its best utilization. Interconnections of limited capacity are 
not entirely satisfactory because they fail just at the time they 
are needed most to transfer from one system to another large 
blocks of power, 


1240 SORENSEN, COX AND ARMSTRONG: [Sept. 18 


The plan of the proposed scheme involves the construction 
of a two-circuit transmission system extending from Pitt River 
to Los Angeles, a distance of 570 miles. Branch lines of like 
voltage connect the three other power projects and the San 
Francisco load center to this main line on which the other load 
centers are located. The main line thus becomes a high-tension 
bus extending nearly the entire length of the state, hence its 
name; California Transmission Bus. This arrangement makes 
possible unlimited interconnection and exchange between all 
the power companies of the state. 

Substations have been located at Marysville, Stockton, San 
Francisco, Fresno, Bakersfield and Los Angeles. These points 
are natural load centers and suitable points for connecting with 
the present power systems. On the Colorado River branch, 
the construction of which is dependent upon the electrification 
of the transcontinental railroads, substations would probably 
be located at Barstow and Needles. The substations divide 
the lines into sections of suitable length for practical operation, 
the longest section being 150 miles, as shown in Table III. 

TABLE III. 


Pitt: River tonlarysvilless ome coals ae ciao oie & eam ancericras a 150 miles 

Feather Riven to -Marysvillés.c. uc. eae ee eaee ee knee 60. “ 

Marysville to, Stoektoalss..i 5.0/0, 0 /ar a tte wre walate SURE Siok ait 90) 4" 

Stockton to Sam Mrancts0r nc: cai scone ae ve caten oeetinoee oe 60" ¢* 

Stocktomtto, Presa. rc sereautcuverres acs isso wie eles esha cee 130° * 

Big ‘Creeks to Hressiors cm eses inns sieves we vie cls ave wisrers denice aes 40 “ 

Hresno' to. dsakersheldiyscycice «2 sis) ste.e ate als atoll svete. geen cal aiee 100° # 

Bakersfield to.ILos Anpeles. .... uss ats os sie su sn av die saw oun 100. 5= 

Bakers tiel dhtowBarsto yer ciciect.ciontelemme tele aoe ate eee 110 

Barstow towNecdles;, tetonrcccc ame maui nai eer es ere LBOL FS 

Needlesito ColoradowRiverst tuscs< sue noch iss sek tetone cart 100%* 

ColoradoiRiver to Phoenisen, sme. cent ee oa ea ee LOO 
Pitt: River to Sait rancisco vn. seetesre oie sete 300 miles 
Big Creek to UOS ANEEIES: le-« wiaiasieleieite ielare eererecl 240° = 
Big Creek to’San Prancisco..0...<.<c65 sets sacks 230 ° 


THE TRANSMISSION LINE 


The standard frequency, 60 cycles, has been assumed on the 
basis that the Southern California power systems operating at 
50 cycles will ultimately find it advantageous to conform to the 
A. I.E. E. standard. In the natural growth of the load as 
shown in Table II, 70 per cent of the 1926 load will be supplied 
by the 60-cycle systems. Interconnection of such large load 
centers or power sources through frequency changers, limits 
the exchange of power, is uneconomical, and increases tremen- 
dously the required operating vigilance. 


1919] CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS 1241 


The practicability of the high-voltage line has been well 
demonstrated by over five years of remarkably successful opera- 
tion of the 150,000-volt lines of the Southern California Edison 
Company which, during this period have delivered from the 
Big Creek power houses over the 240-mile lines to the Los 
Angeles distribution system, 1,200,000,000 kw-hr. at an average 
efficiency of 87.5 per cent with a 45 per cent load factor. Dur- 
ing this period there have been no interruptions for which 
the high voltage is responsible, and on the contrary, the sys- 
tem has been free from disturbance and interruption to a 
greater degree than the lower voltage lines in the same locality. 

The present Big Creek lines can be operated at 220,000 volts, 
60 cycles, without material change and this is proposed as 
a link of the transmission bus, and its operation under these 
conditions will be analyzed and applied to conditions of the 
proposed system. 

Corona. As now operated, at 150,000 volts and 50 cycles, 
the voltage is only 80 per cent of the lowest critical voltage of 
any part of the line and there is no corona loss. At 220,000 
volts, 60 cycles, corona loss occurs to some extent on the entire 
line but amounts to but 0.4 per cent of the line capacity during 
fair weather. With storm conditions over the entire line, and 
with an assumed reduction of 20 per cent in the critical voltage, 
the corona loss would be 8 per cent of the line capacity. This 
loss is not sufficient to make the line inoperative and would 
occur too rarely to be an economic factor. 

Insulation. The Big Creek 150,000-volt lines have nine 
units in each suspension string and two eleven-unit strings in 
parallel on dead ends. During the five and one-half years of 
operation only two insulator string failures have occurred. 
Both of these were during normal conditions of operation with- 
out any apparent cause, other than that of' being in a location 
where the insulators have been found to have a relatively high 
rate of deterioration. 

The Big Creek line towers allow sufficient clearance to permit 
the lengthening of the nine unit suspension strings to eleven 
units, and to any desired number of units at dead ends. Table 
IV. shows safety factors for insulator strings, wet and dry. 

The Big Creek line operated at 220,000 volts is at the critical 
corona voltage and any disturbances resulting in a higher 
voltage will quickly expend their energy in producing corona 
loss, which will permit a smaller safety factor to be used. 


1242 SORENSEN, COX AND ARMSTRONG: [Sept. 18 


The curves in Fig. 2, showing arc-over voltage as reproduced 
from Mr. Silver’s paper, Problems of 220-kv. Power Trans- 
mission, show no practical gain in dry arc-over voltage for 
strings of more than ten units, and with these facts in view it 
is proposed that for operating the Big Creek line at 220,000 
volts, suspension strings have eleven units and dead end strings 
12 units in series. Insulator testing crews have several times 
reported four and five defective units in a nine-unit suspension 
string, without any indication of trouble. The only apparent 
value of a longer string than that proposed would be a decreased 
probability of sufficient defective units in a string to cause break- 
down. Developments of methods of grading insulator units 
and shielding insulator strings, will in all probability, materially 
change curves of Fig. 2. 

Present day method of insulator testing and maintenance 


TABLE IV. SAFETY FACTORS FOR INSULATOR STRINGS 


Wet arc-over Dry arc-over 
9 unit 11 unit 9 unit 11 unit 
String String String String 
eee eS ee ee ee 
(87 kv. to ground) 150 kyv........ 4.3 4.8 
(127 kv. to ground) 220 kv....... Soe 20S) 3.4 


would probably have prevented the two failures which have 
occurred on the Big Creek lines as previously mentioned. 
These methods applied to the lines operating at 220,000 volts 
and the use of the better types of insulators now available will 
insure successful operation. 

Charging Current. Long high-voltage lines cannot be op- 
erated without synchronous condensers at the receiving station 
to regulate the voltage, and as a consequence the charging cur- 
rent, even at the standard 60-cycle frequency becomes a factor 
of no great importance as long as these synchronous condensers 
are connected to the line. 

Without these condensers the line charging current must be 
furnished entirely by the generators, in which case the genera- 
tors may become greatly overloaded and at the same time pro- 
duce a very high voltage over which the operator has no con- 
trol. To avoid this emergency a transmission line with its 


1919] CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS 1243 


generators, transformers, and synchronous condenser must be 
considered as a unit and as such should be securely coupled 
together electrically at all times. This has been proved prac- 
cal in the case of the Big Creek system in which it is possible 
to start the 15,000 kv-a. condensers and bring them up to 
speed with the generators. 

Line Capacity. The Big Creek lines as operated at 150,000 
volts with 30,000 kv-a. condenser capacity per line at the 
receiver end are each good for 57,500 kw. at 85 per cent power 
factor and will have under these conditions a line drop of 11 
per cent. ; 


600 
500 
400 L 
y Arc over 


KILOVOLTS 
w 
rs) 
3S 


ine) 
=) 
oO 


% 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
NUMBER OF UNITS IN STRING 


Fig. 2—Typicau 60-Cyrciz Arc-Over CHARACTERISTICS OF SUSPENSION 
INSULATORS 


Operated at 220,000 volts these lines should each have a 
capacity of 125,000 kw. with an equal line drop when provided 
with the proper condenser capacity, which is approximately 
75 per cent of the line capacity in kilowatts. 

This is a fair indication of the conditions which will exist 
in the proposed system, the load centers of which are so dis- 
tributed as to limit the actual average distance of transmission 
to about 200 miles. The economic gain in doubling the capac- 
ity of lines which cost approximately $6,000,000, the present 
cost of which would be at least 30 per cent more, would more 
than offset the cost of all necessary changes, including the adop- 
tion of the standard frequency. 


1244 SORENSEN, COX AND ARMSTRONG: ° [Sept. 18 


Mechanical. The type of construction used on the Big Creek 
line has proven entirely adequate for California conditions. 
There have been only three mechanical failures all of which 
occurred shortly after the line went into service and were all 
due to defective line hardware. In one case the failure was 
due to faulty design. This fault was entirely corrected by re- 
designing the cable clamp so as to grip the steel core independ- 
ently of the aluminum conductor. The other two were due to 
individual defects in parts. There have been no tower failures 
and no tower maintenance whatever has been required. Ap- 
proximately 20 per cent of the Big Creek line is subject to ice 
and snow conditions, parts of it reaching altitudes of 5000 feet. 
Similar conditions exist: over practically the entire Prepeay’ 
220,000-volt system. 

Operation. The most interesting feature of the operation of 
the Big Creek system is its reliability, which has been equal 
to that of steam plants of similar capacity located near load 
centers. Flashovers have caused only momentary interrup- 
tions and have in no case resulted in damage such as to prevent 
immediate resumption of service. During the greater part of 
the time the power,has_ been carried over a single line for a 
large part of the distance. 

The operating history of the Big Creek system discloses no 
evidence of any trouble due to the high voltage of the system, 
and in addition has demonstrated that higher voltages may 
be used with equal or greater reliability. The Big Creek 
17,500 kv-a. generators have operated at 60 cycles satisfactorily 
and delivered full output at this frequency. 

High-tension line switching and synchronizing has been car- 
ried on consistently throughout the operation of the Big Creek 
system without trouble, and should be possible on the 220,000- 
volt system. During times of switching, slight discharges, 
never followed by any energy current, occur on the arresters. 
Operating at corona voltage rather than at 80 per cent of the 
critical voltage it may be possible to absorb these disturbances 
without arresters. 

Complete parallel operation of all lines must be adhered to 
in the proposed system. Satisfactory protective relay systems 
for dropping defective sections with little disturbance have been 
developed for present parallel transmission lines and there ap- 
pear to be no obstacles to extending these to the higher voltages. 

Generators. Curves of Figs. 3 and 4 show generator and line 


1919] CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS 1245 


characteristics for 60-cycle, 220,000-volt systems. The full 
lines are the charging currents in amperes for different lengths 
of line plotted against per cent normal voltage. The broken 
lines are generator characteristics of various sizes of generators 
when connected to condensive loads with no field excitation. 
The point of intersection of the generator curves with the line 


180 tae 
= 
y Ve A Ke 
160 o 25 
a V Ks F 
f j Le za ci 

e Vat iG x / ay 
S140 3 si ne A bi Va 
g gj si S/ | §/ nel 14 AAV 
S ish; / y 4] Ky ; , 
“120 Sy kel Sf sy 
Z flA Ye y. S 
& | | py; p i e Ne y 
pa 100 t A 1 7 bap Vij ZS 
S Ao 
ches are ms RAGA 600 
et ry / fl / 650 
Shel \700 
ee fA 
} 60 | 55 aaa 
fa 
ez 

40 a ie 

oot 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 


CHARGING CURRENT IN LINE CONDUCTOR 0.96 IN, DIA. 17 14 FT. SPACING 
AMPERES GENERATOR (REDUCED TO 220 KV.) NO FIELD EXCITATION, CONDENSIVE LOAD 


Fig. 3—GENERATOR AND LINE CHARACTERISTICS—60 CycLEs—220,000- 
Voitts—GENERATORS WITH SHORT-CrrcuiIT Ratio 1.0 


charging current curve for any particular length of line deter- 
mines the voltage to which the generator will build up when 
connected to that length of line with no field excitation. Fig. 
3 is for generators with a short-circuit ratio of 1.0, while Fig. 
4 is for those with a ratio of 1.5. 

Fig. 3 shows that with 50,000 kv-a. of generating capacity 
connected to a line of 250 miles, the line can be charged without 


1246 SORENSEN, COX AND ARMSTRONG: [Sept. 18 


losing control of the voltage with generators of this design. 
By having synchronous condensers connected to the line at 
the receiving station generators of this capacity will bring up 
any length of line necessary to the successful operation of the 
proposed system. These curves show that generators for such 
a system should be designed with the highest short-circuit ratio 


HE 


| 
| 
| 


; as 
160 Lf ae ake 
; ’ | < Vv 
2a) 
By 
© 140 
Oo 
(=) 
oOo 
oO 
N 
N 


— 
De) 
o 


= 
fo) 
oO 


fez) 
Oo 


PERCENT VOLTAGE 100 PERCENT 
foe) 
o 


0 40 80 120 160 200 240 280 
AMPERES | CHARGING CURRENT IN LINE, CONDUCTOR 0.961N. DIA., 17 FT. 61N. SPACING 
GENERATOR (REDUCED TO 220 KV.) NO FIELD EXCITATION, CONDENSIVE LOAD 


Fie. 4—Generator and Line Cuaracteristics—60 Cycres—220,000 
Voits—GENERATORS WITH SHORT-Crrcurr Ratio 1.5 
that other conditions will permit in order to reduce to a mini- 
mum the tendency to become self exciting. 
*Data for these curves were worked out in the laboratory 
of Throop College of Technology in 1915 and results verified 
by actual tests on the 17,500 kv-a. generators at Big Creek. 


*For further data and explanation of generator performance with 
large condensive loads see Newbury, Electric J ournal, 1918, 


1919] CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS 1247 


Conclusions. Such a system as proposed is needed im- 
mediately ; all engineering fundamentals essential to a solution 
of its problems are well understood and the Big Creek system 


i 0 D _p Medford CALIFORNIA 


E California-Oregon Power Company 
~~. 1 oes G Northern California Power Company,Cons. 
\ Oro Electric Corporation (Pacific Gas & Electric Co.) 
Pacific Gas & Electric Company 
Great Western Power Company 
Western States Gas & Electric Company 
Snow Mountain Water & Power Company 
California Telephone & Light Company 
Sierra & San Francisco Power Company : 
junction/City ek - / 10 Silver Lake Power & Irrigation Company (So.Sierras Pwr.Co.) 
S s x / 11 Pacific Power Company (So.Slerras Pwr:Co.) 


9 


teks | 
—ly 
Ny 
/ 
WOU MNS Wr 


Fe Ho 12 Coast Counties Gas & Electric Company 
Redding &s; ‘s. Sc 13 Coast Valleys Gas & Electric Company (Sierras & S.F.Pwr.Co.) 
i. 1 14 San Joaquin Light & Power Corporation : 
z 15 . Mt.Whitney Power & Electric Company Saealedisan Co.) 
) . te / 16 Pacific Light & Power Corporation (So.Cal.Edison Co.) 
3 ca i 17 Southern California Edison Company 
at / 18 Southern Sierras Power Company 
j 19 Holton Power Company (So.Sierras Pwr.Co. 
Xe \ 3 20 Ventura County Power Company-(Co.Cal.Edison Co.) 
x wey: =e 21 Coachella Valley Ice & Electric Company (So.Sierras Pwr.Co.) 
NO Lovelock 22 Tuolumne Electric Company 
13 Zz 23 Los Angeles Aqueduet 


azen NEVADA 


ran 1 Truckee River General Electric Company _ 
2 Nevada-California Power Company (So.Sierras Pwr.Co.) 
p Placerville 3 Nevada Valleys Power Company 


Electra P.H. Fairviewond ep | ARIZONA 


eens sPegtanisiats PH. 2 1 Salt River Project of U.S.Reclamation Service 
ae WL 4 2 Arizona Power Com any 
3 Desert Power & Water Company 


Ips 
fi CrP.H.Or{g \ Aurora 0 
fush Cr.P.H, 
p id Mountai 
who) » vy Z Pound Mountain 
Ss a Manhattan? Belmont / F 
OCA, Tonopah 
No-lyydo Plant ©, 4 i 
‘on Bishop Creek; Y ‘ b Goldfield ' 
2 . 
dence p This line has | 
ee > been dismantled 
Kaweah AH \ » Rhyolite ee 
Kay : . / a ete © 
a s ; Seen 
ePPLSACPH, a ; 
Lua Pater 
San Luis Obispo N 4 
187 i FF 
‘ ' 
Sap ransisquitq Ie : 
p76 »- i \ 8 Kingman 
oe” vy ys 3 
kes 
= wo Redlands Aseria 27 Osi A 
Riverside / 
16 ~ Coachella ree Prescatt 
$ SEA 
60,000 V.Line Imperial Je, [8 


! Brawley (é 
!] 196 FHoltvilles, } , 
San Diegoi# EI Centro S&—@ (PHOENIX rie, 
\ ~- —-- — - > — - Yuma ae 
4 H, Mexicali = 


Fic. 5—Mapr or WESTERN TRANSMISSION LINES 


can be used as a part of the project without material recon- 
struction. : 

To supply this need, arrangements should be made without 
delay for a complete working out of all details of the proposed 


1248 SORENSEN, COX AND. ARMSTRONG: [Sept. 18 ° 


system, as otherwise in the future it may be necessary to do 
a large amount of reconstruction to bring together individually- 
designed systems, which is never a wholly satisfactory pro- 


cedure. 
COMPARATIVE DATA 


Big Creek lines at 220 kv. lines as 
150 kv. proposed by Silver 
Aluminum steel cable 
ID TATA SVS Tercrat lee rake ee aibia ® Sich Goo 0.95 in. 1.036 in. 
Circular sntlsre aces cee cre 6 aiete ais 683,000 808,900 
Wreig int et Loot. ...cerac. te oe euaie ean 0.75 1b. 0.94 1b. 
Length of GUerage SPAN. «tere. «| ae ewslae a 750 ft. 800 ft. 
Weight of towers without footings : 
SuUuspensiony Ash. eee ee: sms om ae 4300 Ib. 9000 to 14,000 Ibs. 
Anchor.. fs Serato 6450 lb. 24,000 lb. 
Stringing foeon At 80 deg. ree 
No ice ‘allowances cece. eeeles 4 4740 lb. 
Ice allowance... .>. S255 Sp sic, SE 3130 Ib. 
Maximum tension allowed............. 8500 lb. 17,300 lb. 
- Insulator strings to carry load 
Suspensionrre ee saieee Saees exteries 1 2and3 
Amchors hectic cctios «aman 2) 6 


For further data regarding the Big Creek line refer to the 
paper 150,000 Transmission System by Woodbury, A. I. E. E. 
TRANS., 1914. 

Map. Fig. 5 shows the existing transmission systems of 
California, Nevada, and Arizona, varying in voltage up to 
150,000 and the names of the operating companies. To avoid 
confusion these lines are not shown on the map of the gs a 
system. 

The authors wish to express appreciation of suggestions made 
by Mr. H. A. Barre which led to the preparation of this paper. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1249 


DISCUSSION ON ‘“‘CALIFORNIA 220,000-VoLT—1000-MILE— 
1,500,000-Kw. TRANSMISSION Bus.’’ (SORENSEN, Cox, 
ARMSTRONG), Los ANGELES, CAL., SEPTEMBER, 20, 1919. 


Ralph Bennett: _ Itis interesting to note that this paper can 
hardly be said to be in advance of actual construction since the 
lower half of the proposed line is already in operation in the 
Big Creek Line of the Southern California Edison, while the 
northern half of the transmission is under contemplation for 
immediate construction as the Pit River Line of the Pacific and 
Gas and Electric, and at the full contemplated voltage. 

Our gain in reliability in the construction of power trans- 
mitting devises is no better illustrated than in the advance be- 
tween the timid and temporary construction utilized in the 
latter 90’s, and the substantial, permanent and well developed 
methods now at hand. 

Yet it can hardly be said that there has been any considerable 
advance during this entire period in the abstract technical 
theory of the art. The change has been in the application of 
these abstract values to the concrete case of electrical trans- 
mission. This is well illustrated in the introduction as a 
matter of routine equipment of the use of synchronous con- 
densers on these modern lines where the use of such apparatus 
was considered to be entirely experimental ten years ago. 

It is probable that the change in the status of the business 
from the period of the latter 90’s to the present date is greater 
than the change in its technical features. It is no longer 
possible to consider the electric lighting plant as a private 
enterprise. It is today a public utility extending over one or 
many states, and serving more territory than the average rail- 
road system, and has come under state and Federal regulation 
more sharp and penetrating than the Government exercises 
over any other business. 

The introduction during the past two years of inter-ties 
between the various physical properties of the Western power 
companies has long been foreshadowed. ‘The paper proposes 
that these ties, now of a temporary and insufficient character, 
be rendered a permanent portion of the systems. Many 
companies will be fed by a common net work just as many 
railroad companies feed across their transfers, loads derived from 
many sources and intended for terminals as diversified as their 
origin. Under the ruling under which railroads have operated 
for a generation they are compelled as a matter of public policy 
to give equal care to all property entrusted to them regardless 
of its origin or its destination. They have become common 
carriers and far from rebelling from this condition they con- 
sider it to be an essential portion of their success. ws 

The power business is rapidly developing all of the conditions 
which have surrounded railroad operation insofar as the inter- 
linking of numerous independent companies is concerned. 

It appears logical for conditions eventually so to shape them- 


1250 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


selves that the power company transmissions will become 
common carriers, not merely as the result of mutual agreements 
between existing monopolistic companies, but by action of law. 
As a result, any producer of power, however small, will be 
assured that his production will be received on the transmission 
net work, and that he will receive therefor a price fixed by a 
state regulating body on a basis of a fair return on his invest- 
ment. 

It is, I think, obvious to anyone acquainted with the present 
power situation that this would result in the construction of 
numerous small plants capable of introducing a fair amount of 
power as an incidental to the handling of water, natural gas, oil, 
or other power sources. 

There are numerous cases within the knowledge of every 
engineer in this vicinity where considerable blocks of power 
could be produced on a schedule which would not permit of sale 
to a local net work, even if such sale were permitted by the 
railway commission, but where the production cost of the power 
would be so low that the power could be-produced to great 
advantage if it could be successfully wholesaled to a net work 
capable of absorbing it regardless of its fluctuations. 

Almost every irrigation system in the state possesses drops 
capable of producing a more or less considerable amount of 
power. 

Numerous desirable combined irrigation and power projects 
are neglected because it has not been possible in the past to 
develop a market for the power, although the power in con- 
nection with irrigation could be produced at a very low figure. 

On the north end of the Pacific coast there are sources of 
power as a by-product from wood working plants; there are 
coal mines lying undeveloped because they are not favorably 
located with reference to a rail haul market; in the oil producing 
industry vast quantities of oil and natural gas are wasted be- 
cause they are unsuited to market demands or are in a location 
such that they cannot be successfully delivered to distant 
markets, yet they could be sources of large amounts of power 
which could be readily handled over a transmission bus. 

It is unnecessary and perhaps aside from the purpose of the 
paper to go into detail on these items. The one other matter 
in the same connection however is of interest. Railroad 
electrification has been much discussed of recent years but has 
been toanextent held back by the very considerable problem 
involved in the extremely irregular use of power which will 
occur on most of the western roads. 

Taken in connection with an ordinary local transmission this 
makes a load so undesirable as to render the power rate abnor- 
mally high. 

But in connection with a centralized power system handling 
one or two million kilowatts these fluctuations would be regu- 
larly supplied by the excess capacity of the net work. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1251 


The problems of engineering, of finance and of political 
expediency involved in the changes now taking place in the 
relations of the power companies to each other, and to the 
public, are too great to even touch in this discussion. 

P. D. Jennings: This paper is especially valuable at this 
time owing to the rapid advance of fuel prices and the necessity 
for the conservation of coal and oil for the essential industries 
that can not avail themselves of hydroelectric central station 
energy. 

I believe, as this paper slightly implies, that this high-tension 
bus scheme could economically be carried out to include all of 
the great hydroelectric developments west of the Mississippi 
River. Of course it is not supposed that there would be an 
exchange of energy, say, between eastern Montana and 
southern California, but it is a fact that power plants on this 
bus line would have the great advantage of the diversity of 
load demanded, by substations, at the load centers along the 
line. 

The two important considerations to be given, of course, are 
its operation and financing. It would appear to me that the 
operation of such a bus net work would require a unified 
control; and that the load dispatching work would have to be 
divided up into districts, or regions, which in turn would be 
responsible to an operating board of control composed of 
regional operating directors. This method of operation, of 
course, would require a unit scheme of financing. The probable 
formation of a holding company whose stock would be pur- 
chased and allocated by some equitable plan among all of the 
great generating systems interested. 

Of course such a scheme would probably have many very 
serious disadvantages, from the individual standpoint of some 
of the companies involved, as well as some of the Public Service 
Commissions. 

But these difficulties I do not believe would be insurmount- 
able owing to the fact that both the public and the companies 
would be materially benefited by helping to reduce the rapidly 
increasing operating costs. 

C. O. Poole:. To my mind this proposed plan is one of the 
most important projects presented to the engineering profes- 
sion from a conservation point of view. Ihave been, for years, 
a firm believer in this scheme and can see many advantages that 
will accrue from it, such as making possible comparatively 
small hydroelectric developments that will be in reach of the 
proposed bus, that would otherwise be too remote or without 
market for the output; or there may be streams suitable for 
power development that do not have storage facilities to equal- 
ize the flow throughout the year, in which event it would neces- 
sitate a steam plant in order to carry the load during the 
non-run-off periods. Under such conditions the investment to 
make this development might not be justified to supply an 
individual system, while with the proposed bus such a develop- 


1252 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


ment might be advantageously made, simply utilizing the 
output of the stream while the run-off period ison. This same 
condition might apply also to irrigation systems where there 
are drops in the canals and water supply streams. js 

One of the principle advantages of connecting all generating 
and distributing systems to such a bus would be the improve- 
ment of the load factor conditions by diversity of both the 
generating capacities and the demands of the many diversified 
conditions of the different systems. For this same reason there 
would be less necessity for over-installation on-water power 
generating systems, thereby very materially decreasing the 
spare unit investment and with its consequent less over head 
expense and reduction in cost for generation. From recent 
statistics the average yearly load factor of electric systems 1n 
the United States is only 30 per cent, and, while California’s 
load factor is materially better than this, it is subject to much 
improvement. Ste 

As pointed out by the authors of the paper, and as theoreti- 
eally set forth by Mr. Silver’s paper in this volume, page 
1037, the voltage proposed is not an impossible one to operate, 
but simply a matter of insulation and clearances. From 
a transmission point of view I might suggest, however, 
that the eleven units in the insulator string, as suggested 
by the authors, might be somewhat inadequate for the 
insulation of the new line unless insulators of a more reliable 
nature can be obtained than have been made use of in the past. 

On this subject, the experiments cited in Mr. Silver’s paper 
upon the dry arc-over and wet arc-over tests, are of unusual 
interest and it would seem that the line insulation should be 
based upon the curve of the wet arc-over, rather than of the 
dry arc-over conditions, inasmuch as the real test of the insula- 
tion is during storm and fog conditions, and, while from the 
curve mentioned the eleven insulators in the string might 
approach the flat portion of the dry arc-over curve, yet there is 
plenty of justification for adding more units in the string when 
the wet arc-over line on the curve is considered. The operation 
of such an important line as proposed should carry with it 
larger factors of safety than an individual system might eco- 
nomically call for, and, therefore, extra insulation in such a 
system would be, in my estimation, fully justified. 

Special interest is attached to the probable conditions of 
corona loss upon this proposed line. Ihave been of the opinion 
for some time that it might be possible so to proportion sections 
of the transmission system of the higher voltages that the cor- 
ona loss might be a means of dissipating energy in the event of 
over-voltages from any cause, and in the present instance it 
would seem that the line approaches this condition. In the 
event of an unusual high-voltage surge, energy would be dis- 
sipated to such an extent that it would tend to hold down the 
rise in voltage and, therefore, would be a benefit and protection 
to the system. I think this a feature that should be very 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1253 


carefully considered and experiments conducted beforehand to 
determine to what extent the corona loss could be utilized for 
the purpose mentioned. 

Aside from the purely engineering conditions involved in 
such an undertaking there is another feature, to my mind quite 
as important as the strictly technical side of the situation, and 
that is the method of handling the different companies’ input to 
the bus and the output from the bus. With a dozen-or more 
companies taking from and feeding to such a system, many 
problems are involved that would have to be satisfactorily 
worked out, both as to the protection of individual systems 
from overload conditions, and also protection of the bus from 
service interruption. These features are engineering problems 
that can doubtless be worked out by a comprehensive system _ 
of relay switches. Probably a still more difficult situation is 
involved in the method of measurement of the current to and 
from the different companies. This last question also involves 
the ownership of the transmission bus, as to whether all the 
distributing companies would have ownership in the bus pro- 
portional to the capacities of their plants, or whether each 
should have ownership in the bus proportional to the kilowatt 
hours used by the different companies, and each company 
share its proportion of maintenance and overhead costs of the 
system, or whether an independent company should own the 
bus, this independent company being composed of the con- 
tributing companies and each of the contributing companies 
sharing in the ownership of the bus proportional to the sizes of 
their plants, or as to their proportional use of the bus. These 
are all much involved questions the solution of which, it seems, 
should rest jointly between the engineers, the commercial 
department and the financiers of the institutions involved. 
Personally I have not, so far, worked out any practical solution © 
to this problem. ~ 553 

To my mind this proposed transmission bus should not be 
treated as some mythical thing to be considered in the far 
distant future, but as something that is now needed, and im- 
mediate consideration should be given to working out of all 
details involved in carrying the project to a successful issue. 

J. D. Ross: There seems to be no reason why 220,000 volts 
should not be used commercially, providing the proper syn- 
chronous apparatus controls the voltage and providing the ° 
insulation has a good factor of safety. The cost of such long 
lines will, of course, be commercially feasible only where there 
are large quantities of power to justify the expense. It is 
probable that before many years this voltage will be consider- 
ably exceeded and will be considered ‘moderate. ; 

The city of Seattle is at present embarking on an enterprise 
on the Skagit River one hundred miles distant from the city. 
On a 50 per cent load factor, there will ultimately be developed 
at this point one-half million horse power. On account of this 
very large quantity of power, it is desired to limit the number 


1254 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


of lines as far as possible by using high voltage and for this 
reason six lines are intended and the voltage will be 160,000.. 
Had the distance been two or three times as great, 220,000 
volts might reasonably have been used. ; 

Three of the coast cities besides Seattle own their own 
electric power systems; Los Angeles, Pasadena and Tacoma. 

Some years ago I spoke to the men in charge of these systems 
of the hope that some day there would be a high-voltage line 
paralleling the coast which would allow one city to help the 
other but at that time the voltages possible were not adequate. 
From Seattle to Los Angeles is about 1500 miles and it is a 
notable fact that the line at present under discussion is 1100 
miles in length. Such a line along the coast would be a benefit 
to many of the smaller towns especially, and could be partici- 
pated in by companies and municipalities alike. Of course, 
probably no city or combination of cities would attempt such 
a line but the best and largest water powers are rapidly being 
used up and when it comes later to the proper conservation of 
all such resources, no doubt the states affected will take a hand 
and interconnection between states would make such a line an 
actual fact. One of the great troubles which prevents inter- 
connection of systems at the present time is the dissimilarity 
of voltage and phase relation and one of the greatest works 
that the Institute could do would be to bring about a better 
standardization of voltages. 

Leslie F. Curtis: Dr. Magnusson, in the November 15, 
1918 issue of the Journal of Electricity, considered some of the 
phases of a similar type of bus for the state of Washington. 
He selected the state of Washington because he happened to 
be familiar with conditions there. 

The principal points brought out by Dr. Magnusson in his 
paper are advantages to be obtained by the Federal regulation 
of such a bus system. I am not prepared to advocate either 
Federal or private control. I will simply refer you to his paper. 

J. B. Fisken: Professor Curtis has brought out the point 
that I wanted brought out. Dr. Magnusson advocates a 
Federally owned bus and I think there are numerous objections 
tosuchascheme. There would be difficulty connected with the 
utilities working on a Federally owned bus. 

H. A. Barre: On this general matter of government con- 
trol, I think the big question, or the big trouble, with govern- 
ment ownership in that sort of thing is that you don’t want the 
umpire to play on either of the teams. If the government 
would get out of the way and let us do the job, we can do it. 

We are coming more and more to recognize the fact that 
neither the government, or companies, or financiers, or any 
other element, will have much to say about the develop- 
ment of this project. The development will be according to 
the natural economic laws which are as unalterable as the 
multiplication tables. Improper financing, improper engineer- 
ing and improper relations between the companies and the 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1255 


public, and the public and the organizations of the companies, 
can gum up the whole game; they can delay it; they can inter- 
fere with it, but they can no more stop the building of it than 
the building of a dam across a river can stop the water for there 
comes a time when it does run over. 

I do not think that this is a good time to sell the United 
States short. I think there is enough common horse sense in 
the United States and enough economic pressure for the carry- 
ing out of such schemes and we will get the proper answer in 
spite of all these things that are trying to interfere. 

I object to the paper as a whole because I do not like such an 
arrangement. I do not think we should worry about a 1100 
mile bus in California. I think when this thing does come it 
will come very quickly. It is going to be tied in with the 
Colorado power for a starter; then south through New Mexico 
to Albuquerque, Needles, Bakersfield, Mount Shasta, and 
wind up, as has been said, in Butte. 

The great part of the work is done. There are already a 
great many interconnections. Those interconnections have 
been the means of a great economic saving in the past two 
years. Just in our little corner of the job, the San Joaquin 
Valley would have been absolutely shut down this year if it 
had not been possible for an arrangement to be made between 
the Edison, the San Joaquin, the Mt. Whitney, the San Diego 
and the Southern Sierras Companies. It is not very far from 
being shut down now as far as the shortage of power is con- 
cerned, but the job is still running and the amount of inter- 
ference to service has been extremely small, that is true in 
spite of the fact that it was necessary to buy current from San 
Diego. One of the great stumbling blocks, of course, is the 
50-cycle system in the middle of a big 60-cycle territory. 

The French government has done a very intelligent thing. 
They have standardized the whole country at 50 cycles and 
standardized the voltages in multiples of the square root of 3, 
as high as anybody wants to go. I do not think anybody 
would want to go higher than the 110,000 or 120,000 volts at 
the present time. 

That is a line along which we could follow to some advantage 
throughout the United States through the action of the Insti- 
tute. 

Such a line is not going to be difficult to operate. It will be 
broken up into regions, as has been suggested, in which a group 
of plants will supply a group of territories, or a group of loads, 
and means provided for an interconnection between those 
oups. 
e The control of the voltage is one of the most serious troubles 
and that is going to come through an extension of our work with 
synchronous condensers, without any question. The real 
instructive thing that has come out of this interchange is the 
fact that it has been possible for companies whose interests 
were to a very considerable extent antagonistic to get together 


1256 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


on a broad enough basis to help out each other with their 
troubles and not try to take all the money the other fellow has 
when they do it. 

L. M. Klauber: I do not know how it should be done, but 
I hope it will be done soon. 

I think that one-point that. Mr. Barre brought out is of 
considerable interest; this is that all of these things will be 
easier to do after they are done. They work themselves out 
beautifully. A lot of the problems that have been causing us 
sleepless nights (I refer to problems not of engineering but of 
operation and management) have really eliminated themselves. 
We sometimes wake up in the morning and find that the solu- 
tions which have bothered us for six months have already been 
accomplished and that the difficulties which worried us have 
failed to materialize when the time came. 

You probably noticed a brief editorial in a recent copy of the 
Journal of Electricity, wherein it was stated that when the 
Pacific Fleet came into San Diego Bay, the Crane Valley 
reservoir of the San Joaquin Light and Power Company, 
distant many hundreds of miles and three companies from 
San Diego, had to be drawn on for an extra amount of energy. 
This, of course, is an interesting proposition. It would be 
somewhat more interesting, if true, which was not the case. 
As a matter of fact the shortage on that particular day was 
due to a defective condenser. 

I think that the transmission bus, when the time comes, will 
work itself out without the difficulties in financing, in operation 
and in government supervision, which now appear almost 
insurmountable. 

J. A. Lighthipe: I think Mr. Barre is perfectly right when 
he made the statement that while we are struggling and talking 
about this proposed bus, we will have it. Nothing is improb- 
ane and these great projects simply spring up when the need is 
there. 

The great problem of this business is not only the diversity 
of the distribution, it is the great diversity of the supply. Our 
water sheds in California are very erratic and diversified. That 
problem within itself is a great one. 

We have Railroad Commissioners who do not interfere with 
us. They pat us on the back and tell us to go ahead. As long 
as the State of California has a Public Service Commission, 
such as the Railroad Commissioners, with a modern man at the 
head of it, this matter of public control is not going to bother us. 

It is a beautiful thing to talk Socialism and it is a beautiful 
thing to talk public ownership, but it does not get us anywhere. 
A man with the nerve will get hold of these projects and bring 
them to a proper solution. The State of California has reaped 
the benefit of the pioneers of the power situation and will con- 
tinue to do so. 

The question of voltage is an interesting one. When we had 
10,000 volts we were afraid of it; we never dreamed of such a 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1257 


thing in our lives. When Southern California sprung to 
33,000 volts even the manufacturers of apparatus shook their 
heads with uncertainty. I remember a man, in the early days 
who stated that 50,000 volts would be the ultimate we could 
hope for. That statement was made in the days when we 
knew nothing about all these modern troubles and the talk 
about a 50,000 voltage was thought impossible. However, we 
kept creeping up until we reached 60,000 volts and then 
150,000 volts. We have also learned that the higher the volt- 
age the less trouble we have. That is probably due to the 
fact that the engineers on the job have worked more thoroughly; 
that is, we know what we are running into and we build to 
meet that condition. 

_ The future of the state is so great, where the price of oil used 
is ever increasing; where every bit of power in this state should 
be developed; where this power should be used and where we 
should start a campaign of conservation on what we have in 
the state. 

P. M. Downing: It is very interesting to look at a map and 
see a 1500-mile bus extending from somewhere in British Colum- 
bia or the Northern part of Washington down to the Southern 
part of California or into Arizona, and from an engineering 
viewpoint we are able to convince ourselves that the problem is 
not one impossible of solution. In my opinion the real problem 
is not one of engineering but rather one of economics. There is 
no doubt but what in time the generation of power by the use 
of oil must be superseded almost entirely by water, and yet, at 
the same time, I do not know of any one particular state or 
district on this Coast that is going to have a sufficient surplus 
of hydro power to justify a high-voltage bus such as for trans- 
mitting energy from one state to another or from the system of 
one operating company to the system of another. There is no 
doubt in my mind but what in a very short time we will see 
lines operating at voltages as high or even higher than 220,000, 
but there is an economic limit to the distance that power can 
be transmitted. There is potential water power all along this 
coast from Alaska to Mexico that can be developed to meet the 
local demands. I look for a more general standardization of 
voltages and frequencies on the systems of the various operating” 
companies and a more general interconnection of the various 
systems. If these interconnections can be looked upon as 
forming a bus, I feel that in time we may reasonably expect it 
to become a reality, but, obviously, interconnections of greater 
capacity that are necessary to carry the limited amount of 
energy that will be interchanged, cannot be justified. 

When I say that the engineering problems can be more readily 
overcome than the commercial or economic ones I have in 
mind, particularly, an arrangement that was made a year or 
two ago between three of the companies in the northern part of 
the State of California. Those systems were tied together as © 


1258 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


a matter of economy and for the utilization of surplus power 
available. 

When that tie-in was proposed it took the engineers but a 
short time to work out the engineering problems involved. It 
happened, however, that I also had something to do with 
drafting the final contract. It took us about three months to 
get the commercial details worked out. If there had been a 
larger number of companies involved, the problem would have 
been a correspondingly more difficult one. The physical or 
engineering details are simple, and can be taken care of very 
readily. SoIsay the whole problem is an economic one. Can 
any company, or any number of companies, or the State or 
Federal Government, afford to generate power up in the ex- 
treme northern part of this State. and transmit it down to 
San Diego, when there is power nearer San Diego than that in 
the north? Ido not look for a bus of great capacity to be built 
in the immediate future, except such as might result from the 
normal interconnection of lines of companies operating in 
contiguous territory. Negotiations are now under way looking 
for a connection between the lines of the Pacific Gas & Elec. 
Co. and those of the San Joaquin Light & Power Corporation. 
This connection will be made within a comparatively short 
time and when completed will give a connection from Oregon to 
San Diego. This connection is of limited capacity but is serv- 
ing every purpose and in view of the amount of power that is 
available, a line of greater capacity cannot be justified. Inter- 
connections between the various systems are very desirable and 
will continue to be made at whatever voltages the systems may 
operate, but until there is an apparent necessity for a bus I 
think we may reasonably conclude that the necessary capital 
to construct one will not be forthcoming. 

J.B. Fisken: Mr. Downing has raised a question as to the 
advisability of this bus line. Personally, I think he is right 
and that this will solve itself in the interconnection of different 
systems without any great transfer of power over long distances. 
I do not ever expect to see the power from Spokane utilized in 
San Diego. 

I see no reason, however, why Spokane power should not 
relieve some other power that could be transmitted a shorter 
distance. 

This problem, I think, is largely a western one, but perhaps 
Mr. Stevens can tell us how they do these things in Pennsyl- 
vania. 

J. F. Stevens. I would have given a great deal if, during 
the war, such a plan as is proposed in this paper had been in - 
operation in the East, or even if there had been such limited — 
inter-connections as you now have. 

It happened that I was connected with one of the Govern- 
ment agencies which had to do with the power situation in 
Southeastern Pennsylvania. We were confronted with the 
fact that there was a distinct shortage of power in our district, 


1919 DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1259 


not only a shortage of coal but also a shortage of generating 
capacity in our public service power plants. This meant that 
every pound of coal burned had to be burned at maximum 
efficiency and every generating plant operated at maximum 
capacity in order to secure the power necessary for the operation 
of our war industries. 

The natural solution seemed to be a combination of the 
resources of the power companies operating in the district by 
tie-in connections which would render available their full 
generating capacity which then could be distributed to the 
various industries irrespective of their location. With this in 
view a conference was called and I found the power companies 
very willing to discuss the problem but without available funds 
with which to practically effect a tie-in. They were operating at 
from 25 to 60 cycles transmitting voltages from two thousand 
to sixty thousand so that the cost of installing frequency 
changers and transformers was considerable. The Govern- 
ment was prepared to spend unlimited millions in other direc- 
tions but, while recognizing that power was essential to pro- 
duction, refused to appropriate any funds for the purpose of 
tying together the power plants of this district. We found 
ourselves in the usual position of a war-time bureau with author- 
ity to commandeer a tie-in but no authority to expend money 
for it or to compel the companies to spend money. 

As a solution we had introduced into Congress a bill appropri- 
ating two hundred millions of dollars for the purpose of con- 
structing power stations located at the mine mouth and erecting 
transmission lines to serve the district from Washington to 
New York. This bill failed of passage and, in view of the fact 
that it would probably have resulted in federal ownership and 
operation, I am not particularly sorry, for few of us in the East 
look with favor upon government ownership. The net result, 
however, has been to stimulate interest in power generation 
at the mine mouth in stations equipped with large units and 
transmitting over a very considerable radius. You are 
fortunate in having available water powers which are almost 
totally absent in Eastern Pennsylvania but we have as partial 
compensation large deposits of fuel coal of excellent quality. 

Some experiments have been made and the results so far 
achieved have been: exceedingly satisfactory, particularly in 
localities where there were a considerable number of small 
public service or municipal plants, and it bids fair to be a 
solution of the old municipal plant problem. It happens that 
back in the early days of electric lighting there was quite a 
mania for municipal ownership of lighting plants and almost 
all of them have fallen into sorry condition. In order to con- 
struct the plants the town would be bonded and no provision 
made for a sinking fund. They are, therefore, now in the 
position where they have an obsolete plant with a bond issue 
against it and no funds for the redemption of the bonds or for 
the reconstruction of the plant. I have in mind one such 


1260 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


plant in Southern Ohio where the municipality was generating 
at a cost of from nine to twelve cents and selling at four and 
there are many more like it. They had no money with which 
to modernize their plant and even if they had the load was not 
sufficient to bring their generating cost down to a point where 
they could sell at a profit. The solution was found by estab- 
lishing a generating plant at a mine not far distant and furnish- 
ing power to this town as one of its customers at a price which 
enabled them to sell to their citizens at a profit by transforming 
their generating station into a substation. 

I firmly believe the time will come when all power in my 
district will be generated at the mine-mouth, the various plants 
being tied in together on a common bus and distributed to 
various substations. You on the Pacific Coast have the 
advantage of water power and I think your plan most admirable. 
Even the discussion has been typical for when I came in the 
room the length of the transmission line was given at 570 miles 
and has now grown to 1500 miles but even the latter figure 
does not seem unreasonable in view of the existing situation. 
It is not, to my mind, the question of whether you have local 
power enough to meet the demands of each locality or whether 
you could expand your plants so as to secure it. It is the 
ability to interchange power, supply deficiencies and take care 
of break downs which is so very valuable. There have been 
many cases in the East where one large generator would go out 
in a public service plant which meant a shortage of power and 
light in that district which shortage could have been cared for 
had it been possible to tie-in with other power companies 
operating in the immediate neighborhood. 

It does not seem to me that the plan here proposed presents 
any serious difficulties. The project naturally divides itself 
into generation, transmission and distribution. The various 
generating companies sell their power to the transmission 
companies which in turn would sell to the distributing com- 
panies in proportion to their demand. While there are some 
operative problems yet to be solved the principal problem is 
one of finance. 

Relative to the operating end, I will state that in the East 
we have quite generally adopted a system of parallel transmis- 
sion lines. As arule we do not run two or more circuits on one 
pole line but mount each circuit on separately located pole lines 
half a mile or more apart. This practise has tended to save us 
from lightning troubles and break downs in the transmission. 
circuits. 

_C.W. Koiner: I have been thinking of this paper along the 
line of economics. It appeals to me as practically suggesting 
the interconnections which saved us a great deal during the 
period of the war. If interconnection and tieing in, whether 
by as long a bus as this or a shorter one, is good in times of war 
it certainly ought to be good in time of peace. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1261 


The diversity factor which has been touched on by Mr. 
Lighthipe is the keystone of the light and power business. 
Without diversity we all would be in some other line of business 
because there would be no money in the power business under 
present conditions and circumstances of operation. There 
would be the gathering up of the crumbs, as it were, of the 


, tieing in the plants that have water during some seasons of the 


year and none at others, enabling storage to be made, and all 
the other ways that would tend to mutually help out in times 
of stress. 

I do not think of this paper as applying to the Pacific Coast 
particularly, but I am thinking of what Mr. Stevens touched 
on in the East during the war. The fact that the great coal 
mines lie close to the seaboard, would have made it a wonderful 
thing to have had the advantage of tying-in during the war. 
Why haul the coal and cinders and ashes to the seaboard and 
then cart them out of the city after making the buildings 
black, creating a lot of dirt producing and inefficient steam 
plants? 

I think this principle was recognized ten or twelve years ago, 
or longer, but there are a great many things that enter into the 
problem, one of which has been touched on here and on which, 
I think, the Chairman invited discussion—government owner- 
ship and regulation. 

It seems to me that it cannot be accomplished without 
regulation. Mr. Barre says that they try to rob one another 
and that they must have an umpire to prevent that kind of 
thing. The fellow who is able to take advantage, or figure the 
closest, will get the better of the other, figuratively speaking. 

Now, to deny that the government has not the ability to even 
generate this power and deliver it to the distributor, or regulate 
it, is to deny that we are capable of efficiently living under 
democracy. Our government is supposed to be a democracy; 
therefore, if you cannot solve a problem by and for the people 
of this character, then we need a boss; we need somebody who 
will crack the whip over us and make us perform efficient 
service. 

I am not one that believes that we are not capable of doing 
these things; I know we are. Some of the obstacles are the 
opposition of those who are entrenched. We may have stock 
in companies that have the water power cites, and we want 
more; we can make more money than if we let the government 
own it and run it for the people. Consequently, we as engi- 
neers are working for that side of the house and we naturally 
are opposed to government ownership and even _ regula- 
tion. But, some of the wiser heads, such as Mr. Phillip 
Cabot who wrote an excellent paper recently published . 
in the Electrical World, recognizes that government regulation 
is here to stay and that even government ownership is coming on 
certain things. The water power belongs to all of the people; 


_ go does the coal. Somebody happened to see it first and, there- 


1262 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


fore, the coal is in the hands of private interests, yet the eco- 
nomic life of the country depends upon coal. Now, all monopo- 
lies should be controlled, or rather owned by the government. 

I am not a Socialist, however; I am not making apologies 
for I believe in what I say. I believe that the water power of 
this country must be conserved or passed into the hands of 
private interests the same as the coal mines, and without 
regulation and proper control, the people of the state or of the 
various states, might not get the benefit. We must have 
regulation for the purpose of interchanging power-between the 
states. It cannot be done without it. 

When it came to winning the war we had to work as a govern- 
ment, all pulling together for the same thing. Now, in these 
problems we have to do the same thing and we might just as 
well face the problem in that way. 

J. F. Stevens: The last speaker has touched upon the 
question of government ownership and I want to give you one 
example of the efficiency of government ownership in this 
line—something with which the Institute was very closely 
associated. 

Just about the time of our entrance into the war, the Insti- 
tute, seeing the seriousness of the power situation and recogniz- 
ing that the defense of New York from attack by sea rested in 
Governors Island, called General Leonard Wood, then in 
command of the Island, into conference on the subject. We 
called attention to the fact that the Island was dependent upon 
the operation of its own power plant, government owned and 
operated, without which it would be impossible to use the 
search lights, ammunition hoists or even aim or fire the big 
guns, and that the failure of the plant, either through the act 
of an enemy or by accident, would leave New York defenseless 
from attack. 

General Wood acknowledged that our statement of the 
situation was correct and asked for our solution. We told him 
we had a large amount of power in and around New York 
which we were prepared to tie together and deliver to him on 
Governors Island through submarine cables for use as an 
auxiliary to or a substitute for the Island plant. His reply 
was that the government had no appropriation with which to 
pay for such service. We then offered to raise the money 
necessary to pay for the tie lines and to buy and lay the cable. 
Then, to our surprise, he told us there was a regulation which 
prevented the landing of a cable for any purpose whatsoever on 
such a government reservation as Governors Island and that 
it would require an act of Congress to enable the Army to take 
advantage of our generous offer. Such an act was introduced 
into Congress but never has been passed. From this you can 
see the sort of efficiency we may expect from government. 
ownership of utilities. 

J. A. Lighthipe: Mr. Koiner said he was not a Socialist. 


I want to tell him that we all are. I want to say that when we 


1919] | DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1263 


want anything done in a hurry we always have to do it our- 
selves. I want to tell Mr. Koiner that the money he has 
accumulated during his lifetime does not belong to him—it 
belongs to Uncle Sam, and when he dies it goes to the govern- 
ment. Of course, the government does not want to take it all; 
it allows him some to will to his wife and children and the part 
the government gets is called inheritance tax. 

I suppose Mr Koiner thinks he owns the money his™em- 
ployers pay to him. He does not do anything of the sort. Of 
course he uses some of it, but the government takes the rest 
and it is called Income Tax. 

Now, this would be a wonderful thing to develop these water 
resources. It ought to be done as an economic measure, but 
Uncle Sam has not got any money and how are we going to 
solve the problem? The government will do this: We will 
let the individual people invest their money in a Public Utility 
Corporation, but we are not going to let them run it and bam- 
boozle the country. What we are going to do is to put our 
own directors in there and tell them how their money is going 
to be spent; tell them just how much money they can borrow 
and criticize their method of construction. We are going to 
tell them how great dividends they are to pay. We call that 
the Railroad Commission. : 

That is just what we are running into. If we are going to 
have any public enterprise in this country, we are not going to 
have Uncle Sam start it because he is a little too slow. Weare 
going to have the individual enterprising pioneers of this — 
country develop all this power and we are going to have the 
Railroad Commissioners regulate our rates, etc. This will be 
done because, although Uncle Sam has not the money to do it, 
and is never ready to give it to us, he will tell us to put our 
money in and he will see that it is handled properly and that 
we get a good interest on the investment. But there will be 
no watered stock and no high financing. Consequently, every 
move we make, whether it be the purchase of something; or 
the installation of a new steam plant; or the installation of 
various water powers, we make our plans and submit them to 

*the Railroad Commission. They figure out whether we really 
need this plant, whether the cost would be excessive, and then 
tell us to go ahead. You then have the endorsement of the 
Railroad Commission. : 

Mr. Koiner stated that this thing can not go on without 
some control. I say we are under control. We cannot make 
a move in this state without the sanction of our Railroad Com- 
missioners and we are fortunate to have a very liberal set of 
men at the head of that Commission. We welcome this 
regulation because we are infinitely better off than some of the 
other cities that own their plants, because we keep our books in 


~ acertain way, as they tell us to; we have a sinking fund, which 


is lacking in some of our city plants and we are allowed a 


_ depreciation which is properly agreed upon. In other words 


re 


1264 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


the whole thing is run by the Public Utilities, only we are run- 
ning it under the direction of the state of California. = 

Lester S. Ready: I wish to say that I am optimistic 
regarding the installation of a transmission bus running 
throughout the State of California. From what we have seen 
during the last three or four years of the spirit of cooperation 
by the utilities during the period of the war we cannot help but 
realize that the problem is not an impossible one. 

I believe that if it had been said five or six years ago that the 
various utilities in Southern California would have stood 
together during the period of short water supply and not taken 
advantage of each other the remark would have been considered 
almost ridiculous. Yet, during the past year the supply of 
electric power in the southern and central part of California 
has been divided between the companies, the company with 
additional supply rendering service to its competitor at reason- 
able rates. Steam-electric power produced in Los Angeles and 
San Diego has been used to make possible the supplying of 
adequate service in the San Joaquin Valley, where a material 
shortage occurred. 

The big supply of hydroelectric power of the state is in the 
northern section. There is not a great deal of hydroelectric 
power developed or to be developed, in the south. The 
Southern California Edison Company has built its lines from 
Big Creek and there is still a great deal of undeveloped power 
on that stream which ultimately will be transmitted south of 
Tehachapi. It is doubtful whether the power supply of the 
development when fully completed will more than half supply 
the demands of Southern California, and power from the 
northern part of the state must be transmitted southward. 

Glancing at a map of the state you will see that all of the 
transmission lines lead southward, and at present the general 
flow of power is in that direction. There may never be a great 
deal of power produced on the Pit or Feather Rivers delivered 
to Los Angeles, but these rivers will relieve the demand upon 
the plants south of them, so that these in turn may be relieved 
to supply the demands further south. 

From a physical standpoint there are practically only two 
transmission systems in the state at the present time. From 
Merced north to the Oregon line there is a great network at 
present completely interconnected. All companies south of 
Merced form another great system fully interconnected, and it 
is not only possible but probable that within six months or a 
year there will be an interconnection between these two main 
systems. 

The war has done a great deal of good toward the develop- 
ment of interconnections between the utilities in this state and 
its affect will be a lasting benefit to the state as a result. The 
district in the south is requiring the full capacity of all the 
power plants and were it not for interconnection there would 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1265 


be a great shortage of power in the San Joaquin Valley at the 
present time. 

The Railroad Commission is ready to do its part in fostering 
the interconnections which should be made. It made special 
efforts during the war to assist in the full conservative use of the 
power supply of the state and I wish to state that we are very 
pleased with the way things have been carried out, and the 
electrical engineers have much to their credit. I am not fully 
advised of the basis by which Mr. Barre determined the rates 
which were charged between the companies during the emer- 
gency but am certain there has been no profiteering between the 
companies during this period. 

George A. Damon: One great thing that we are doing 
right here in connection with this proposed high-tension bus 
line is to establish a “sense of direction.’”’? We may not, just 
at present, be certain of all of the details—or how the enterprise 
is to be accomplished but I am sure we all feel that we are on the 
way. The situation is something like the starting of a foot 
ball game: we all know where the goal is but we are not at all 
sure of what each play will be to take us across the goal line. 
We may be quite certain, however, that if we all start in the 
right direction and stay together by constantly co-operating, 
eventually, we will accomplish this very desirable advance in 
the art. 

I think it is quite immaterial to the project, at this time, to 
consider whether the cost is to be financed “individually” or 
“collectively’’—that is by private capital or by public funds. 
We all love the democracy which we retained at the cost of the 
great war and recognize that our next problem is to strike an 
equitable balance between individual interests and the common 
welfare. My own sense of direction seems to indicate that the 
economic pressure of the need of this great interconnecting bus 
will evolve its own system or method of financing and that, as 
electrical engineers, we need not stumble or hesitate over this 
difficulty. ; 74 

From our own technical standpoint the great big important 
problem which we have not yet discussed is the question of 
frequency. As we all know we have in use in this part of the 
country both 50 cycles and 60 cycles. If I am properly in- 
formed about 25 per cent of our load is on a 50-cycle system. 
Under these circumstances we have yet to determine the cost 
and practicability of combining these two frequencies into one 
system. We are constantly and rapidly increasing the load on 
each of the two systems of distribution but here we are 
seriously considering the tying together of all sources of 
generation or supply by means of one great interconnecting tie 
line. Under these circumstances what do we propose to do 
eventually with these two frequencies? In my opinion this is 
the real electrical problem to which we should just at this time, 
address ourselves. 


1266 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


L. M. Klauber: I think that the question of frequency 1s 
somewhat like some of these economic problems—it will solve 
itself over night. The Edison Company has always claimed 
that 50 cycles is the proper frequency and that operation would 
be impossible at any other. However, last week when the 
engineering staff was not watching, the system speeded up to 
something like 5914 cycles and operated that way for about 
two minutes; they could as easily do it for two years. 

L. J. Corbett: As has been stated, the electrical features 
involved in the line projected have not been-discussed very 
much. It occurred to me after looking over this paper and 
listening to the remarks thus far, that some of these points have 
not been taken up because they are not of extreme importance 
from an electrical viewpoint. When you haveasystem as long as 
the one contemplated, with plants connected in at short dis- 
tances apart, the actual effect on the system, at San Diego, 
for instance, due to connecting in the plant at Spokane, would 
not be of great importance, because the load at San Diego 
would be taken care of by the plants in the closer vicinity. 
Only in certain cases where for some reason an entire district 
would be cut out, would we have even the problem of a long 
distance transmission line arising. It may be recalled that in 
the case of a long line there are differences in wave form which 
result from the transmission line characteristics, but it is my 
opinion that these would be almost eliminated in such a system 

as outlined here. 

’ As has been stated by one of the speakers, a 220,000-volt line 
is not necessary, as an interconnection of the ordinary existing 
systems, whether 30,000, 50,000, 60,000, 110,000 or 150,000 
volts, can be made. The lines can be interconnected just as 
they are by using proper transformer substations. As for the 
different frequencies encountered, that feature would present a 
minor difficulty; it would be an economic question solely, as it 
would call merely for the additional cost of a frequency changer 
when connection is made to a plant of a different frequency. 
It seems to me that everything required can be done with a 
ae! voltage line and with equipment already in use or avail- 

able. 

J. H. Anderton: All previous discussions on this paper 

have given practically no weight to the engineering problems 
involved in the design and operation of the proposed line. In 
fact, it has been stated here that the engineering problems are 
comparatively simple. This may be quite correct if the com- 
parison be made with the financial side of the problem. I do 
not believe, however, that we should assume the engineering 
features as a negligible factor. For instance, I note from the 
figures given on page 1240 of the paper that the distance be- 
tween Pit River and Los Angeles is 570 miles; to San Diego it 
would be approximately 700 miles. These distances are, of | 
course, more or less approximate and while they approach the 

quarter-wave length of 60-cycle propagation, there will be no 


1919] DISCUSSION AT LOS ANGELES 1267 


danger from this standpoint alone since a practical line has 
resistance and other constants which prevent the theoretical 
rise due to the quarter-wave length distance. However, with 
lines of any length and given constants, a point of highest 
receiver voltage and maximum charging kv-a. can be found. 
The converse is also true that with a given length certain 
constants will give the highest receiver voltage and maximum 
charging kv-a. With a line of the length under consideration, 
the use of normal line constants might reasonably give a 
receiver voltage of from 250 to 400 per cent of the normal 
generator voltage, assuming that the line were charged from 
oneend. This latter assumption is, of course, impossible due to 
the ky-a. capacity which will be-required to charge the line but 
indicates in a general way the necessity for a careful determina- 
tion of all the constants. The complexity of the problem is 
very apparent from the fact that the line may be operated as a 
whole or in part and could be charged from various sources. 

H. H. Cox: The idea in preparing this paper was that it 
is now time for some large development in California. Cali- 
fornia can use 100,000 or 200,000-kw. water power now and 
relieve the steam plants and shut off the use of fuel. You 
all know the price of fuel. Fuel means something more to us. 
In a pound of oil there is a whole lot of other things more 
valuable than the thermal unit. Therefore, the use of fuel 
is going to be turned in another direction to make these chemi- 
cal products, giving us the use of the by-products. 

Our confidence in the operation possibilities of the high- 
voltage line is absolute. We don’t think there will be any diffi- 
culty at all. In answer to Mr. Anderton, regarding the dis- 
tance of 750 miles, more or less, this system would never be 
operated as a transmission from Pit River to Los Angeles. 
You would have to get the individual sections together. That 
is, one line from Pit River to San Francisco and another from 
Big Creek to Los Angeles; then the two would be gotten 
together and power interchanged. It would be a physical 
impossibility to build up a line of this distance with generators 
because the quarter-wave length would act as a short circuit 


“on the line. 


In regard to the operation of the line, we state that com- 
plete parallel operation of all lines must be adhered to in the 
proposed system. Satisfactory protective relay systems for 
dropping defective sections with little disturbances have been 
developed for present parallel transmission lines and _ there 
appear to be no obstacles to extending these to the higher 
voltages. Such protective relay systems have been in use on 
60-kv. systems and are operating satisfactorily. 

This transmission bus, as I have said, will probably never 
transmit power from north to south, but it will be a means of 
caring for emergencies and transmitting surplus energy to 


take care of the diversity of the different loads. 


1268 CALIFORNIA TRANSMISSION BUS [Sept. 18 


The present interconnections have a very limited capacity, 
as you all know. One company may now have 10,000 kw. to 
spare and puts in an interconnection of that size. Tomorrow 
an emergency arises and the other company needs 20,000 kw. 
The interconnection would not carry it. In the beginning of 
our paper we assumed the interconnection of all the California 
power companies on an equitable cost basis. It is now time 
for a large development of power to take place in California. 

G. E. Armstrong: I just overheard, from Mr. Downing, 
the remark that we will have a job to justify this line. It 
doesn’t look that way to us. In the first place, Mr. Downing 
said that California had lots of power, I suppose ten years 
ago that the power we have now looked like quite a bit. When 
I first came with the Southern California Edison Company 
we had a peak of 30,000 or 40,000 kw. and we are now running 
over 175,000 kw. ‘The increase is going on a percentage basis. 
When on that basis, and the percentage increasing every 
year, we are going to pick up load pretty fast. 

Mr. Downing thinks he won’t live to see this line an accom- 
plished fact. I would like to call his attention to one point. 
For instance, the Southern California Edison Company, if 
this line isn’t put in, is going to need an additional 150,000- 
volt line to Big Creek very shortly. The two lines we have 
now are sufficient for about 60,000 kv-a. each. The two 
Big Creek plants now have a capacity of 60,000 kv-a. The 
installation of another plant there will bring it up to 100,000 
next year and we will need more for the next year. If the 
voltage is raised to 220,000 shortly, the capacity of each line 
would be about 125,000. This was the idea that we had in 
mind as a need of bringing this proposed line in operation. 

The San Joaquin Light and Power Co. now needs a trans- 
mission line running north and south and having a voltage 
of at least 110,000; that is what they are figuring on. You 
can easily see that it would be a waste of money for them to 
build a line of that capacity when the Big Creek line at 220,000 
volts could take care of both the Edison Company and the San 
Joaquin Light and Power Company. 

There is one other point. The longer this proposition is put 
off, the harder it will be to accomplish it. If it is necessary 
for the Southern California Edison Company to build another 
150,000-volt line to Big Creek, it would not be very favorable 
to changing to 60 cycles., This same thing would be true of 
any of the companies in the northern part of the state who find 
it necessary to extend their lines in the near future. But, if 
this bus line is considered now and worked out in a reasonable 
way, I don’t see why the next lines could not be built having 
in view the interconnection of the systems, so they could be 
operated at 220,000 volts when the time comes. 


Presented at a joint meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Institute 
of Radio Engineers, New York, October 1, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I.E. E, 


TRANSOCEANIC RADIO COMMUNICATION 


BY E. F. W. ALEXANDERSON 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The paper defines the state of the art of today which is the 
result of developments during the war. Transatlantic radio 
communication is at present maintained by five first class sta- 
tions, two in America and three in Europe. These stations 
operate at wave-lengths between 12,500 and 17,000 meters. The 
range of wave-lengths suited for such traffic is rather limited, 
the desirable wave length being included between the limits of 
10,000 to 20,000 meters. New developments indicate three 
methods for increasing the radio traffic without interference 
between the different messages. These methods are increase of 
the transmitting speed, closer spacing of wave lengths and direc- 
tive reception. If these technical possibilities are intelligently 
used, the author predicts that radio communication will be equal 
to all demands that will be placed upon it. 

The second part of the paper describes the radio transmitting 
system for the development of which the author is responsible. 
This system is represented by the naval radio station,. New 
Brunswick, N. J. and comprises new means for generating 
modulating, and radiating the continuous wave energy. The 
generator is the high-frequency alternator with which the - 
author’s name has become associated. The modulating system 
is the ‘‘magnetic amplifier’ which is described in a paper by the 
author before the Institute of Radio Engineers. The “multiple 
antenna’ system of radiation is described in this paper for 
the first time. The general theory and figures for the increased 
radiation efficiency are given. The author also predicts that the 
multiple antenna will make possible directive radiation on a 
large scale. 


T has already become generally known that a new highway 
for world traffic has been opened up through the develop- 
ment of transatlantic radio communication. It is now a matter 
of history that radio was largely used for communication 
-between the United States and armies in Europe and that 
the Great War was brought to a close by negotiations con- 
ducted by radio which led to the armistice. Now, we are 
ready for an international commerce of unprecedented scope, 
but lack adequate means for communication. 
The recent achievements of radio technique have become 
common knowledge, and the world has now turned to this new 
method of communication clamouring that it step in and save 


1269 


1270 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


the day. This is a condition which places a serious responsi- 
bility upon radio engineers. Fortunately, the technique has 
emerged from the cloud of mystery that used to surround it, 
and we are in position to treat the problem cooly and scienti- 
fically like any other problem in electrical engineering. How- 
ever, it must not be inferred that the task is any easy one, if 
the radio technique is to fulfill all the hopes which are placed 
on it. 

It has been demonstrated during the war period that trans- 
oceanic communication has become thoroughly reliable, every 
day in the year, and practically every hour in the day. Thus 
far, we can say, that the problem is solved. But a second 
question will be raised: What volume of traffic can be carried 
by the means at our disposal at the present time, and what is 
the relation of this radio traffic to the world traffic of to-day 
and to the world traffic of the future? The facts of the case 
are briefly the following: 

Experience has shown that the wave lengths which are most 
suited for transoceanic communication lie between 12,000 and 
17,000 meters. ‘“This space in the ether’’ has already been 
taken up by five first class transmitting stations which, during 
the war period and up to the present time, have been in con- 
tinuous service for transatlantic communication. Of these 
stations, two are in the United States, one in England, one in 
France and one in Germany. By extending the range of wave 
lengths down to 10,000 and up to 20,000 meters, and following 
the same system of intervals there would be room for about 
seven more stations or a total of twelve first class transmitting 
stations. 

A first class station has such radiating power that its messages 
can be received in all parts of the world. This is one of the 
advantages of radio communication; but it implies that if 
such a station is to be used to full advantage it must have a 
“right of way”’ for its wave length over the whole world. Thus 
if we look at the matter pessimistically, without allowance 
for the improvements that further engineering developments 
are likely to bring, it would look as if the capacity of the world 
for first class radio stations would be about twelve. The rate 
of transmission at the present time from these stations is about 
twenty words a minute and it would thus be easy to figure out 
that the capacity of radio for handling any considerable portion 
of world communication would be totally inadequate. 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1271 


The other side of the picture, which the radio engineer of 
the future must study carefully and closely, should indicate 
the technical possibilities for improving the situation. The 
tendency of present day developments points to the following 
means for expansion of radio traffic: 

1, Increase in speed of transmission. 

2. Improved selectivity based on the direction of the wave. 

-3. Improved selectivity making possible closer spacing of 
wave lengths. 

As a basis of discussing the general situation it may be here 
stated as simple facts: 

1. That signals have been transmitted and received at con- 
siderably more than 100 words a minute. 

2. That signals have been received from Europe while an 
American high power station within comparatively short dis- 
tance was radiating on the same wave length. 

3. That is has proved practical to separate radio signals 
differing in wave length considerably less than 1 per cent. 

Based on these facts, it is probable that the transmitting 
speed in the future will average 100 words a minute instead of 
20 words a minute. 

That the selectivity for direction of the waves will multiply 
by five the number of stations that may be operated on one 
wave length; and that the selectivity with reference to wave 
length will be improved so that the wave lengths of messages 
will be within 1 per cent of each other, instead of 7 per cent 
which is the spacing of the stations at present. 

These prospects, taken in combination, give us an optimistic 
picture in which the possible capacity for transoceanic radio 
traffic of the world is 175 times as great as it is with the practise 
of to-day. 

To claim that the traffic capacity could immediately be in- 
creased nearly 200 times, would be an exaggeration, because 
the different improvements which have been made may partly 
conflict with the execution of each other if they are to be used 
simultaneously. This optimistic picture is therefore to be 
-regarded as a goal—perhaps never to be reached, but it points 
the way for almost unlimited possibilities for progress by con- 
tinued engineering efforts. 

In order to avail ourselves of these three improvements simul- 
taneously, the transmitted wave must be a continuous wave 
which does not “spill over’? with harmonics, decrements or 


1272 ALEX ANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct.1 


variations, into the range of wave length assigned for other 
communication. When wave lengths are spaced 1 per cent 
apart, each wave must be sufficiently pure so as to have no 
objectionable components outside the limits of one-half of one 
per cent. While rules to this effect should be rigidly enforced 
it must be appreciated that there are certain fundamental 
limitations. ; 


re Set CYCLE SINE WAVE MIOOULATION 


| meee ooTs >| ke One oasH— 


dil \ (| 


| 
Aa. 


LETTER VAT /00 WORPS PER MINUTE 


Ge 100 HAMPLITUDE 


a 50% AMPLITUDE 


2Q000~ 

2 25 fp AMPLITUDE 
ITAA 

ra 25 %6 AMPLITUDE. 


20040~ 


Fig. 1—Mertuop or Resontvine Stnp Wave Mopv.ation Into THREE 
Continuous Waves 


HIGH SPEED SIGNALING 


Modern transoceanic radio signaling is conducted by means 
of continuous waves. It must be appreciated, however, that 
signaling by an absolutely continuous wave would be impossible, 
because the making of dots and dashes introduces increments 
and decrements in the radiation. It will be shown that a 
repetition of increments and decrements can be resolved into 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1273 


a group of closely adjacent continuous waves. This agrees 
with the well known fact that the tuning of a wave with a 
decrement is known as a broad tuning. To illustrate this 
point we may take as a basis a signal at 100 words a minute 
(5 letters per word). If it is assumed that the increments and 
decrements in making the dots are not sharp interruptions but 
a continued variation by sine wave curves as indicated in Fig. 1, 
it is found by an analysis that such a wave may be resolved 
into a group of continuous wave components within the limits 
of 40 cycles above and below the average. This is the theoreti- 
cal minimum width of the band of wave lengths which are 
necessary to transmit 100 words per minute. If the dots are 
defined by sharper interruptions the wave becomes still 
“broader” and it would not be unreasonable to say that the 
minimum practical band of wave lengths for 100 words per 
minute is 100 cycles on each side of the fundamental. This 
would make possible a spacing of the waves 1 per cent apart 
when using a wave length of approximately 15,000 meters. 
Messages at a higher rate of speed will occupy a correspondingly 
wider “‘space in ether.”’ 

As a conclusion from this analysis it may thus be said that an 
increase of the speed to 100 words a minute and increase of 
messages to a spacing 1 per cent apart may be accomplished 
simultaneously provided that waves are used of such a charac- 
ter and modulation that they contain no radiation except the 
one needed to accomplish the intended purpose. 


DIRECTIVE RECEPTION 


The second means for increasing radio traffic consists in 
improving the selectivity by taking advantage of the direction 
of the waves. The author’s paper printed in the Proceedings 
of the Institute of Radio Engineers, August, 1919, described a 
receiver referred to as the “Barrage Receiver”? which was used 
to demonstrate directive reception. ‘There are several other 
types of receiving devices, developed by the United States 
Navy and other investigators, which accomplish substantially 
the same purpose. The broad principle underlying all these 
directional receiving devices is the one discovered by Bellini 
and Tosi and generally referred to under their names. 

In the U. S. Navy’s tests of the ‘‘Barrage Receiver’’, it was 
proven that it is possible to carry on simultaneous two-way 
communication on exactly the same wave length. If this 


1274 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


method of directive reception is carried out consistently in a 
world system of communication, it may be assumed that 
transmitting stations operating on the same wave length may 
be located approximately as shown in the map in Fig. 2—one 
in Europe, oneon the American east coast, one on the American 
west coast, one in the Far East and one in South America. 
The American receiving station for European signals in such a 
system should be located east of the American Atlantic Trans- 
mitting Station, and in line with the Pacific Transmitting 
Station. Thus messages from the two American transmitting 
stations could both be simultaneously neutralized in the 
American Receiving station by a ‘Barrage Receiver,’ while 
signals on the same wave length are received from Europe. 
Interference from the South American station may be neu- 


SENDING STATION 
© RECEIVING STATION 


> 
A 


Fig. 2—PRoPOSED SIMULTANEOUS RADIO TRANSMISSIONS ON THE SAME 
Wave Lenetu 


tralized by the use of a double barrage system, while the station 
in the Far East, though it may not be exactly in line with the 
two others would be sufficiently near the general direction so 
that, considering the great distance, it would not cause inter- 
ference. 

If this communication system is to be duplicated on a num- 
ber of other wave lengths, the practical conclusion follows that 
the transmitting stations as well as receiving stations for each 
district should be grouped in centers, and these centers-located 
relatively so as to make the directive neutralization as effective 

‘as possible. The neutralization of several transmitting 
stations simultaneously may not always work out as first 
designed. It has been shown by investigations of the Navy 
Department that the radio waves do not always follow straight 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC. RADIO 1275 


lines and not always the same path. However, discrepancies 
from such origin may again be overcome by further extending 
the principle of neutralizing waves from several directions 
simultaneously. 


CLOSER SPACING OF WAVE LENGTHS 


The method of increasing traffic capacity by closer spacing 
of wave lengths has great possibilities. It has been shown that 
the selectivity with reference to wave length can be greatly 
increased by several successive tunings in either the radio, the 
audio or some intermediate circuit. It is thus entirely practical 
to receive either by ear or by photographic records, signals 


cr 
HTT ATTA TAM 


WAVE TRAIN SHOWING ACTUAL NUMBER OF RADIO CYCLES IN A DOT OF THE 
TELEGRAPH CODE TRANSMITTED AT THE RATE OF SOO WOROS PER MINUTE AT 
15,000 METERS WAVE LENGTH. 


Hau AAU Mul ly sll 
mii wiih il Win nV HANIA TTT i 


A SPARK WAVE AT 400 CYCLES SPARK FREQUENCY 


Fig. 3 


which are considerably less than 100 cycles apart. The 
theoretical limits for such selectivity in connection with high 
speed transmission are defined below. As illustrated in Fig. 1, 
a high speed message is not a single continuous wave, but a 
band of wave lengths—100 words per minute occupying a space 
- of about 200 cycles. Therefore the same degree of selectivity 

is not to be expected with a high-speed signal if the interfering 
radiation is of considerable intensity. 

Speaking in terms more familiar to practical radio operators 
it may be said that high speed telegraph signals assume to some 
degree the objectionable characteristics of a spark signal. . As 
an illustration of this, Fig. 3 shows the relative decrements in a 
. continuous high-speed telegraph wave and a spark wave, show- 


1276 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


ing that the increments and decrements of the continuous 
wave signal at 500 words per minute are about equal to a spark 
wave of 400 sparks per second. These illustrations apply to 
wave lengths of about 15,000 meters. 


THE RADIO TRANSMITTING SYSTEM 


Several types of radio transmitting systems are at present in 
use with a high degree of success. The deseriptive matter in 
this paper will, however, be confined to the system for which 
the author is responsible as represented by the Naval Radio 
Station at New Brunswick, N. J. 

Generally speaking, any radio transmitting system consists 
of three essential elements: 

1. The generator of radio-frequency energy. 

2. The modulating system, whereby the energy is controlled 
so as to produce the dots and dashes of the telegraph code or 
the modulations of the human voice. 

3. The antenna or radiating system. 


GENERATING SYSTEM 


There are four types of generating systems of high-frequency 
energy in use at the present time. 

1. The spark or impulse generator. 

2. The Poulsen-Are generator. 

3. The high-frequency alternator. 

4. The vacuum tube oscillator. 

The system which will be described, is of the type employing 
a high-frequency alternator. The installation of New Bruns- 
wick contains a 50-kw. alternator shown in Fig. 4 which was 
operated for sometime for experimental purposes with radio 
telephony at a wave length of 8000 meters, and later in trans- 
atlantic telegraph service at 9300 meters. 

A larger equipment which has been in continuous service for 
the last year consists of a 200 kw. alternator shown in Fig. 5, 
6 and 7. Fig. 5 shows the machine partly assembled, the 
rotor consisting of a solid steel disk. The spaces between the 
polar projections are filled with non-magnetic material so 
as to present a smooth surface and thereby reduce air friction 
to a minimum., The disk runs between the two laminated 
armatures which are cooled by water pipes as shown in the 
photograph. The armature winding which consists of wire 
wound back and forth in straight open slots, is divided in 64 


PLATE XLV. 
A, I. E..E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fie. 4—50-Kw. 50,000-Cycie ALTERNATOR 


ALEXANDERS ON 


Fro. 6—200-Kw. Hicu-FPrequency ALTERNATOR 


> Gane, 0 Mien! ai Se 


A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 7—200-Kw. ALTERNATOR SET AS INSTALLED IN THE Navat Rapio 
Station, New Brunswick, NEW JERSEY 


[ALEXANDERSON] 


Fig. 9—ComBINED CURRENT AND VOLTAGE REGULATORS FOR 'HiIGH- 
FREQUENCY ALTERNATOR CONTROL 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1277 


sections, each section generating about 100 volts and 30 am- 
peres. The current generated by these 64 windings is collected 
in the air core transformer mounted on the top of the machine, 
Fig. 7. This transformer has 64 independent primary windings 
corresponding to the armature windings. The single secondary 
winding of the transformer delivers the complete output of the 
alternator. This collecting transformer is thus to be considered 
as an integral part of the generating unit and for all purposes 
of calculation the characteristics of the generating unit, such 
as electromotive force and current, are given as delivered from 
this secondary winding. At full output the alternator delivers 
100 amperes at an electromotive force of 2000 volts. It can 
thus be seen that the alternator is designed fora load resistance 
of 20 ohms. However, the same machine might be adapted 
for any other load resistance by selecting a different number 
of turns in the secondary of the collecting transformer. The 
reason why this particular machine is designed for a high 
voltage and low current will be given later in discussion of the 
new type of antenna with which it is used. 

The 200-kw. alternator when operated at the New Brunswick 
wave length of 13,600 meters runs at a speed of 2170 rev. per 
min. It is driven by an induction motor through a gear of 
a ratio of 2.97:1 when the high-frequency alternator is used as 
a source of radiation, the wave length is determined directly 
by the rotative speed of the machine. Thus, obviously, it is 
important that the rotative speed should be as nearly abso- 
lutely constant as it is possible to make it. An important ac- 
cessory of the alternator set is therefore the speed regulator. 
The 50-kw. alternator set shown in Fig. 3 is driven by a direct- 
current motor whereas, the 200-kw. set is driven by an induction 
motor of the slip ring type. The 50-kw. set was equipped with 
a direct-current motor because the problem of speed regulation 


of that type of motor is somewhat easier. Induction motors 


were, however, decided upon for the later types because al- 
ternating-current power is more easily available in most locali- 


ties. 
~ SPEED REGULATOR 


The speed regulator consists of a speed determining element 
and a power controlling element. The speed determining 
element is a resonant high-frequency circuit fed by one of the 
64 alternator windings which is set aside for that purpose. The 


oscillating energy of this high-frequency circuit is associated 


1278 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oet. 1 


by magnetic couplings with a rectifying circuit in which the 
high-frequency energy is changed into direct current. This 
rectified current in turn, actuates the controlling magnet of a 
vibrating regulator of the type that is generally used for volt- 
age regulation in power stations. When the driving motor is 
a direct-current motor it is easy to see how this vibrating 
regulator may be made to control the speed by regulating the 
voltage of the power supply to the motor. In order to ac- 
complish the same object with an induction motor some new 
features have been introduced. 

An ordinary induction motor is operated at constant po- 
tential. When the motor runs light it draws from the line a 
magnetizing current which is almost wattless. Thus it operates 
at a low power factor. When the motor is fully loaded it 
draws power at a high power factor—a motor of the type used 
having a power factor of 90 per cent. 

When the New Brunswick station was adjusted for operation 
it was found that a wave length was desired which required 
the induction motor to work at 19 per cent slip. The rheostat 
in the secondary of the motor could easily be adjusted so that 
the motor would deliver the desired power with full load at 
19 per cent slip. However, inasmuch, as the output of the 
alternator varies continually with the making of dots and dashes 
of the telegraph code, the motor is alternately loaded and not 
loaded. The tendency would therefore be for the motor to 
speed up during the intervals. If the potential of the power 
supply to an induction motor is varied, the motor torque 
varies by the square of the voltage. It is furthermore easy to 
show, by the theory of the induction motor, that if a motor 
consumes power at 90 per cent power factor at full load, and 
the load is reduced to 14 by the reduction of voltage to 4, 
the power factor will remain 90 per cent. In fact it will always 
consume power at 90 per cent power factor regardless of its 
load if the voltage supply is adjusted accordingly, so long as 
the secondary resistance remains constant and the speed re- 
mains constant. 

Thus it may be said that the standard method of operating 
an induction motor is at constant potential and variable power 
factor. The method of operating the driving motor of the 
radio set may on the other hand be characterized as variable 
potential and constant power factor. - 

The problem which thus presented itself was to find means 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1279 


_ for varying the applied voltage in accordance with action of 
the speed-determining element, and this has been done in the 
following way: 

Between the motor and the power supply is introduced a 
choke coil with iron core, the permeability of which can be 
varied by saturation. The change in permeability is produced 
by a direct current which is controlled by a vibrating regulator. 
When the motor carries full load the iron core is saturated so 
that the choking effect is practically zero. At fractional load 
the choking effect is automatically adjusted by the regulator 
so that the motor delivers at all times the power required to 
hold constant speed. The motor itself operates at all times at 
its maximum efficiency and power factor, but the power factor 
of the current drawn from the line varies with the load. Thus 


HIGH FREQ. SET 
MOTOR ALTERNATOR 


Pown-7> 60” 
Ok TO ANTENNA 


SATURATION 
[> Cos 


RECTIFIER 


SPEED 


wilt 
EXCITATION a E 


Fic. 8—Srrep ReGuLAToR,ALTERNATING CuRRENT DRIVE 


when the motor operates at 14 load the power factor of the line 
is 45 per cent while the power factor of the motor is 90 per cent. 
The circuits of the regulator are shown in Fig. 8 and the 
vibrator regulator in Fig. 9. 


MOopDULATING SYSTEM 


The method of controlling high-frequency energy involves an 
apparatus which has become known as the “magnetic ampli- 
fier.’ This device is described in a paper by the author in the 
Institute of Radio Engineers, January, 1916, and therefore 
needs to be referred to only briefly. The magnetic amplifier is 
a device which is physically of the nature of an oil cooled 
transformer. The iron core which is made of fine laminations, 
is designed in such a way that the magnetic permeability of 


1280 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


the iron core can be varied by magnetic saturation. By a 
special combination of tuned circuits as shown in Fig. 10 it has 
become possible to separate the controlling current from the 
high-frequency current so that a comparatively weak current of 
a few amperes controls as many hundreds of amperes in the 
antenna. ~ When the transmitting station is used for telegraphy 
the magnetic amplifier is controlled by the telegraph relays 
which are a part of the wire telegraph system. During the 
war service, the telegraph key was operated in the centralized 
operating room of the Naval Communication Department’ in 
Washington. When the station is used for telephony the con- 
trolling current is an amplified telephone current. 


TRANSFORMER 
MULTIPLE TUNED ANTENNA. 


ALTERNATOR 
INOUCTION 
MOoTQ”7” 


POWER 


TELEGRAPH 
KEY 


Fig. 10 


While the magnetic amplifier has proven to be a very satis- 
factory and reliable controlling device for ordinary telegraphy 
its particular advantages are most prominent in high-speed 
telegraphic transmission and telephonic transmission, on 
account of its instantaneous magnetic action without any 
arcing contacts. Fig. 11 shows an oscillogram of radiation at 
100 words per minute and a copy of a photographic record of 
reception at the same speed. Fig. 12 shows the telephone 
modulation of the antenna current when Secretary Daniels was 
speaking over the telephone line from Washington, controlling 
the output from the New Brunswick station, thereby transmit- 
ting his voice to President Wilson’s ship at sea. 


PLATE XLVII 
Awd se. E: 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


ps ee ee ee 
AWTENNA CURRENT 
100 WF, 


OSC/ILLOGRAIM OF 
RAQOATED SIGNAL FROM NEW BRUNSWICK 


[ALEXANDERSON] 
Fig. 11—PuotToGrarH OF RECEIVED SIGNAL FROM NEw BRUNSWICK AT 
100 Worps PER MINUTE 


PLATE XLVIII, 
ID ESE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


“SECRETARY OF THE: “wae QANIELS 1 WASHING TON, De. 
eae pan PRESIDENT WU SOWM th cov ig "He, 


ET Gemeb2 


re (ek eee TuniInG Coin [ALEXANDERSON] 
Fig. 15—PeErsprective or ANTENNA 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1281 


THE MULTIPLE ANTENNA 


The antenna of the New Brunswick station represents a new 
departure in the method of radiation. The old antenna struc- 
ture was originally one of the horizontal Marconi antenna, 
5000 ft. (1500 m.) long, 600 ft. (180 m.) wide supported on 
towers 400 ft. (120 m.) high. The original antenna had a 
resistance of 3.8 ohms. 

The antenna as operated now has a resistance of 0.5 ohms 
distributed approximately as follows: 


Radiation resistance.................... 0.07 ohms 

Tuning coils and insulation............. 0.10 

Ground Pesintance: <2, uoFd 2s at Ber 0.38 
Total multiple resistance............ 0.5 ohms 


The reduction in total resistance of the antenna is due to the 
reduction of the ground resistance. While the old antenna 
had one tuning coil located in one end, the new antenna has six 
tuning coils as shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 18. 


THEORY OF THE MULTIPLE ANTENNA 


The theory of the multiple antenna can be explained in 
several ways. Without going into details, an explanation will 
be presented giving the point of view which has proved most 
useful for general discussion. For this purpose the multiple 
antenna may be considered as an aggregate of several antennas 
of the ordinary vertical type each having its own tuning coil. 
When regarded in this way, the multiple antenna in New Bruns- 
wick is equivalent to six independent radiators placed 1000 ft. 
apart. The ground resistance of each of the radiators is 2 
ohms, the coil resistance 0.6 ohms and the radiation 0.07 ohms 
making a total resistance of 2.67ohms. Each of these radiators 
has an aerial 1000 ft. long and 600 ft. wide, counted at an 


s 


average height of 300 ft. A total resistance of about 2.67 ohms - 


is, as a matter of fact, the resistance to be expected from an 
antenna of such dimensions and ordinary design. If one 
individual antenna such as described is operated with a radia- 
tion of 100 amperes, the energy consumption of the antenna 
would be 26.7 kw., and the radiation efficiency would be 0.07 
ohm divided by 2.67 ohm which is 2.6 per cent. If it is 
desired to increase the radiation from 100 amperes to 600 
amperes the energy consumption would be 36 times as great 
that is, 960 kw. There is, however, another way to produce a 


1282 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


radiation equivalent to 600 amperes. If six separate antennas 
of the dimensions described were built and each operated with 
a radiation of 100 amperes, each antenna would emit a system 
of waves proportional to 100 amperes radiation. If all the 
waves emitted by the six antennas were in phase, the amplitude 
of the combined wave would be six times as great as the wave 
emitted by one antenna. Thus the amplitude of the com- 
bined wave would be equal to the amplitude-.of the wave 
emitted by one antenna when operated at 600 amperes. The 
energy consumption required for operating one antenna was 
26.7 kw., thus it might off-hand be concluded that the energy 
consumption required for operating the six antennas simultane- 
ously would be 160 kw. This conclusion is not exactly correct 
because there is an interaction between the radiating effects of 
“ the different antennas resulting in a somewhat higher energy 
consumption. This might be expressed as follows: 

The radiation resistance which is 0.07 ohm is common for 
all six antennas, whereas the ground and coil resistance of 2.6 
ohm belongs to the different antennas, individually. Thus the 
combined circuit of the multiple antenna can be represented by 
the common radiating resistance of 0.07 ohm connected in 
series with a group of six multiple resistance of 2.6 ohms each, . 
so that the total current of 600 amperes flows through the 0.07 
ohm radiation resistances which represent the ground and coil 
resistance of the individual antennas. Hence the total energy 
consumption of the combined antenna is found to be 180 kw. 
out of which 155 kw. is ground coil and insulation loss and 25 
kw. radiation. The radiation efficiency of the multiple an- 
tenna is thus 14 per cent against the radiation efficiency of 2.6 
per cent for the individual antenna. The above calculation is 
made for the present operating wave of 13,600 meters. If on 
the other hand the same calculation is made for the same length 
of 8000 meters, which has been found more efficient for tele- 
phonic transmission, it is found that the radiation efficiency is 
30 per cent, the energy being distributed as follows: 


Radiation resistance......... 0.2 ohms 
Coil and insulation »..<7..: 2.). 0.07 
Ground resistance...........0.33 
Total multiple resistance..... 0.6 ohms 


For the sake of convenience in dealing with the radiation 
from a multiple antenna it has become the practise to indicate 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1283 


the total radiation from the multiple antenna as the sum of 
the currents measured in the six ground connections. The 
equivalent multiple resistance of the antenna is then deter- 
mined by the equation J?R = energy consumption, where J 
is the sum of the currents in the ground connection. 

It has been assumed above that each of the individual an- 
tennas is operated so that the waves sent out by the same are 
not only of the same frequency, but exactly of the same phase. 
It remains to be shown how this is accomplished. Fig. 13 
shows the relation between the antenna and the multiple tuning 
coils and the alternator. As shown by the diagram, the al- 


SINGLE TUNED ANTENNA 


600 amp 


SINGLE TUNED EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT 


600 AMZ 


es 


MULTIPLE ANTENNA 


MULTIPLE TUNED EQUIVAL. 
20 L 


ENT CIRCUIT 
5 A +S. 


10 


Pier 13 


ternator is connected in series with one of the six tuning coils. 
Arrows on the diagram indicate further how the oscillating 
currents and the energy currents are distributed. Six in- 
dependent oscillating circuits are formed, the current in each 
ground connection corresponding to the charging current of 
the corresponding section of the aerial. If the antenna had 
been shock excited so that it continued to oscillate in the 
way indicated, no current would flow in the horizontal wires 
between the different sections of the antenna. However, in 
order to maintain continued oscillations a flow of energy must 
take place from the alternator which is connected to one of 


1284 ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO [Oct. 1 


the six tuning coils. When the antenna is operated with 100 
amperes in each of the ground connections, the energy con- 
sumption as shown above is 180 kw., that is, each oscillating 
circuit consumes 30 kw. 

What actually takes place is the following: The tuning 
coil to which the alternator is connected transforms the energy 
of the alternator into a power supply at a potential of 
60,000 volts, and each of the oscillating circuits draws energy 
from this power supply at that voltage. Thus the energy 
currents consumed by each oscillating circuit is only 0.5 am- 
peres. It can thus be seen that while the total oscillating 
current of the antenna is 600 amperes the energy current which 
flows horizontally from the power source to the multiple os- 
cillating cireuits is only a total of 2.5 amperes. In other 
words, the energy which is delivered by the first tuning coil 
in the form of 100 amperes at 1800 volts is transformed by the 
first oscillating circuit and distributed as in a transmission line 
from which 0.5 amperes at 60,000 volts is drawn in five places. 
The analogy between the multiple antenna and a high-tension 
power distribution system is thus apparent. 

This point of view is a departure from the conventional 
theory of radiation; but it must be remembered that there 
' was a time in the development of electric power technique 
when the introduction of the high-tension multiple distribution 
system was a radical departure. 


DIRECTIVE RADIATION 


The multiple antenna as described in its simplest form is 
adjusted so that the radiation from each of the individual 
oscillators is in phase. If, however, the antenna dimensions 
are so chosen that the phase displacement of the traveling 
wave between the different radiators becomes an essential 
factor, it is possible to obtain directive radiation. The radiated 
wave then will not be a simple circular wave but an interference 
pattern which may be treated like the corresponding phe- 
nomena in light and sound waves. Furthermore the phase dis- 
placement of the oscillations of the individual radiators may 
be regulated by tuning. Thus a variety of interference pat- 
terns may be created and analysis of these possibilities shows 
that an efficient unidirectional radiation by such methods 
should be possible. 

Methods for unidirectional radiation have been established 


1919] ALEXANDERSON: TRANSOCEANIC RADIO 1285 


through the well known work of Bellini and Tosi. Through 
the courtesy of Mr. Bouthillon of the French Post Office, 
results of tests made in France have been placed at the disposal 
of tne author, which show conclusively directive radiation 
by the Bellini and Tosi antenna. 

With the dimensions of antennas used up to the present 
time, efficient directive radiation has not been practical. It 
has, however, been proved by various tests that the system 
of a central power source and a distribution system of energy 
to a large number of multiple radiators places at our disposal 
means for constructing radiators of dimensions of one wave 
length or more. The New Brunswick antenna (1500 meters 
long) has a minimum wave length of 8000 meters as a single 
antenna, whereas it can be operated as a multiple antenna at 
2000 meters wave length. A detailed analysis of the possi- 
bilities of multiple radiation would fall outside the scope of 
this paper but the author is in position to predict with confi- 
dence that directive radiation on a large scale will not only 
prove practical but that it will be the most efficient method of 
radiation. 

To add directive radiation to the proposed program for in- 
creasing the capacity of radio traffic would perhaps be pre- 
mature until it has been demonstrated on a large scale. How- 
ever, it deserves mention in order to show that new principles 
which may be utilized for still greater expansion of the radio 
technique have not yet been exhausted. 


- ” s 4 
+ - t 
: ~ a 
wre oe %4 
ow rc 
if : 
=~ . > £ ai eet 
z mae ee ' : * 
Ms ed . 
° { 
4 > 7 ‘ 
# 
: ; P 
i . 
s 4 
fe 4 et 
> os a 2 be * 
: \ ; “4 
: es 
~ a . 
sa a > psa ale 
j ; 437% , ~ u 
> aes i ‘ : 
is ; us 
’ ¢ 
: "s - a - 
; 
j F a 
‘ . 7 ~ a 
ED A S$ 3 = ’ 5 ; ~— 
ah ‘ aes ‘ it 
: ao - , “ 7 , ee gs 
-: . ‘ Pht + ete 
ve ‘e a a a Peat 
P y S 5 SERS: ISG ee 
of SF, Soya rt © pics tale aie ee hal wh be a oes: 
4 abi TF en obs a ¥? geet r Beyer ab of 
ORE Sree ate eee SS gd, i 
PSE I Sa et a Oe ltd ng acy “nage 
+ ¢ ‘ ~ , ie Y 
EOS 2 Sl iy ae Pal ae eee | RP LOe oo : 5a 
oa Wee Sr Pua ts Fre Iori Jotpyersh - 
yr 3s a “fe Ce nL eee we ok Lon 
Ph ee He MLE art BK, ach ta ” 


‘ a) Ae at. 


aha ay brah x76 i ah ant: si aii ‘svigaaatty bl 
8 oe pine: ig Hy wv odicijunibine = Sr tn 
bie, eR slewny F 
OF oe : i ia ako: boympingiores n~L core 

2 eae ie ty Weiss peter ci oN aboot eri gin urnate e 


fitz : si] bpsikite ‘aay oe 
ipy®. 


Presented at a joint meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, and _ the 
Institute of Radio Engineers, New York, 
October 1, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E. 


TELEPHONE REPEATERS 


BY BANCROFT GHERARDI AND FRANK B. JEWETT 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


In this paper the authors have endeavored to set forth briefly 
but clearly the history of the research and development work 
which has led up to the final production of successful telephone 
repeaters. The various forms of amplifiers which have been 
suggested are described and their possibilities and limitations 
pointed out. The essential properties of repeater networks 
together with the necessary line conditions for successful re- 
peater operation are described and illustrated. Tandem 
operation of repeaters is discussed as is also the use of repeaters 
in four-wire circuits. Illustrations are given showing a few of 
the more important repeater installations now in regular com- 
mercial service in the United States. 


INTRODUCTION 


URING the past ten years developments in the design 
and construction of telephone amplifiers, or telephone 
repeaters as they are more universally called, and in the art 
of their application to all forms of telephone circuits have 
progressed to such an extent as to justify the presentation to the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers of a comprehensive 
paper which shall cover not only the earlier efforts but the 
present state of development. 

As indicated below, the idea of one or more repeaters inserted 
in a line for the purpose of reinforcing from some local source 
of energy the weakened current from the sending station is 
older than the telephone itself. In telephony innumerable 
attempts by a large number of investigators have gone on 
continuously almost from the inception of the telephone in an 
effort to extend the range of telephonic speech through the 
utilization of energy applied to the telephone line at a point or 
points between the transmitting and receiving stations. While 
the net result of all this work is, of course, the state of the art 
as we now have it, a survey of the earlier developments in the 
light of present-day knowledge discloses in striking fashion the 
fact that, unknown to the investigators, the early attempts 


1287 


1288 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


were destined not to succeed where success was measured by 
the development of a practical device which would give satis- 
factory results on a regular two-way telephone circuit. 

We know now that the final successful development and 
application of the telephone repeater had to wait not only for 
the slow accumulation of comprehensive knowledge concerning 
all the factors which govern the successful transmission of 
speech electrically over wires and of the intricate relation of 
circuits and apparatus to produce desired results with the 
maze of frequencies involved in speech, but also on develop- 
ments in physical science which were in themselves quite 
foreign to the specific realm of telephony. For these reasons 
the work of the earlier investigators, ingenious though it was, 
was for years foredoomed to failure by factors over which they 
had no control and of which, in many cases, they had no 
knowledge even. In the light of what we now know, much of 
this early work appears almost impossibly successful and 
attests to the ingenuity and resourcefulness of the men who 
conducted it. 

Another thing which the final successful development and 
extensive application of the telephone repeater indicates with 
striking clarity is the fact that a complete solution of the 
problem was made possible only by the existence of a great 
unified engineering and research department, such as that 
maintained ‘by the Bell System. The elements involved and 
the multiplicity of detail to be worked out and correlated were 
far beyond the limitations of any single individual or any 
limited organization. The best that mathematics, physics, 
chemistry, engineering, manufacturing and operation could 
supply were needed for the solution. Further, if the solution 
were to be obtained in a reasonable time it was essential that 
the efforts of the experts in all of these fields must be directed 
in a cooperative attack on the main problem. With the 
growth of fundamental research groups of highly trained 
scientists in the engineering department of the Bell System the 
means for attacking the elusive repeater problem in compre- 
hensive fashion became available and progress toward success 
became certain and rapid. The loose ends of discrete and 
desultory researches were gathered in, past and present work 
scrutinized and the attack directed from a foundation of cer- 
tain knowledge not theretofore available. 

The wonderful success which has attended the work and 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1289: 


which has started what bids fair to be a revolution in the entire 
scheme of telephonic transmission should be a source of grati- 
fication to American electrical engineers, to whom more than 
to any others have been due the other wonderful telephone 
developments of the past. 

In discussing the earlier work on telephone repeaters and 
that which led up to the first successful device, the 
authors have not attempted even to enumerate the large 
number of investigators, much less to allocate credit among 
them. The names mentioned are those of the men who stand 
out most conspicuously and the fact that many of them are 
employees of the Bell System is not remarkable, since it was the 
largest single agency consistently at work on all problems con- 
cerning telephone development. In a complex art which has 
been vigorously worked for nearly fifty years, it is inevitable 
that great numbers of patents should have been taken out on 
all conceivable kinds of devices and systems. Many of these 
are inherently worthless, while others contain elements of 
value, although not in themselves disclosing complete workable 
arrangements. While, therefore, no single invention has solved 
the repeater problem in its entirety, it is interesting to note that 
all of the inventions which make possible the successful tele- 
phone repeater of today are the work of Americans. 

No paper dealing with the development and _ successful 
application of telephone repeaters would be complete without 
mention of the fact that throughout all the later years, during 
which progress has been certain and rapid, the principal credit 
for-the broad engineering and commercial results obtained is 
due to Colonel J. J. Carty, past President of this Institute and 
for many years Chief Engineer and now Vice President of the 
American Telephone and Telegraph Company. To Colonel 
Carty more than to any one else is due the credit of having 
brought about that coordination of all of the elements men- 
tioned above, which was vital to the ultimate success of the 
undertaking. 

HISTORICAL 

The foundation of the art of telephony by Alexander Graham 
Bell followed by almost fifty years that institution of the sister 
art of telegraphy which was based on the discoveries of Fara- 
day, Ampere, Volta, and Henry. It was inevitable, therefore, 
that efforts to extend the range of telephonic communication 
should be influenced by earlier and successful efforts in tele-. 


1290 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


graphic communication. As _ telegraphic operation was 
attempted between more widely separated stations it was found 
that the attenuated currents were insufficient to operate the 
recording mechanism. To obviate this limitation Morse intro- 
duced at the receiving station a local source of energy which 
supplied current to the recording mechanism but was controlled 
by the received signals through the medium of an electromag- 
netic relay. 

In this invention was the principle necessary for an indefinite 
extension of the possible range of communication since the 
local source might supply current to another stretch of line. 
It is a curious bit of history that this application was not 
utilized for several years during which transmission over long 
distances. was accomplished by manual instead of automatic 
repetition at the intermediate stations. 

The delay in this natural development was due to the fact 
that the relay of Morse, although it was a repeater, was a 
one-way device since it was actuated only by currents arriving 
from one of the two telegraph stations on either side of it. It 
required the use of two such repeater elements and of a circuit 
arrangement to convert a one-way into a two-way repeater 
station. Of these circuit arrangements one of the earliest was 
that of Varley. During the next few years duplex repeaters 
received considerable attention from inventors. The differen- 
tiation, however, which seems so obvious to us today, between 
the repeater element and the circuit arrangement by which 
such elements may operate duplex, was infrequently if ever 
emphasized. 

In the extension of the range of telephony by the use of 
repeaters the duplex feature was even more essential than in 
telegraphy. The problem was complicated not only by the 
inherited confusion between element and circuit but also by 
the greater importance of the third factor in such operation, 
namely, the lines on either side of the repeating station. 

The necessity for distinguishing between these three factors 
of repeating element, repeater circuit, and lines was early 
recognized by the engineers of the Bell System. The exact 
and quantitative relationships between them have been ade- 
quately expressed for about a decade. In our discussion of the 
matter in hand we shall follow, therefore, the logical order 
which results from this differentiation and treat these factors 
separately in the above order. Before undertaking their more 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1291 


detailed exposition it may be well to vivify their individuality 
by the consideration of the concrete case illustrated in Figs. 
1 to 5 inclusive. 

A principle, which is familiarly known by its direct-current 
application in the Wheatstone bridge, has proved most fertile 
in the formation of duplex circuits. Thus in Fig. 1 we have an 


GALVANOMETER 


Fic. 1 pices. 


early method of duplex telegraphy, which is obviously reducible 
to the simple bridge circuit of Fig.2. Ifaand b are equal then, 
provided also RF is equal to X, the battery B will cause no dif- 
ference of potential between m and n and hence no current 
through the galvanometer in the case of Fig. 2 and no resultant 
magnetism_in the sounder of Fig. 1. 


RECEIVER 


TRANSFORMER OR 
“REPEATING COIL’ 


FIG. 3. 


The same principle is applicable to the duplex operation of 
a telephone line as is seen in Fig. 8, where the sounder and the 
key of Fig. 1 are replaced respectively, by a receiver and a trans- 
mitter. If the resistance FR is not equal to X, the impedance 
of the telephone line, then, the duplex set is not entirely - 


1292 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: (Oct. 1 


“‘anti-side tone’”’ since the operation of the transmitter causes 
some current in the receiver. The amount of current through 
the receiver and hence the motion of its diaphragm depends 
both upon the current from the transmitter and upon the 
amount of unbalance in the bridge which is occasioned by the 
inequality of R and X. 

If we dispose the transmitter and the receiver as in Fig. 4, 
allowing any sound from the latter to actuate the transmitter, 
then we may obtain what is termed a “howling set’. The 
mere jarring of the carbon button due to bringing the instru- 
ments into juxtaposition will result in a current from the trans- 
mitter and hence, if R and X are not equal, in some current in 
the receiver. The consequent motion of the receiver diaphragm 
causes a new disturbance of the carbon of the transmitter and 


Fig. 4 


this in turn causes a new impulse of current through the 
receiver itself. If the combination of receiver and transmitter 
is sufficiently sensitive this sequence of events may perpetuate 
itself and result in a steady tone, the frequency of which is 
determined by the electrical and mechanical characteristics of 
the system. The energy for such steady vibrations of the 
diaphragm is, of course, obtained from the battery associated 
with the transmitter. (For purposes of simplicity the battery 
is not shown in Figs. 3 and 4. It may be either a battery 
associated Ideally with the transmitter or one at the distant 
central office.) 

From this illustration of the “howling set” the importance 
of line balance may be seen, for the combination of receiver and 
transmitter constitutes a repeater element. .The element may 
more conveniently be symbolized as in Fig. 5 where the re- 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1293 


sistance, R of Fig. 4, has been replaced by a telephone line. 
In this last form of the bridge we may recognize the three factors 
menticned above. The repeating element has input terminals 
1, 2 and output terminals 3, 4. It is associated with the lines 
on either side by the bridge circuit mnqq in such a manner 
as to repeat telephone conversations in either direction. Thus 
voice currents originating at a station on the east line are im- 
pressed on the terminals 1, 2 of the element through the 
action of the transformer. The resulting output from ter- 
minals 3, 4 is then transmitted equally to the east, where it 
is received as side tone by the speaker, and to the west, where 
it is usefully received by the distant auditor. Further details 
of this operation will be considered later. We may, however, 
note that if the unbalance between the lines east and west 


FIG.5. 


exceeds a certain magnitude, which depends upon the sensi- 
tiveness of the element, then the operation is that of the 
howling set. Under these conditions the repeater is said to 
“sing,”’ for it will transmit in both directions a strong steady 
tone which renders telephonic communication impossible. 
The difficulty introduced by this possibility of singing was 
not serious in the early days of the development of telephone 
repeaters and only became so with the invention of more 
sensitive elements. In fact in the very early days the difficulty 
was to obtain an element of sufficient sensitiveness. What 
sort of conditions must be met may be illustrated by the fact 
that the current at the transmitting terminal of a long line 
is only a matter of 2 or 3 milliamperes. In transmission 
over the line the current is constantly attenuated so that at the 
receiving terminal it may be only 3 or 4 hundredths of its ori- 
ginal magnitude. Such small currents required greater pre- 


1294 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


cision offfdesign than was appreciated by many of the early 
inventors, although as early as 1888 one of the Bell engineers, 
E. H. Lyons, had constructed a repeater which would amplify 
such small currents. 

THE REPEATER ELEMENT 


Before considering further these early designs we may well 
list the operating requirements for a successful repeater element. 
In so doing we shall not be concerned with the physical prin- 
ciples upon which the device operates. To all present intents 
and purposes we are concerned only with pairs of terminals 
1, 2 and 3, 4 of an enclosed and unknown electrical network 
as illustrated in Fig: 6. If we subject such a hidden element 
to electrical measurement with alternating current we may 
obtain, for each frequency which we use, several characteristic 
ratios. Thus, from the ratio of the voltage impressed upon 
terminals 1, 2 to the resulting current we obtain the impedance 
of that circuit and similarly for the circuit of terminals 3, 4. 


Box 
—=_—=— CONTAINING 
REPEATER 
ELEMENT 


FIG .G. 


We obtain also a mutual impedance by taking the ratio of the 
voltage produced in the circuit 3, 4 to the current in the 
circuit 1, 2. Similarly, there may be measured the mutual 
impedance in the opposite direction. In case one only of the 
mutual impedances is zero, that is, that no voltage is produced 
on one side when a current is flowing in the other, we speak of 
the device as having a “unilateral mutual impedance.” Of 
the repeaters which we have found best adapted to telephony 
. all are of this unilateral type. The requirements which must 
be met are identical whether the device is bilateral or unilateral 
but they may be more conveniently stated in terms of the 
unilateral type, of which the receiver-transmitter (or me- 
chanical form) shown in Figs. 4 and 5 is a simple illustration. 
These requirements are: 

1. The unilateral mutual impedance must be independent of 
the amplitude of the impressed current, within the range re- 
quired for telephone transmission. In other words, there must 
be a linear relation between the output voltage and the input 


‘y 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1295 


current of the repeater, in which case the output is directly 
proportional to the input. If this condition is not met there 
will appear in the output one or more harmonics of the im- 
pressed alternating voltage. 

la. The input and output impedances of the element must 
be similarly independent of the impressed voltage or else dis- 
tortion will occur. 

2. The unilateral mutual impedance must be independent 
of the frequency of the impressed voltage within the range 
required for the transmission of the human voice. If this 
condition is not met the various overtones in such a complex 
sinusoidal current as is initiated by a voice will not be faithfully 
reproduced in their proper proportions. 

2a. The input impedance of the element should be inde- 
pendent of the frequency of the impressed voltage or else it 
should be the same function of the frequency as is the impedance 
of the telephone line to which it is to be connected. If this 
condition is not met a distortion, destructive of good quality, 
may be introduced. In this case the voltage actuating the 
repeater is not that which the telephone line would impress 
upon another similar line but is greater or less by a factor 
which depends upon the frequency. It is not sufficient that 
the element repeat accurately its input but it is also requisite 
that its input circuit receive from the telephone line without 
distortion. 

2b. The output impedance of the element should be simi- 
larly independent of the frequency or else properly related to 
the impedance of a telephone line so that the line may receive 
without distortion the output of the repeater. 

38. The element must give amplification; that is, ignoring 
the energy sources which may be associated with or be parts of 
the element, the efficiency as measured by the ratio of output 
and input enérgies of telephone currents must be greater than 
unity. For example in the case of the mechanical element, 
which was pictured above, the energy is supplied by the battery 
associated with the carbon button. We are concerned at 
present only with its efficiency for transferring telephone varia- 
tions from terminals 1, 2 to terminals 3, 4. How much greater 


than 100 per cent this efficiency must be will depend, obviously, 


upon costs and other engineering factors. A repeating element 
adaptable to our telephone plant may well be expected to give 
an enersy amplification such that telephone currents, which 


— 


1296 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


have been attenuated by about twenty miles of standard cable, 
will be restored to their original values by its action. In tele- 
phone parlance ‘the element should give a gain of about 
twenty miles.” Since by transmission through twenty miles 
of standard able both the current and voltage would be 
attenuated to about one-eighth, the energy delivered to the 
repeater circuit would be only one sixty-fourth of the original 
energy. Of this only one-half reaches the receiving element 
for the rest is dissipated in the bridge. Hence there must be 
supplied to the line on the output side of the repeater circuit 
128 times as much energy as is received. A glance at the 
circuit of Fig. 5 shows, however, that the output of the 
repeater itself is equally supplied to the outgoing and the in- 
coming lines. The element must be capable, therefore; of 
supplying 256 times as much energy as it receives. In other 
words, the element should have a telephone efficiency of about 
twenty-six thousand per cent. 

4. The sources of energy associated with the element, and 
by virtue of which amplification is possible, must have voltages 
which may safely and conveniently be utilized in the telephone 
plant. For example, a repeater whose source of energy had a 
voltage of greater than 250 would be unsatisfactory in a plant 
which normally employs voltages not greatly exceeding 100. 

5. The element must be either insensitive to external elec- 
trical disturbances or easily shielded from them so that c¢ross- 
talk from neighboring telephone circuits or apparatus may not 
actuate it. 

5a. Conversely, the element must not be such as to cross- 
talk into adjacent circuits or apparatus. 

6. The element must be constant in behavior, reliable and 
of fair life, and not such as to require frequent attention or 
laboratory conditions of operation. In other words the ele- 
ment must meet the conditions as to reliability of Service which 
apply to other portions of the telephone plant. 

7. In size, first cost, cost of energy and of maintenance, 
the element must conform to the economic conditions of an 
established plant. - 

Recognition of these conditions has guided our search for 
new elements’ during the past fruitful decade. Even before 
that time these requirements were recognized although they 
were not completely formulated. It is surprising how many 
independent inventors approached us during this time with 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1297 


devices formed by coils and magnets but involving no source 
of energy, or at least utilizing none, and hence patently incap- 
able of producing amplification. Inherently such devices 
were static transformers, on the low voltage side of which there 
might be a greater current but obviously not a greater power 
than there was expended as input on the high voltage side. 
In some instances such devices were said to be intended for 
frequent use along a telephone line at fairly regular intervals. 
Such effect in improving telephone transmission as they might 
have would then be explainable by their function as inductances 
in the line; in other words, by the loading of the line. They 
thus offered imperfect substitutes for Dr. Pupin’s method of 
loading. 

Most of the earlier attempts at the design of telephone 
repeaters followed the recognized lines of telegraph practise or 
of electrical power engineering. The life of the telephone, 
however, has been almost contemporaneous with that of the 
newer physics which deals with discharges through rarefied gases 
and which has led to the discovery of the electron and of steady 
electron streams in vacua. General knowledge of the elec- 
tronic structure of matter has grown by leaps and bounds in 
the last few years and coincident with this growth has been our 
practical development of electronic repeaters. 

For purposes of classification, therefore, we may divide 
repeating elements into three groups depending upon whether 
their moving parts consist of (a) molecular ions, (b) electrons, 
or (c) molecular aggregates, that is, ponderable matter in the 
ordinary sense. The first group we might call “‘gaseous”’, the 
second “electronic,” and the third, ‘‘electrodynamic.’”’ We 
may also classify according to the means by which the moving 
parts are actuated, as (a) electromagnetic if the operation is 
dependent upon a magnetic field which is altered by the re- 
ceived current, and (b) electrostatic if operation is dependent 
upon an electrical field which is established or altered by the 
received current. . 

Electrostatic devices involving moving members of mechani- 
cal size are too insensitive to serve as telephone repeaters. In 
the case of gaseous or electronic devices such a method of 
control is, however, entirely practicable and, indeed, for elec- 
tronic systems marvelously effective. Our system of classifi- 
cation may, therefore, be simplified by the omission of one 
class of mechanical devices. It must, on the other hand, be 


1298 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


further complicated by the introduction under gaseous re- 
peaters of a type of device which has no cognate in the other 
two classes.. Such devices are conductors which depend upon 
the passage of current through themselves to alter their own 
characteristics. Something of this behavior is familar to all 
engineers who have worked with carbon ares and remember 
their instability. For our purpose we may designate this type 
of repeater as a “negative resistance device’ and postpone the 
justification of the terminology to later discussion. 

The classification of repeater elements in the order in which 
they will be discussed is, then, as follows: 

I. Electrodynamic repeaters 
A. Receiver transmitter type 
B.. Generator type 
1. Direct-current generator 
2. Alternating-current generator 
3. Asynchronous generator 
II. Electronic Repeaters 
A. Electrostatic 
B. Electromagnetic 
III. Gaseous Repeaters 
A. Electrostatic 
B. Electromagnetic 
C. Negative Resistance 

I-A. The form of telephone repeater which most naturally 
suggested itself to the early engineers is the combination of a 
receiver and a microphone essentially in the manner depicted 
in connection with our earlier discussion of the problem pre- 
sented to telephone engineers by the necessity of increasing 
the range of telephonic communication. In the early years 
of telephony no other means seemed available and prior to 
1903 many unsuccessful attempts were made along this line. 
The parent Bell organization devoted the efforts of a large 
number of its best men to this problem, which was also a 
favorite with inventors outside of its organization. In the 
minds of the general scientific world further interest had been 
stimulated by the reported offer of a capitalist to pay one 
million dollars for a successful invention. 

The solution was finally reached by one of the Bell engineers, 
H. E. Shreeve, who was assigned to the problem in 1908 after 
an earlier experience in the design of microphones and other 
telephone devices. Previous inventors had combined receivers 


va 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1299 


and transmitters without recognizing that the normal functions 
of their diaphragms were those of sound collecting or emitting 
members and Shreeve omitted these unnecessary features. 

Another difficulty in earlier designs had been the “packing”’ 
of the carbon of the microphone and one of his first studies 
had to do with its cause and elimination. He found it to be 
due to expansion which was occasioned by the heat liberated in 
the carbon chamber. In his first successful laboratory model 
a stretched steel strip was used as a connecting link between 
the receiver and the microphone and the microphone was 
designed so that the expansion of its parts under the influence 
of heat did not subject the granular carbon between the elec- 
trodes to increased pressure. 


RECEIVING WINDING. CARBON CHAMBER OF 
TRANSMITTER BUTTON 


MAGNET ADJUSTING SCREW 


Ge 
rrr 


NS 
\ SN y 


ane AN 
4 SN Z PLATES POR RADIATING HEAT 
\\ 5 OOO 


FIG.7 


With this form was obtained our first successful test of 
repeater operation over a telephone line. The device was 
tried in 1904 on a circuit between Amesbury, Massachusetts, 
and Boston and resulted in a greater intelligibility in the 
transmission of long lists of unrelated words than could be 
obtained over the circuit without the repeater. 

The next step was to obtain more perfect quality reproduc- 
tion and this was secured by making lighter moving parts and 
increasing the natural frequency of the moving system. The 
next model, shown in Fig. 7, was commercially operated on a 


circuit between New York and Chicago, from August 1904 to 


February, 1905. In this model the packing of the trans- 
mitter element was obviated by the thermostatic action of 


1300 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


the vibrating disk, and the natural period of the moving parts 
was such as to emphasize the important frequencies of the 
voice. The element was associated with the line by a simple 
bridge circuit which had been patented by Edison in 1888. 
The transmission between New York and Chicago was found 
to be greatly improved. 


Ol 


aie! 


CARBON CHAMBER OF 
TRANSMITTER BUTTON 


7 
' 
PLATES FOR RADIATING HEAT 


In this installation an additional feature was incorporated 
to prevent amplification of the so-called “‘Morse thump,” 
which occurs when a repeatered line is composited and carries 
superimposed telegraph signals. A repeating coil of low 
mutual inductance was inserted between the line and the 
receiving element. This coil was inefficient for currents of 
low frequency but was relatively efficient for those of voice 
frequency. 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1301 


In spite of the success which was obtained with this first 
repeater installation, the problem was far from being solved. 
In fact, when an attempt was made to reproduce the model, it 
was found extremely difficult to obtain vibrating electrodes, 
which had the necessary thermostatic action in addition to 
other necessary characteristics. An attempt was, therefore, 
made to regulate the sensitiveness of the microphone by more 
positive means and the next model, Fig. 8, had the feature of a 
thermostat in the form of a zinc strip. This zinc strip was 


PLATES FOR RADIATING HEAT 


Z A LAO MA eee 
a 


f J/AAHUMYY 
VIBRATING ELECTRODE F Yygeeragases: 
AND PLUNGER : 


f 


CARBON CHAMBER OF 
TRANSMITTER BUTTON} 


WINDINGS 


FIG.9 


heated by a coil, which was in series with the microphone, and 
whenever the current through the microphone increased as the 
result of incipient packing it served to withdraw the rear 
electrode. ; 

This repeater, known as No. I-A, was reasonably satisfactory 
in service until the requirements became more exacting, par- 
ticularly in the matter of tandem operation with the attendant 
requirements of improved quality reproduction. An intensive 
study was therefore undertaken, with the result that the natural 
frequency of the vibrating system was raised still higher, the 


‘ 


1302 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct 1 


weight of the moving parts was still further reduced and a still 
more sensitive form of regulator adopted. 

Without going into two much detail in regard to intermediate 
steps which were made between the 1—A repeater and the so- 
called 3—A type, which is the present standard for instru- 
ments of this type, it will be sufficient to describe the features 
of this latest model and to point out the inherent limitations 
of this class of repeater. 

The 38—A repeater, Fig. 9, is of the so-called “cartridge” 
type and consists of two main parts, the cartridge and the 
socket. The cartridge contains all of the working parts which 
are liable to become defective in service and may readily be 
removed from circuit for the purpose of replacement. It is 
held in place in the socket by a bayonet catch, and electrical 
connections are madeto itscontact posts by springs in the socket. 
The regulating means which serve to maintain the sensitive- 
ness of the microphone between extremely narrow limits 
consists of an electro-magnet with differential windings. The 
initial magnetic field of the receiving element is the resultant 
field produced by a winding in series with the microphone and 
an opposing winding in shunt with the microphone. If the 
steady resistance of the microphone increases, the series wind- 
ing takes less current and the shunt winding more, or vice 
versa. These magnetic changes alter the pull on the flexible 
disk electrode and thus serve to regulate the pressure on the 
granular carbon. 

An inherent defect in this type of instrument is the fact 
that the sensitiveness falls off rapidly when the input energy 
is below a certain minimum. At the present time no com- 
pletely satisfactory explanation for this phenomenon has been 
advanced. A defect of this character is obviously serious in 
the operating plant where circuit conditions and volumes of 
energy at any given point in a circuit fluctuate widely from time 
to time. Thus at one moment the repeater in a given circuit 
may be handling the energy from two persons speaking loudly, 
using telephones very near the terminals of the circuit, while 
at the next moment it may be called upon to function with 
the energy which it receives from telephones connected to long 
circuits, which in turn connect to the circuit with which it is 
associated. If the persons using the telephones in this latter 
ease have weak voices, if they do not use the telephones prop- 
erly by talking directly into the transmitter, or if the apparatus 


PLATE XLIX. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


(1LaMal GNV IduvaagHo, 


SLUV qd IVdIONIUG ANV ADAIULUVO ‘LAMI0G 
DNIMOHY ‘INGNAIGQ YALVAdAY ANOHAAIG], Ad J, TVOINVHOAP—6G ‘DIY 


PLATE L. 
A. IE. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Rigsise: ; [GHERARDI AND JEWETT] 


’ 


3 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1308 


or lines themselves are inefficient, it is clear that the energy 
at the repeater terminals may be many times less than that in 
the previous case. Further under those conditions maximum 
amplification is the more to be desired so that a repeater 
element whose performance fluctuates with the amount of 
energy which it receives and particularly one whose perfor- 
mance is worse when operating with the smallest energy is 
subject to a handicap when it comes to applying it generally 
in the telephone plant. 

The Shreeve type of mechanical repeater is nevertheless 
distinctly serviceable and many units are in commercial 
service. The amplication is not, however, sufficiently inde- 
pendent either of the amplitude or of the frequency of the input 
to make them adaptable with best results to use in tandem, 
although they have been used to advantage on telephone lines 
the length of which did not require more than three repeater 
stations. 

I-B. The application of the principles involved in direct- 
and alternating-current generators to the solution of the 
telephone repeater problem received the attention of some of 
the best minds in the art during the decade following 1900. 
During this time the problem was attacked both theoretically 
and in experimental design by H. S. Warren, M. I. Pupin, and 
others. The practise of power engineers suggested two 
typical methods. 

(1) A generator of which the armature should constitute 
the output circuit of the element and the field winding the 
input circuit. Variations in the field current will result in 
corresponding variations of the armature voltage of such a 
machine. In order, however, that there should not be present 
in the armature voltage variations due to commutation, which 
would result in extraneous noise in the telephone, it is neces- 
sary that such a machine have a high frequency of commu- 
tation. If this frequency is well above that of the highest 
frequency which is essential to the faithful reproduction of 
the human voice, the noise currents due to commutation may 
be choked out by inductance or filtered out by a periodic 
structure like an artificial loaded line. When it is said that 
frequencies of 2500 cycles per second are required for good 
quality of telephone speech it is evident that for any practical 
design of armature and commutation the. peripheral speed 


must approach the allowable mechanical limit, 


~ 


1304 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


Various unipolar designs were therefore considered in which 
no commutation is required. The principle involved may be 
seen by considering Fig. 10 which shows a form suggested in 
1905 by G. A. Campbell. The field coil M is solenoidal and 
carries fixed disks, w’, which serve both as a magnetic core and 
as collectors for the radial e. m. f’s. induced in similar disks, 
w, attached to the rotating shaft. In machines of this charac- 
ter where the field current is only of telephonic magnitude the 
flux is very small and the e. m. f. which may be obtained at 
any mechanically allowable speed -of rotation is much below 
that requisite for a successful telephone repeater. In addition 
the eddy current and hysteresis losses are relatively high be- 


i 


FIG.10 


cause of the frequencies involved and the efficiency is cor- 
respondingly low. The input impedance, being that of an 
electromagnet, is not independent of the frequency, as is 
desired, but instead is such as to discriminate against the higher 
frequencies of the voice wave. 

Even if it were possible to build and operate such high-speed 
generators as repeaters of feeble currents, the type is deficient 
in so many of the characteristics required of a successful com- 
mercial repeater that the extent of its use is questionable. Now 
that simpler and practically perfect repeaters are available, 
it is doubtful whether the limits of physical possibility in this 
type of apparatus will ever be worked out. 

(2) The practical difficulties of eddy current and hysteresis 


é 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1305 


losses, of limiting speeds and of small input, were also effective 


in preventing the development of a successful repeater along 
the lines previously followed in the power engineering of al- 
ternating currents. 

(3) In 1900, Joseph Lyons disclosed to us his invention, a 
telephone repeater upon the principle developed and patented 
in power engineering by Hutin and Leblanc. The principle 
is perhaps better known as that of the asynchronous generator, 
which is an induction motor driven above synchronism by a 
local source of mechanical energy. The conditions under 
which such a device may serve to supply energy to a trans- 
mission line, across which it is connected, are well known to 
electrical engineers. It was Lyons’ idea that the stator should 


TRANSMITTER. 


be bridged across a telephone line and, through the interaction 
of the received current with that induced in the short-cir- 
cuited rotor, should supply to the line additional energy of the 
same wave form as it received. Schematically the circuit 
is as shown in Fig. 11. | 

In order, however, to supply energy at any telephone fre- 
quency the speed of the rotor must be at least as large as the 
quotient of the given frequency and the number of pairs of 
poles in the stator. Thus in the case of a 12-pole stator a 
frequency of 2400 cycles per second would require a speed of 
- 400 revolutions per second. Not only are the speed require- 
ments too high for practical operation but the machine would 
also fail to meet the second requirement for a repeater. The 
amplification for each frequency would depend upon the 


1306 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


negative slip at that frequency and thus the lower frequencies 
of the voice current would receive more amplification than 
the higher ones. It was at one time suggested by Dr. Pupin 
that such distortion might be avoided by using several such 
asynchronous generators connected at different points of the 
line and each designed to amplify but a band of frequencies. 
Even had it been found possible to devise efficient machines to 
amplify the different groups of frequencies, it is doubtful if 
the arrangement would ever have proven satisfactory in an 
operating telephone plant, since at no point along the line 
between the first and last generator would the current have 
represented normal speech. This characteristic of the system 
would, of course, be a serious handicap to proper operation, 
since it would be almost impossible to tell whether the line 
were in trouble or not. 

That the mechanical limitations of speed, clearance, thickness 
of lamination, and the other factors familiar to designers of 
dynamo equipment should have prevented the development 
of such a generator is understandable when the telephone re- 
quirements are stated in terms of power engineering. What 
was required was a generator which could operate on about 
one-half of a milliampere of field current. To give an energy 
amplification of 256 times, its field losses must be less than one 
per cent of the output. The value of one-half of a milliampere 
is the effective value of a complex wave form, all the sinusoidal 
components of which must appear in the output with equal 
amplification. 

II. Electronic repeaters are those in which the moving 
parts are discrete electrons whose motions are unimpeded by 
molecular matter. Such devices, therefore, require a vacuum 
sufficiently high that the motions may be characteristic of 
free electrons. ‘There must also be a means of supplying free 
electrons, that is of dislodging them from molecular matter 
of which they form constituents. The satisfactory method of 
accomplishing this is to “boil them out’’ of a piece of metal 
or metal oxide. Our present electronic repeaters are therefore 
“thermionic” devices. 

_ The history of thermionics may be said to date from the 
publication in 1902-1903 of papers by O. W. Richardson 
in which he advanced a theory of the thermionic emission of 
electrons, which in all its essentials was accepted by the great 
majority of the scientific world and may now be regarded as 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1307 


definitely established. According to this theory (which is also 
a theory of metallic conduction) metals and conductors of 
electricity contain within their bounding surfaces immense 
numbers of free electrons which behave like the molecules of 
a perfect gas. When a metal is heated the kinetic energy of 
the electrons is increased and the number escaping across the 
boundary surfaces is likewise increased. 

J. J. Thompson outlined the theory in his treatise on con- 
duction of electricity through gases as follows: 

“The emission of corpuscles from incandescent metals and 
carbon is readily explained by the view—for which we find 
confirmation in many other phenomena—that corpuscles are 
disseminated through metals and carbon not merely when these 
are incandescent, but at all temperatures, the corpuscles being 
so small are able to move freely through the metal and they 
may thus be supposed to behave like a perfect gas contained 
in a volume equal to that of the metal. The corpuscles are 
attracted by the metal so that to enable them to escape into 
the space surrounding it they must have sufficient kinetic energy 
to carry them through the layer at its surface where its at- 
traction of the corpuscle is appreciable. If the average kinetic 
energy of a corpuscle, like that of the molecule of a gas is pro- 
portional to the absolute temperature, then, as the temperature 
increases, more and more of the corpuscles will be able to escape 
from the metal into the air outside.” 

In 1904 Wehnelt discovered that the thermionic emission 
from conductors coated with certain oxides was enormously 
greater than that of pure metals. Since that date the study 
of thermionic emission has proceeded most rapidly and the 
practical applications of the phenomena have more than kept 
pace during the last eight years. 

Phenomena due to thermionic emission had, of course, been 
observed for years before a satisfactory theory was advanced. 
The first of these instances was the discovery by Edison in 
1884 of an effect which is now known by his name. He found 
that if a metallic plate is introduced into the bulb of an in- 
candescent lamp and if the plate is connected to the positive 
terminal of the filament then a current flows between the plate 
and the filament as may be observed bya galvanometer inserted 
as shown in Fig. 12. This conductivity of the space between 
the plate and filament is unilateral, for if the plate is connected 
to the other terminal of the battery no current flows. The 


1308 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


explanation of the phenomenon resulted from work of Fleming 
in 1896 and J. J. Thomson in 1899 along lines earlier pursued 
by Elster and Geitel. Fleming studied the operation of a 
two-member vacuum tube device having a heated filament 
and cold plate, and Thomson demonstrated that the mech- 
anism of current conduction between the filament and plate 
resulted from the emission of negative electrons from the 
filament. 

Through such a tube a current may flow, since electrons 
may pass and will so do provided the plate is positive with 
respect to the filament and hence such as to attract the electrons 
emitted by the latter. The idea of using such a two-element 
device as a rectifier and hence detector of wireless waves was 
applied independently in 1905 by Wehnelt and by Fleming. 


= —— 


FIG.\2 


For the next few years practical progress with thermionic 
devices was in the hands of the radio-engineers. In his 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers’ paper of 1906 
DeForest showed that the discharge between the hot cathode 
and the plate can be controlled by additional electrodes. Ina 
patent issued the following year he shows inside the bulb such 
a controlling electrode to which he had given the form of a 
grid. With his discovery of a means for controlling the electron 
stream was born the most sensitive of repeating elements. 
Years of careful technical development were required, however, 
before the original idea had been perfected to the point where 
it met fully all the rigid requirements of application in a com- 
mercial telephone plant. 

To understand the development which was required to adapt 
the first successful form of audion designed for radio-telegraph 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1309 


receiving to this use, we shall first consider in some detail the 
structure and physical principles of the device. 

The “audion” consists of an evacuated vessel containing 
three electrodes, from one of which a thermionic emission of 
electrons is obtainable. Fig. 18 shows the characteristic 
structure. The filament is heated by the passage of a current 
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 14. The other two electrodes 
areaplateandagrid. Ifa battery is connected to the filament 
and plate as in Fig. 14, so as to make the latter positive with 
respect to the former, then a current will flow in the circuit so 
formed. The electrons emitted at the filament are drawn across 
the intervening vacuum by the electrical field which the battery, 
B, in the plate circuit establishes. If ane. m. f. is now applied 
between the grid and the filament as by the source marked V 
in the figure, the field between plate and filament is altered and 
the current in the plate circuit is correspondingly altered. If 


GALV 


Fig. 14 


the grid is made positive with respect to the filament more 
elettrons are urged across the space between grid and filament.’ 
While some of this increase strikes the grid, and thus results in 
a current in that circuit, by far the greater number continue 
through the meshes of the grid to the plate. The result is an 
increased current in the plate circuit. Conversely, if the grid 
is made negative there results a decrease in the plate current. 
In this case, however, no current flows in the grid circuit 
because electrons can be drawn to an electrode only if it is 
positive with respect to the source of the electrons. 

The characteristic relation between the grid voltage, V 
-and the plate current J,, is that of Fig. 15. If the plate voltage 
is altered the form of the curve is not altered but the magnitude 
of the current is changed as illustrated in Fig. 16 which shows 
a family of such characteristics. It is evident from this figure 
that the number of negative volts which must be applied to 
the grid in order to reduce the plate current to zero is always 
the same fraction of the volts applied in the plate circuit. 


1310 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


Hence it appears that the current in the plate circuit may be 
altered either by altering the voltage there applied or by a 
much smaller alteration of the voltage applied to the grid 
circuit. The device thus gives a voltage amplification. 

As long as the grid is kept negative no current can flow 
in that circuit and any alterations in its voltage are unac- 
companied by any current variation and hence are entirely 
wattless. Such variations are accompanied by. current varia- 
tions in the plate circuit and result in an energy expenditure 
in that circuit. The telephone efficiency is thus seen to be 
practically infinite since an energy output may be obtained by 
a wattless variation of the input voltage. 

To understand why the characteristic curve of Fig. 15 
flattens out as the grid is made more positive we need only 


Ip 

90 
8 
7 

= eo 
s 
AO 

Ny) +V 30 
20 
FIG.15S. 10 

= s 


to remember that in the passage of a current through the 
plate-filament circuit two physical phenomena are involved. 
The first of these is the thermionic emission of electrons at 
the filament and the second is their enforced and directed transit 
between filament and plate. The emission takes place whether 
or not a voltage is impressed on the plate-filament circuit, and 
depends only upon the filament temperature. The process is 
much like evaporation in a closed vessel and soon reaches a 
statistical equilibrium where electrons are leaving and return 
to the filament at the same rate, that is number per second. 
Impressing a positive potential on the plate disturbs the equi- 
librium for it withdraws electrons from the tube. When this 
voltage is small it withdraws but a relatively small number 
per second; that is the current is small as in the lower portion 
of the characteristic. As the voltage is increased the current 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1311 


increases but reaches a steady maximum value for a voltage 
sufficient to draw across the interspace as many electrons per 
second as the filament can emit at the operating temperature. 

Although the number of electrons per second which pass 
between filament and plate and hence the current is so limited, 
the velocities with which the individual electrons move will 
continue to increase with the voltage. If there is a residual 
gas in the tube its molecules will be ionized by their collisions 
with the electrons provided the velocities of the latter are 
sufficiently high to disrupt the electronic systems of which these 
molecules are formed. Such ionization, however, increases the 
number of electrical carriers and hence the charge per second 
which may be transferred. The presence of gas in a tube 
is in general, therefore, evidenced by such a characteristic as 
the full line of Fig. 17. ; 

The voltages involved in the detection of radio signals are 


FIG.17 


much smaller than those met with in telephony so that no 
serious inconvenience arises from the presence of residual gas. 
As a consequence, in the production of his early successful 
audions for radio reception DeForest did not find it necessary 
to employ all of the known means for producing the highest 
possible vacuum. 

In dealing with the very much larger energies which obtain 
under the conditions of telephonic repeater action, it is neces- 
sary to adopt methods of manufacture which will insure the 
removal to a high degree of all gaseous material in the tube, 
- including that which may be occluded in the walls of the tube 
- or the enclosed metallic parts. When such evacuation is ac- 
complished all of the advantages of a pure electron discharge 
are retained, even for the higher voltages and currents which 
have to be dealt with in a telephone repeater, In other words, 


1312 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


for a given plate voltage there is obtained a wider range. of 
voltage which may be impressed upon the grid without de- 
parting from the true thermionic character displayed in Fig. 15. 

In addition to securing the necessary conditions in this 
respect, a large amount of research work has been done by 
the engineers of the Bell System in producing suitable forms 
and proportions of tubes to give the best results with the various 
types of repeater circuits and in devising a type of filament 
which will insure a maximum of life and a minimum of power 
consumption for the amplifying tube and at the same time 
insure a uniform operating characteristic throughout the life 
of the tube. Further than this, the work has resulted in ability 
to produce in quantity tubes of exactly the same characteristics, 
a feature which is of the utmost importance in telephone 
repeater operation but which is of minor importance in radio 
work. Non-uniformity in the tubes would very seriously 
handicap the commercial operation of this type of amplifier 


Fic. 18 


since it would require the readjustment of apparatus each time 


it might become necessary to replace a worn-out or damaged 
tube. = 


Not only: was the original form of eition deficient as a tele- 
phone repeater from the standpoint of its energy capabilities, 
but the conditions of its use in radio reception were inherently 
different from those which obtained in a telephone repeater 
circuit. We may express this fact by saying that for radio 
detection we make use of the ability of a device to distort a 
sinusoid, which is impressed upon it, while for telephonic 
purposes we require the very minimum of distortion. 

Associated with the audion in DeForest’s use was a condenser 


in the grid circuit as shown in Fig. 18. The input terminals 
were 1 and 2 of that figure and the output terminals were. 


3 and 4 of the repeating coil. If employed as the amplifier 
ina telephone repeater, the repeating coil serves to impress 


4 


be errs 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1313 


on the telephone line to which the device is connected the varia- 
tions in the plate circuit current from the battery B which 
may be occasioned by any alterations in the potential applied 
to the input circuit. The condenser, however, serves as an 
electron trap if a sinusoidal e. m. f. is impressed on terminals 
1, 2. Thus imagine that the first half wave of the sinusoid 
makes the grid negative with respect to the filament. This 
polarity tends to force electrons from the grid to the filament, 
but, since electrons are not emitted by the grid, no transfer 
takes place. Making the grid negative does, however, reduce 
the current through the plate circuit as we saw in connection 
with Fig. 15. Now, the succeeding half wave tends to force 
electrons in the opposite direction, that is from filament to grid, 
which is a possible direction of transfer in this unilateral circuit. 
The individual electrons so transferred to the grid cannot 
pass through the condenser and complete the journey back to 
the filament although others from the opposite plate of the 
condenser may be induced to make the rest of the journey. 
The result is that each positive half wave increases the number 
of electrons on the grid and its adjoining condenser plate and 
thus results in a further increase in negative potential. But 
the more negative the grid becomes the smaller is the current 
in the plate circuit and the lower the point on the characteristic 
curve about which we are producing sinusoidal variations. 
Obviously, such an action is very satisfactory for detecting 
the presence in the input circuit of a train of sinusoidal waves 
of small amplitude since the effect is cumulative. Equally 
obviously, however, such action may absolutely prevent the 
passage through the system of a voice actuated train of waves 
since a word or two may make the grid so negative as to reduce 
practically to zero the plate current upon the variations of 
which the transmission of the wave depends. ; 
The correction of the circuit arrangement by the elimina- 
_ tion of this condenser, which aided distortion, was but a detail 
in the broader research which we have made on the application 
of thermionic devices. This work involved a study of appro- 
priate circuits in which these tubes could be used, of ther- 
mionics, of methods of producing high vacua, of gages for 
indicating the degree of vacuum obtained, a study of various 
types of filament to secure efficiency and uniformity, and of 
the physical relations in three-element vacuum tubes of the 
geometrical form and separation of the electrodes. Some of 


1314 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


these researches as for example those of Van der Bijl, W. 
Wilson, and others have already been published. 

The net result of these researches has been our ability to 
design and construct tubes adapted to any of the purposes of 
the art of communication. In the final form in which we use 
‘a vacuum tube as a telephone repeater we obtain a characteristic 
relation between input voltage and output current which is 
free from distortion as far as we can recognize such effects. 
This is obtained partly by the design of the tube and partly 
by the proper adaption to it of its associated circuit. 

In the first place we arrange that the repeater shall have 
a constant and finite input impedance by bridging between 
grid and filament a high resistance. To this resistance cur- 
rent is supplied by a step-up transformer as indicated in 
Fig. 19. The voltage effective in the grid-filament circuit is 
then the drop across the resistance. In the second place we 


generally arrange that the grid shall not be positive at any 
time in the cycle of theimpressed voltage. This is accom- 
plished by inserting a battery, C, in the grid circuit. In 
this way the tube acts as a device for amplifying the impressed 
voltage and introduces no distortion due to the unilateral 
conductivity of the grid circuit. 

The characteristic relation between grid voltage and plate 
current which is shown in the curves of Fig. 16 is obviously 
not that of a perfect repeater since there is not a linear re- 
lation between input voltage and output current. The volt- 
ages indicated on these curves are those of the battery in 
the plate circuit. The condition under which they were ob- 
tained is that of no external resistance in this battery cir- 
cuit so that the voltages are really those which are effective 
between the plate and filament within the tube. The values 
of the current in these plots are. due to the combined actions 
of this effective voltage and of the voltage impressed upon 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1315 


the grid circuit. For each of these curves the effective 
plate voltage is constant and the curve gives the relation be- 
tween the input voltage and the output current. If, however, 
there is external resistance in the plate circuit, then the effective 
voltage between the plate and the filament will not be that of 
the battery, but will be less by the amount of the JR drop 
in the external circuit. An increase in the grid voltage will 
not, then produce as large an increase in plate current be- 
cause such an increase as it would produce if the plate voltage 
was constant is partially neutralized by the decrease in the 
effective plate voltage which the JR drop occasions. The 
result is that by properly proportioning the external resistance 
of the plate-filament circuit we may obtain a characteristic 
relation between grid voltage and plate current which is es- 
sentially linear as shown by the full line curve of Fig. 20. 
The requirements for a telephone repeater stated above are 


° 
Fic. 20 


thus fully met in our construction of the audion and in the 
circuit arrangement for its operation. In later portions of 
this paper we shall meet illustrations of its perfection in the 
report of experiments and commercial operation. 

In the case of the audion the control of the electron stream 
is electrostatic. It is possible, of course, to control such a 
stream by electromagnetic means since the stream is really 
acurrent. Such a control, is, however, inherently less efficient 
and sensitive than that of the voltage actuated device described. 
We shall, therefore, give no detailed discussion of such methods 
but will pass at once to the discussion of devices in which the 
presence of gas molecules results in an ionization and the con- 
sequent presence in the tube of positive carriers of molecular 
size as well as negative electrons. 

III. The distinction between electronic and gaseous re- 
peating elements is not a matter of the presence or absence of 


1316 & GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


gas since an absolute vacuum is unobtainable. It is rather a 
matter of whether or not gas is an irrelevant and undesirable 
element or an indispensable one. In the vacuum tube of 
DeForest, gas was not indispensable as we have seen and such 
gas as was residual limited the range of voltages, throughout 
which the tube had the desired characteristics when used as 
a repeater. 

III-A. In the repeating element of von Lieben which was 
invented in Europe somewhat later than the time the audion 
was produced here, gas is an essential constituent. This device 
has a Wehnelt cathode, that is a filament coated with oxides 
of the alkaline earths from which electrons are thermionically 
emitted. The function of the cathode is not, however, to 
provide all the carriers as in the case of the filament of the 
audion but rather to provide means for ionizing the gas present 
in the tube. 

The tube is a.three-element device and has in addition to 
the thermionic cathode, an anode of aluminum (corresponding 
to the plate of the audion), and an intermediate sieve-like 
electrode in the form of a perforated aluminum disk. 

The function of the sieve is to control the discharge which 
takes place between the anode and the cathode, in case a po- 
tential is properly applied. The stream of electrons which 
proceeds from the cathode to the anode is impeded by the 
presence of gaseous molecules. The consequent collisions will 
result in the ionization of some of the gas molecules if the 
velocity is sufficiently high and this velocity depends upon the 
potential which is applied to the circuit. The ionization results 
in the presence of more electrons which are available for in- 
creasing the current and also in the presence of positive ions 
of molecular size which are similarly available but move in the 
opposite direction. The introduction of a potential between 
the filament and sieve permits of an external control of the 
motions of the electrons and positive ions, attracting the former 
and repelling the latter or vice versa. 

Small changes in the potential applied to the sieve may result 
in relatively large changes in the ionization and hence in the 
current in the anode circuit. The device may, therefore, be 
used to give amplification but for reasons which will appear 
presently it is not adapted to telephonic work. 

Since the tube contains carriers of both kinds a stream of 
one kind or the other will inevitably flow to the sieve and thus 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1317 


here will be a current in that circuit which will depend for 
its direction upon the polarity of the applied voltage and for 
its amount upon the conductivity of the gaseous space within 
the tube. If the cathode and sieve are used as the input cir- 
tuit, corresponding to the filament-grid circuit of the audion, 
then it is evident that the impedance of this input circuit will 
vary with the impressed voltage. Such a variation will result 
in a serious distortion and is not in conformity with our re- 
quirements for a repeating element. 

The presence of both kinds of carriers makes impossible the 
simple expedient which is so valuable in the case of the audion 
where the unilateral conductivity of the grid-filament circuit 
is utilized. Further the pressure of the gas within the tubes 
is subject to fluctuations which it is almost impossible to con- 
trol. This results in large variation in amplification. In com- 
parison with the electronic device the von Lieben tube is 
seriously deficient as a telephone repeater, and the electro- 
static control of gaseous devices has not been found capable 
of as efficient and simple application to telephonic problems 
as is the electrostatic control of electronic devices. 

III-B. The electromagnetic control of gaseous devices has 
likewise been investigated for telephonic purposes. The op- 
positely moving streams of positive and negative carriers 
will be deflected in the same direction by an electro-magnetic 
field. Provided that the motion of such a discharge stream 
may be made to alter properly the conductivity of either the 
circuit of the discharge itself or of some auxiliary circuit, a 
repeating element may be formed. 

Some of the early work on such systems is that of Hewitt 
whose experiments on mercury vapor arcs are well known. 
The method which he proposed to employ may be seen from 
Fig.’ 21, where is shown a tube containing mercury vapor 
through which a current is passing from the battery B. A 
receiver is connected in series with the battery and the are. 
The arc stream itself is controlled by the electromagnet which 
is excited by the transmitter. This arrangement, which is 
essentially a very insensitive unilateral repeating device, has 
never, so far as is known, been made to function as a telephone 
amplifier. In addition to its inefficiency, this arrangement is 
undesirable because of noise, distortion and variable amplifica- 
tion. 

A later step in the development of an electromagnetically 


1318 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: (Oct. 1 


controlled mercury arc repeater was taken by Dr. H. D. 
Arnold. He utilized an auxiliary circuit for the output and 
so disposed it that its conductivity was altered in conformity 
to the motion of the are stream. In the general idea of using 


FIG.72\ 


a mercury arc stream and influencing it magnetically, Arnold 
of course, follows Hewitt. 

The auxiliary circuit devised by Arnold is at right angles 
to the arc stream and includes three electrodes, one about 


Beis 


™m a 7" n 
s 4 


FIG.22 


the center of the stream and the other two approximately 
equally spaced on opposite sides as shown by a cross section 
of the tube in Fig. 22, the main arc stream being perpendicular 
to the plane of the diagram. The electromagnet is in the plane 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1319 


of these electrodes and thus serves to deflect the main arc 
stream toward one or the other of the side electrodes depending 
upon the polarity of the magnet. The ions in the main arc 
stream are available carriers for current between these elec- 
trodes and the central electrode if a potential is maintained 
between them as by the battery, B. 

In the normal condition, when the arc is undeflected, similar 
portions of the are stream are included between the center 
electrode and each of the side electrodes. The conductivity of 
the two paths thus offered to the potential of the battery are 
then equal and there is no difference of potential between the 
terminals m, n of the coil, to the center tap of which the battery 


FIG.23 


is connected. In so far as the conductivities of these two 
branches of this bridge circuit tend to vary as the result of varia- 
tions in the ionizations of the are stream no difference of po- 
tential will be produced between the terminals of the coil, 
since both conducting branches will tend to vary similarly 
due to a common cause. Fortuitous variations in the arc 
stream are, therefore, not repeated in the external circuit and 
the difficulty of arc noise is practically eliminated. When, 
however, the arc stream is deflected by the voice actuated 
electromagnet, the conductivities of the two branches are op- 
positely changed and a resultant current circulates. 

The device as originally described for patent is shown in 
Fig. 28. An auxiliary anode, formed by a mercury electrode 
shown at A’ is used for starting the are stream. In this form 


1320 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


the arc is struck by tilting the tube and allowing the mercury 
of the anode A’ to run into contact with that of the main 
cathode C. As the tube is restored to its vertical position an 
are is formed. between A’ and C, provided that the key K, 
has been closed. Opening the circuit at K allows the arc to 
form between C and A. 

This gaseous device is capable of good amplification and 
is fairly free from distortion except such as may be introduced 
by the fact that impedance of the electromagnet may not be 
identical with that of a telephone line. It was tried out ex- 
perimentally on telephone lines but has never been used for 
any length of time and then only under special engineering 
supervision. For example, units were installed on the import- 
ant long distance circuits between New York and San Fran- 
cisco but were never used commercially. 

III-C. The third type of gaseous device which we have in- 


Vv 


FIG. 24 


vestigated as a possible repeater is the negative resistance type. 
A typical voltage-current characteristic for an are stream is 
that of Fig. 24, where the ordinates give the impressed voltages 
and the abscissas the resulting current. 

For an ordinary resistance the slope of the relation of voltage 
and current is positive in the usual sense, since for any point on 
the curve dV /dI is positive, and represents a slope of less than 
90 degrees measured counter-clockwise from the axis of J. 
For the arc, however, with its falling characteristic, the slope is 
negative. The resistance which the arc offers to a change.) in 
its condition is thus to be considered negative. 

If an arc is connected in series with an ohmic resistance and a 
source of potential, as shown in Fig. 25, which is essentially 
that suggested at one time by Hewitt, who dealt with a mercury 
arc in an enclosed tube, the arc, owing to its falling characteris- 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1321 


tic, has the effect of making the total resistance in the circuit 
appear to be less when small current variations exist in the 
circuit than when steady conditions exist. 

The reason for this is that any small increase in current is 
accompanied by a decrease in the voltage across the arc itself, 
thus leaving a still greater voltage across the ohmic resistance 
than would be obtained if the circuit consisted merely of ele- 
ments obeying Ohm’s law. If the source, V, is a transmitter 
and if there is in the circuit also a receiver, then it follows that 
the energy received by the latter may, under proper conditions, 
be greater than that delivered to the circuit by the transmitter. 
In other words there is a possible telephonic amplification. e 

The magnitude of the amplification with the Hewitt device 
obviously depends upon the relative magnitudes of the negative 


R 


resistance and the external ohmic resistance. The external 
resistance may in part be that of a telephone line and for that 
reason this method has been considered as a means of producing 
telephonic amplification. The negative resistance of the arc. 
can never do more than remove some of the effects of the 
external resistance. If it could do more, of course, the circuit 
would “sing.’”” We have found in practise that the system can 
never increase the loudness of telephone speech unless the line 
resistance itself is sufficient to stabilize the arc. - In practise the 
are would have to be connected to various telephone lines, each 
having different characteristics, and in order that an are which 
will amplify, when connected to a high resistance line, shall not 
“‘sing’’ when connected to a line of lower resistance, a certain 
amount of extra external resistance has to be added to the arc 
circuit, which resistance will be different for each different type 


1322 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


of line. For practical telephony, therefore, this negative resist- 
ance device is not of service. 

Even if the possible amplification were sufficient under actual 
conditions there would still remain the fact that the dynamic 
characteristic. of the arc varies with the frequency of the im- 
pressed telephonic waves, giving prohibitive distortion and 
variable amplification. Further, in common with the other 
types of gaseous discharge apparatus which we have considered 
above, the negative resistance device would be too unsteady 
for practical use. 

The two devices which we have found practicable under the 
exacting requirements of commercial telephone service are the 
receiver-transmitter element and the three electrode vacuum 
tube or audion. The electromagnetically controlled are stream 
with auxiliary electrodes, which, as indicated above, has been 


| 
4 
rg 
= 


sess 


FIG. 26 


used by us to a limited extent experimentally, and while 
possessing many of the characteristics of a commerical telephone 
repeater, is not in its present state of development adapted to 
general telephonic use. Of the three types, mechanical, 
electronic, and gaseous the electronic device with its thermionic 
emission is the most nearly perfect. In fact the amount by 
which it fails to meet all the requirements for a perfect repeater 
is so small as to be negligible except under the most rigorous 
~ conditions. 

THE REPEATER CIRCUIT 


The electrical network by means of which one or more 
repeater elements may be associated with the telephone lines is 
conveniently known as the “repeater circuit,’ as explained 
above. In two-way operation, such as telephony requires, 
there may be distinguished three general types of such circuits, 
of which the bridge or balanced circuit, described earlier in this — 
paper, is the more usual type. 

The other types do not depend upon balance for their suc- | 
cessful operation. One of these is commonly called the 


. 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1323 


“booster.” Fig. 26 shows one form of series booster, in which 
the input and output of the element are connected in series with 
each other and with *the line. A form of shunt booster is 
similarly indicated in Fig. 27. A large number of other forms 
of booster circuit are possible. Negative resistance devices 
are by their nature adapted to the booster scheme of connection. 

In the case of booster circuits there is, for operation without 


es 4 
F\IG.27 


singing, a limiting relationship between the amplification for 
which the element is adjusted and the impedance of the line in 
which it is connected. Part or all of the output currents from 
the element must flow through the input circuit of the element 
itself, and thus the amplification of the incoming telephonic 
current depends upon the “building up” of currents in the 
circuit by the interaction of input and output. It is obvious 


LineWest ie East 


Fig. 28 


that if the lines do not offer a sufficient load such a circuit with 
ts element may act as an oscillation generator, that is, there 
may be singing. 

The third type of repeater circuit is somewhat analogous to 
the single line repeater of telegraph practise. Incoming voice 
currents operate sensitive relays which switch the terminals of 


_ the*element according to the direction from which the voice 


1324 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: (Oct. 1 


currents originate so that the circuit is equivalent at any instant 
to a one-way repeater circuit. 

These types of circuit, which do not depend upon balance, 
have in general been found not so desirable for practical use as 
the bridge type of duplex circuit and will not be discussed in 
further detail. 

Of the bridge type we may distinguish two classes depending 
upon whether a single repeater element is used to amplify 
transmission in the two directions-or whether separate elements 
are used for the opposite directions. The typical circuit shown 
in Fig. 28 is obviously of the first class. Such circuits we may 
call ‘‘21-type,” indicating two-way, one-element circuits. The 
other class, which we shall discuss a little later, is generally 
known as the ‘‘22-type’’, since it is a two-way, two-element 
circuit. 


Output Coil 


Potentiometer Input Col 


Fig. 29 


The input and output terminals of the element in the 21 type 
circuit, Fig. 28, may obviously be interchanged without altering 
the physical operation of the circuit, in which case the element 
transmits to the two lines in parallel instead of in series. ‘The 
choice between these two connections is influenced largely by 
the ease with which, through the medium of repeating coils, 
the input and output impedances of the element may be made 

‘similar to the impedances of the network to which they are 
connected. 

A practical form of the 21 circuit is shown in Fig. 29 with its 
associated vacuum tube amplifier. The incoming energy is 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1325 


supplied through an input repeating coil, between which and the 
telephone linesis interposed a “filter,”’ not shown in the figure. 
This filter, of which many satisfactory types have been invented 
by Dr. G. A. Campbell, is a physically periodic structure, con- 
sisting of similar networks in series, which is so designed as to 
discriminate against the passage of sinusoidal currents of 
frequencies above or below the necessary telephone range and 
thus prevents the element from receiving currents which arise 
from the simultaneous use of the metallic circuits of the tele- 
phone line for telegraph currents or other signal currents. The 
potentiometer is introduced to regulate the gain occasioned by 
the element. Retardation coils and condensers serve to 
prevent cross-talk into adjacent telephone circuits and to 
permit the use of a common battery to supply all the repeater 
sets at any repeater station. A rheostat is also introduced, as 
shown, to control the heating of the filament and thus its 
thermionic emission. 

Before proceeding to describe the 22 type circuit we may 
well restate the physical operation of the 21 type in terms 
somewhat different from those used in our introductory dis- 
cussion of the circuit. Let us follow the telephone current, 
assuming for the moment that it is traveling from west to east. 
The current that comes to the repeater from the west is partly 
transmitted through the circuit to the line east but the larger 
part of it is divided between the input and output circuits of 
the telephone repeater element. The energy which flows into 
the output circuit is merely dissipated. The energy which 
flows into the input circuit is amplified by the repeater element 
and the amplified current passes to the “output coil.”’ At this 
point if the line west and the line east are similar in characteris- 


tics, the energy divides, half going to the east and half to the 


west. The half that goes west, that is, towards the direction 
from which the transmission came, serves no useful purpose. 
The half that goes east (combined with the small amount of 
energy that passed directly through the repeater) may be many 
times larger than the original energy coming from line west and 
is the useful amplified transmission. 

When the lines west and east are identical in characteristics, 
it is evident by symmetry that there is no voltage set up across 


the input circuit, and there is, therefore, no possibility of a 
“singing” condition no matter how large amplifications are 


employed. This circuit therefore permits two-way transmis- 
sion over similar lines. = go it 


1326 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: (Oct. 1 


In case, however, the line west and the line east are different 
in their impedance characteristics for any part of the telephone 
frequency range, then for such frequencies there will be voltages 
set up across the input circuit due to current flowing from the 
output circuit and a tendency towards singing and distortion. 
The conditions which hold when such unbalances exist will be 
discussed later. 

The duplex bridge circuit, as we saw from our earliest dis- 
cussion, is applicable as a terminal circuit whereby two-way 
transmission may be had over a single pair of wires. (See Fig. 
3). In such operation the telephone line is balanced by the 
inclusicn in the opposite arm of the bridge of an artificial line of 
similar impedance-frequency characteristic. At a repeater 
station we may, therefore, terminate both incoming lines by 
bridge circuits, balance each line by an artificial line, and 
operate both lines as a through circuit for two-way conversa- 


-<-—— 
line Ean 


tions provided we connect the input branch of each bridge to 
the output branch of the other. In connecting the input 
terminals of one bridge circuit to the output terminals of the 
other bridge circuit we may introduce a one-way amplifier as 
shown in Fig. 30. 

The resulting circuit is the 22-type defined above, although 
its evolution did not follow the line which we have just followed 
for simplicity of discussion. It will be noted that this circuit 
makes use of a separate repeater element for transmission west 
to east from that used for transmission east to west, that it 
requires two “‘output transformers,” and that each line, instead 
of being balanced by the line in the opposite direction, is bal- 
anced by an artificial line indicated as “network west” or 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1327 


“network east.” Assuming again the transmission to be 
coming from the west, we trace the currents through the re- 
peater circuit as follows: A small part of the energy goes 
through into the network west; the largest part, however, is 
divided between the input circuit of repeater No. 1 and the 
output circuit of repeater No. 2. That part which enters the 
output circuit of repeater No. 2 is dissipated without doing 
useful work. The part reaching the input of repeater No. 1 is 
amplified and the amplified energy flows through the output 
transformer connected to line east. The “network east’ is 
made to have as nearly as possible the same impedance as the 
actual line for the full range of telephone frequencies. If the 
balance were perfect, there would be no voltage whatever set 
up across the input circuit of repeater No. 2, and therefore no 
possibility of setting up a singing condition whatever values of 
amplification were used. 

Actually, however the balance can never be absolutely 
perfect, so that there will be a certain voltage set up across 
this input. This will, in turn, be amplified by repeater No. 2. 
These amplified currents will then flow through the output 
transformer connected to the line west. If the “network 
west” has exactly the same impedance as the line west, then 
the energy will equally divide between the two and there 
will be no voltage set up across the input circuit of repeater 
No. 1. This condition will then prevent any possibility of 
a singing condition being set up. Again, however, there will 
’ be in any practical case some unbalance so that a small voltage 
will be set up across this input circuit. If the two unbalances 
involved (2. e. line east against “network east’’ and line west 
against “network west’’) are sufficiently large, it is evident 
that the telephone currents have a closed path through the 
two repeaters and through these unbalances so that a singing 
condition may be set up. 

This circuit is, however, very.much more stable than the 21- 
type circuit. It will be noted that if either of the networks 
exactly balances its line, there may be any degree whatever 
of unbalance between the other network and its line without 
permitting singing. In general, the fact that the singing 
condition requires two unbalances simultaneously leads to_a 
more stable condition. 

There is another property of the 22-type circuit which is of 
great importance in connection with tandem operation of 


 ) 


1328 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


repeaters, that is, when two or more repeaters are used at 
different points in a line. As pointed out, transmission coming 
from the line west and reaching a 21-type repeater, as in Fig. 
28, will result in an amplified current being sent out towards 
line east; but it will also result in an equally large current 
being sent back into line west. In the case of the 22-type, 
however, if the transmission comes in from line west and the 
balance between network east and line east is good, there will 
be very little energy sent back into line west. As will be 
pointed out in more detail below, under “Tandem Operation 
of Repeaters,’’ this feature has a large advantage as the energy 
sent back into line west would react on any other repeater which 
was in circuit in that direction. 

A 22-type circuit with vacuum tube repeater elements con- 
nected into it is shown in Fig. 31. 

In connection with the presentation of the 22-type circuit 
it is interesting to note that this circuit, which is today the 
best known means of producing two-way telephone repeater 
operation with one-way amplifying devices, is the invention 
of Mr. W. L. Richards, one of the engineers of the Bell System, 
who devised and patented the arrangement in 1895—years 
before successful telephone repeaters were available for utiliza- 
tion in telephone systems. 

BALANCING OF LINES 


As pointed out above, the 21-type circuit depends for its 
stable operation on the balancing of the telephone line east 
against the telephone line west, and the 22-type circuit de- 
pends on the balancing of each of the telephone lines against 
an artificial line or ‘‘network.’’ ‘‘Balancing’’ requires that the 
two lines or the line and its artificial line which are balanced 
against each other shall have closely the same impedance for 
the whole range of telephone frequencies. 

Assuming that we have repeater elements which can give 
us sufficient amplification without appreciably affecting quality 
it is evident that the amount of amplification which we can 
get in any practical case depends on the degree to which this 
balance condition can be carried. This in turn, as will be more 
evident after reading the further discussion, depends on line 
conditions. It is then the line conditions, rather than the re- 
peater element or its circuits which finally limit in every prac- 


tical case the amplifications which can be obtained hes a 
repeater. 


¢ 


TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1329 


1919] 


30d, —= 


Hsog wun 


DEPWOYN I 


qaduj = 


oY Lo | ‘ 
> SPDWOUNDL GY 


Qing sryprdry 
3 


YIOMLPN 
Puiruriog 


6 000-0 O-.000 -9 


1330 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. I 


Let us consider, therefore, what the impedance of a telephone 

circuit looks like as seen from the repeater terminals. 
TELEPHONE LINE IMPEDANCE 

If we take a very long No. 8 B. w. g. open wire circuit, which 
is the largest size of copper in general use in the telephone art, 
and suppose this circuit to be absolutely uniform in its charac- 
teristics, then its impedance, that is, the ratio of the voltage 
applied across it to the current entering it will be as shown by 
Curves 1 and 2 in Fig. 32, in which curve 1 gives the resistance 
and curve 2 the negative reactance of the impedance. 

For such a line we can make up a very simple form of net- 
work which has approximately the same impedance and can 
be used for balancing in a repeater circuit. Curves No. 3 
and 4 of Fig. 32 indicate the impedance of a network consisting 


Simple Network 
Cc 


R; C, 


Precision Network 
Ce | 


re Seer 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 32—Non-Loaprep No. 8 Gace Open Wire LINE 


merely of a condenser in series with resistance. It will be noted 
that even this simple circuit is a very good approximation of 
the impedance of a long line except at low frequencies. Curves 
Nos. 5 and 6 show the impedance of a somewhat more com- 
plicated network, as indicated on the diagram, which gives a 
very good approximation over the whole telephone frequency 
range. 

In a practical case every line has slight irregularities which 
affect somewhat its impedance. An impedance curve for an 
actual line which is, however, comparatively regular, is shown 
by curves 1 and 2 of Fig. 33. The measurements on this line 
were made with the end of it closed through an impedance 
similar to that of a long length of the line itself. Curves 5 
and 6 are copied in from Fig. 32 for comparison. 


5S 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1331 


It is difficult, however, to keep a long open wire circuit free 
from short stretches of cable. Fig. 34 shows both com- 
ponents of the impedance of a No. 8 gage circuit having a 
total length of about 165 miles with the distant end closed as 
before through an impedance equal to that of a long length 
of the line itself, but with 114 miles of underground cable at 
a point 105 miles from the end at which the measurements were 
made. 

It would evidently be more difficult to make a network having 
the same impedance as this. It can be done, however, fairly 
simply by building an artificial line representing the 105 miles 
from the sending end to the place where the cable is located 
putting in series an artificial line representing the cable, on 
putting beyond the artificial line an impedance network simu- 


800 


600 


200 


ie) 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fiq,33—Non-Loapep No. 8 Gacr OPEN Wire LINE 


lating the impedance of a long line, which might be in this case 
merely a resistance in series with a condenser. 

If a line has many irregularities, however, the setting up of a 
balancing network, while always theoretically possible, would 
become very expensive and inconvenient. A fundamental 
requirement, then, in obtaining good repeater action on a line 
is the maintenance of a high degree of uniformity in the elec- 


trical characteristics of the line. 


In this particular case the irregularity caused by the cable 
can, to a considerable extent, be overcome by inserting in the 
cable one or more loading coils to make the impedance of the 
cable approximately that of the open wire line. In this actual 
case a single coil was cut into the cable near its mid-point, and 


~ the measured impedance after this had been done is indicated 


1332 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: {Oct. 1 


in Fig. 35. In this figure the curves after loading are shown in 
heavy lines and the old curves are indicated in lighter lines for 
comparison. 

In the case of loaded lines the problem of maintaining 
sufficient regularity in the electrical characteristics to give a 
satisfactory impedance curve becomes considerably more 
difficult, due to variations in the inductances of the loading coils 
and in the distances between these coils. To illustrate this a 
number of impedance curves of loaded circuits will be given 
showing the effects of their irregularities on the impedance 
characteristics. In these curves, for simplicity, only the resist- 
ance component will be shown, as the reactive component is 
considerably smaller and goes through about the same irregu- 
larities as does the resistance curve. 


Has) 
n 
105 Mi. ¢§_ 61 Mi. 


1% Mi. of Under- 
ground Cable 


ark 


Pole 400 


New 


Harrisburg 


| Resistance 


+ - 
me =e Reactance HoH 


| 


200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 34— HarrisBure To Pore 400 Newark, Wires 23/24 
Corn out at Easton 


Fig. 86 shows an impedance characteristic of an open wire 
line loaded at approximately 8-mile intervals with loading coils 
having approximately 14 henry each. This circuit would give 
commercial service from a transmission standpoint. It will be 
noted, however, that its impedance characteristic is extremely 
irregular, and it would be difficult to obtain gains from a tele- 
phone repeater operated in conjunction with it. 

Fig. 37 shows the resistance of a circuit of similar constants 
representing a less extreme condition of irregularity. This 
would have been considered, before the advent of repeaters, a 
reasonably good circuit so far as irregularity is concerned. 
These irregularities were due largely to comparatively small 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1333 


variations in spacing of loading coils and in the inductances of 
the loading coils. Loading coils have to be placed on a tele- 
phone circuit at particular points in the transposition layout of 
the circuit in order to prevent crosstalk between it and other 
circuits on the same lead. It is difficult, however, exactly to 
space transpositions in view of the variations in the route taken 
by a line, lengths of cable, junction points with other lines, etc. 


Resist 


T 


Negativ: 


IE 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 35—HarrispurG To Porte 400 Newark, WIRES 
23/24 Coin IN aT HAsTON 


4000 


3200 


2400 


. OHMS 


1600 


800 


0 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
“FREQUENCY ‘ 


Fig. 36—SrcrTion or TRANSCONTINENTAL Circuit 
PrrrspuRGH TO NEw YORK BEFORE “CLEARING Up” 


This led in the past to variations in the lengths between the 
successive loading points. Aerial loading coils are exposed to 
current surges due to lightning, and with some of the types of 
coils which have been put into use this has led to variations in 
their inductances. For any given frequency it may be that 
the effect of a large number of such irregularities are cumulative 
in raising the impedance of the circuit for that frequency, 


1334 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


whereas with another frequency only slightly removed from the 
first, the effect of the irregularities may be to reduce the impe- 
dance. The result then with such impedance is indicated in 
Fig. 37 where the variation was due not to a few large irregu- 
larities, but to a large number of small irregularities. 

This particular circuit was one of those entering into the 
transcontinental line, so that it was very carefully gone over, 
retransposed where necessary, the loading coils replaced by 


3200 


T T Gene 
So Curve 
T 


2400 ! 
2 
= 1600 
° 3 re 
800 
hee 
0 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fic. 37—Srction oF TRANSCONTINENTAL Circuit Pitts- 
BURGH TO CHICAGO BEFORE “‘CLEARING,,UP” 


Beeieent 
cca EREE RET 
PAY TN “i 


Smee 


0 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


¥iq. 38—Sxrcrion ofr TRANSCONTINENTAL CIRCUIT—PITTSBURGH TO CHI- 
CAGO AFTER “CLEARING Up” 


others having a particularly high degree of stability and uni- 
formity and the spacings made very uniform. The result of 
this work is indicated in Fig. 38 in which the dark line shows the 
impedance after this work had been done and the light line is 
a repetition of Fig. 37 for comparison. The circuit will now 
permit of large gains with repeaters. 

In the cases where a large variation in impedance is due to 
one or more large irregularities, the impedance curves often 


offer a very interesting and convenient method of determining 
/ 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1335 


the point at which irregularity exists. For example: Fig. 39 
shows the impedance of a circuit as measured from one end, 
the large wave-like variation being due to defective apparatus 
at some point in the circuit. By measuring the frequency 
range between successive “humps” on this “‘wave’’ it is possible 
to determine the distance from the sending end to the point of 
irregularity. In practical work many cases have arisen where 
omitted or defective coils or other irregularities have been 
located in position by this method. 

In maintaining this uniformity of the characteristics of the 
line, one of the largest difficulties is caring for short lengths of 


2000 


1600 


0 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 39—LoaprEp No. 8 Gace Open Wire LINE 


Note: This irregularity was caused by defective apparatus located at a distance of 
about 15 sections from terminals at which measurements were made. 


cable which may occur in the line at river crossings, in going 
through towns, etc. It has sometimes been difficult to explain 
to those outside of the telephone field, but who are acquainted 
with the fact that by loading and telephone repeaters we can 
talk through long lengths of cable, why it is that we have so 
much difficulty with short lengths of cable which come into our 
open wire circuits, and why we are averse to cutting such short 
lengths into important long distance lines at villages and at 
crossings of railroads, power lines, etc. Considering, however, 
that a 500-ft. length of cable has as much capacity as three- 
quarters of a mile of open wire, it is evident that even a short 


length of cable has a very large effect on the operation of any 


- 


1336 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


repeater on the line. In laying out a circuit, such short lengths 
of cable can be partially corrected for in the spacing of the 
loading coils. Changes made after a line is laid out are of 
course much more difficult to take care of. 

In cable circuits the problem of maintaining uniformity is 
similar to that of open wire lines, requiring very accurate 
spacing of the loading coils and requiring loading coils of very 
uniform characteristics and of high electrical stability. 


BALANCING ARTIFICIAL LINES 


Assuming, then, in any case, that the lines have been made as 
uniform electrically as is economical, there is the problem of 
constructing artificial lines (or networks, as they are generally 
called) which shall have within a desired degree the same impe- 
dance as the actual line. It should be noted that these artificial 
lines do not need to have transmission characteristics cor- 
responding to the actual lines, but need to have only the same 
impedance characteristics. 

A very simple form is that indicated above for use in balanc- 
ing a non-loaded open wire line, consisting of a single resistance 
in series with a single capacity. As already noted, a better 
approximation for a non-loaded open wire line can be made by 
adding another resistance and condenser as shown in Fig. 32. 

For loaded lines, it is necessary to use a somewhat more 
complex artificial line, although here again the basic form is 
comparatively simple. Fig. 40 shows in light lines for com- 
parison an impedance curve much like that of Fig. 38, and in 
heavier lines, the impedance of an artificial line consisting of 
two condensers, a resistance and two inductance coils arranged 
as indicated by the diagram in thisfigure. |For completeness 
both the resistance and reactance of the impedance are shown 
in the figure. _ 

In the case of a loaded line the impedance depends very 
markedly on the place in the loading section from which the 
circuit is measured. In practise lines are generally terminated 
either at mid-section or at mid-coil, since these points are 


symmetrical points in the loading and make for maximum — 


flexibility in connecting circuits together. Most of the figures 
in this paper were taken at mid-coil. 

It is evidently necessary that the balancing line should 
balance not only the actual line itself, but any apparatus 
between the line and the point at which the repeater is applied, 
so that all coils, composite sets or other devices used i in Series 


ates 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1337 


with the line must be, with the necessary precision, balanced 
in the artificial lines by corresponding coils, condensers, etc. 


TANDEM OPERATION OF REPEATERS 


The above discussion has referred particularly to the opera- 
tion of a single repeater in a circuit. Where several repeaters 
are used in tandem at different points in a circuit, the same 
considerations are involved. In addition there is the further 
consideration that not only can circulating currents be set up 
involving each repeater by itself, and which may lead to 
“howling,’”’ or to distortion in quality, but such circulating 
currents may follow paths involving any two or more of the 


2000 


1600 


1200 


OHMS 


800 


400 


200 400 ~ 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 ~ 2000 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 40—Loapep No. 8 Gace Open Wire Linz % Cor TERMINATION 


repeaters operating in conjunction. As noted above, the 22 
type circuit involving artificial balancing lines has a large 
advantage over the 21 type for tandem operation, due to the 
fact that transmission entering it from either direction does not 
cause a large amount of energy to be thrown back in the same 
direction, as is the case with the 21 type circuit. There is thus 
very much less interaction between the repeaters with the 22 
type.. 

Effective tandem operation of repeaters requires, therefore, 
a high degree of electrical uniformity, and also requires that 
the reflection effects between the repeaters and their connected 
lines shall be reduced as much as possible, so that each repeater 
brings in as little irregularity to its adjacent repeaters as 


possible. 


1338 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: {Oct. 1 


THE Four-WIRE CIRCUIT 

In the above we have considered the application of repeaters 
in ordinary circuits in which the same pair of wires is used for 
transmission east as is used for transmission west. After the 
above discussion regarding balance, it is evident that there 
would be considerable advantage in transmission if separate 
pairs of wires were used for transmission east and for transmis- 
sion west. A circuit of this type, designated as a “four-wire 
circuit,” is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 41. 

The term “four-wire’’ does not mean necessarily that four 
wires are used, but that different circuits are used for trans- 
mission east and transmission west. Each of these circuits 
may comprise a pair of wires, or may be a phantom circuit, etc. 

In a circuit of this kind there will be one-way repeaters in 
each of the two branches. The two branches must be brought 


ee ee 


Ae Ae 


| 
| 
| 
| 
nt 
| 
! 
| 
I 
| 
+ 
—s 
1 
| 
| 


together at the ends for connection to two-wire lines, or to the 
subscribers’ loops. There is, therefore, a possibility for circu- 
lating currents to be set up flowing over the two sides of the 
circuit in series. In order to minimize such circulating currents, 
artificial balancing lines are used at the points where the four 
wire connects to the two-wire in a manner similar to the 
arrangement of the 22-type circuit. It should be noticed that 
if the total amplification of both branches of the four-wire in 
series is less than the total transmission equivalent, the circuit 
cannot “‘sing.’’ If the balance at the ends is good, the gains 
may be even greater than the transmission losses without 
producing singing. As in the case of two-wire operation, how- 
ever, large distortion may be brought into the circuit by the 


+ 
des 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
' 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
+ 
' 
! 


ele es AS a oe 
l | 
He 
—4-++----— --— 
——t 
: H | 
na 
a a a a a 


\e 


1339 


ATERS 


TELEPHONE REPE 


1919 | 


ey AYnNd! 4 
*\Ae ousi2ine ile eaearens ag @ «=. » — snyeuedde ydesbajay 
wow . 4 See = 5] 
wi Vet a Sl” rh Ce ne eee esha 8 fq payeoipu cuajeades auoydajay 
a ” “oo - sso] Sapesedd, 
219¢9°e56|, paepurzs jo soy on = juepante aut “UON}IAII YIed ul sabessaw ydesbajay 
JNO} 10} Sapiaoid }1 aul aWeS ay} Jy “ODSIDUELY UECPUL 440, MOA/ USAMA} 
yas? _, 102 burpeet 49 burredc \ \ aq CuoiessaAu0? auoydaja} sNOBUe}|NWIS aas4 JO} SAPIAOJC JINddIO Sly} 
ksuayero slo. burpea|ynoat> Fee ota ance 
K SalI OOPS 


ede a : 
VES gol wees Sule 


WYOA MIN OYNESL Ld MAAN3IG ALIS IW LS VOINWANNIM = OOSIONVN4 NWS 


\ 


wesbeiq palyiduis 
64199419 ydesBaa] pue auoydaja) Ybnouy | 40) df yag vay 
LINDY OOSIONVE NVS —YYOA MAN 


1340 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: {Oct. 1 


circulating currents even when the amplifications and balance 
are not such as to produce singing. 

Circuits of this kind evidently use twice as many wires as 
ordinary circuits. They permit, however, the use of smaller 
wires. It is a question of economics then, as to whether a 
circuit of this kind proves in in any practical case. For long 
distance cable operation, and for other special cases, there are 
conditions where we find that these four-wire circuits have a 
field of use. 


METHOD OF APPLYING REPEATERS 


In the practical operation of repeaters there are two methods 
of connecting them into lines which have come into general use. 
These are: 

(a) ‘Through line repeaters.”’ 
(b) “Cord circuit repeaters.” 

The through line repeater is one which is associated with a 
particular line and, connected directly into the line. The 
operators, therefore, have no control over it. It is generally 
set to give a definite amplification, depending on the characteris- 
tics of the line. 

The cord circuit repeater is connected into a cord circuit 
under the control of an operator. The two ends of the circuit 
generally appear before the operator as two plugs which she 
may connect into any pair of circuits terminating before her 
which are in proper shape for repeater operation. The ampli- 
fication given by the repeater is generally under her control, 
the amplification in each case depending on the pair of circuits 
which is connected together. 

Where the circuits which may be used with a cord circuit 
repeater vary considerably in characteristics, so that the same 
artificial balancing lines will not work satisfactorily with all 
of them, various arrangements are used so that proper balancing 

lines will be connected into the circuit corresponding to the 
_actual lines to which the circuit is connected. The commonest 
arrangement for doing this consists in having a jack in the 
switchboard immediately below each jack to which a toll line 
connects. This extra jack has connected to it an artificial line 
corresponding to the actual line. The repeater circuit then 
terminates in double plugs so arranged as to pick up boththe 


actual and artificial lines simultaneously. 
7 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS ‘1341 


PRACTICAL RESULTS OBTAINED 


As already noted, the amount of gain which may be obtained 
in any practical case now depends almost entirely on the 
degree of electrical “uniformity”? which it is economical to 
maintain in the telephone circuits to which the repeaters are 
connected, since we can obtain within practical limits as large 
amplifications in the repeater elements as we desire. 

We have already indicated the large effect which this elec- 
trical uniformity requirement has had on the design of loading 
coils, and on practises with regard to their use. About every 
feature of open wire and cable construction and office equip- 
ment which affects the electrical characteristics of the circuits 
has been in some way affected by this repeater requirement. 
Not only in the design and construction, but also in the daily 
operation and maintenance of circuits with repeaters, this 
requirement has to be kept constantly in mind. 

At the present time more than 1000 telephone repeaters are 
in service in the plant. We now will describe a number of 
typical repeater circuits and will indicate the results which are 
being obtained. 

TRANSCONTINENTAL LINE 


The circuit over which transmission is given between the 
cities along the eastern coast and the Pacific coast cities is 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 42. Originally there were 
three repeaters used in this circuit, located at Pittsburgh, 
Omaha and Salt Lake City. Since that date, largely for 
flexibility in switching traffic, the number has been increased to 
six located at Pittsburgh, Chicago, Omaha, Denver, Salt Lake 
City and Winnemucca. The total gains were only slightly 


_increased by the change. The circuit consists of No. 8 B. w. g. 


copper conductors loaded at eight-mile intervals with coils of 
one-fourth henry each. This gives a line equivalent of 56 
miles of standard 19 gage cable. There is a further transmis- 
sion loss due to composite and other apparatus of about 7 miles, 
the total equivalent being, therefore, about 63 miles. This is 
reduced by repeaters to a resultant equivalent of 21 miles, 
which is, therefore, about one-third of the equivalent without 
repeaters. 

The drawing shows the important points on the line, indicates 
the positions of telephone and telegraph repeaters and indicates © 
the compositing apparatus used in separating the telegraph and 
telephone cu ents. ; 


1342 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


BOSTON-WASHINGTON CABLE 


The largest use of repeaters on cables has been in connection 
with the circuits between the various cities which are served 
through the underground cable route extending from Boston 
through Providence, Hartford, New Haven, New York, Phila- 
delphia and Baltimore to Washington. The use of repeaters 
on small gage cables placed in this subway became of the 
greatest importance during the war in caring for the tremend- 
ously increased requirements for telephone facilities between 
these large cities along the Atlantic seaboard. 

Most of these telephone repeaters are located in the large 
cities along the route of this cable. At two places, however, 
Princeton, N. J., and Elkton, Md., the repeater requirements 
were such as to justify the putting up of buildings especially 
for repeater operation. Fig. 48 shows an illustration of the 
building which was put up at Princeton. There are now about 
200 repeaters working at Princeton. The ultimate capacity 
of the building will be over 500 repeaters. 

Fig. 44 shows a typical group of repeater racks, each rack 
carrying two complete repeaters. Fig. 45 shows at the left, 
front and back views of some of these repeater racks. At the 
right it shows the face of a test board from which the different 
repeaters and associated circuits may be tested. Fig. 46 


shows the power board where the operating currents and poten- 


tials applied to the repeaters are measured. 

The repeaters shown in the above photographs are of the 
vacuum tube type. Fig. 47 shows a front view of an installa- 
tion of the mechanical type repeaters at Providence, R. I. 
Fig. 48 shows a rear view of the repeater racks. 

The longest cable circuits set up along this route are those 
from Boston to Washington, a total distance of about 455 miles. 
A typical layout for a circuit of this kind consists of loaded 
conductors, No. 10 B. & S. gage from Boston to New York, No. 
13 gage from New York to Philadelphia and No. 10 gage from 
Philadelphia to Washington. This circuit has an equivalent 
of about 30 miles of No. 19 gage standard cable, which by 
means of repeaters at Hartford and Philadelphia is reduced to 
about 14.5 miles. It should be noted here that No. 10 gage 
conductors, are somewhat larger conductors than would now be 
placed for this business, and are being used because they were 


available, having been placed before the use of. repeaters had 


been developed to their present effectiveness, — 3 bf 


ae 


PLATE tl 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


]rramal 


aNv I1duvadHy] 


ep “PI 


PLATE Lil 


A, |, E. E. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 


1919 


[ILaMal GNV IduvaaHy] 


bP “OI 


PLATE Lill. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


[LLGMaL GNV IdavagHD] 


} 
i ¥ 
4 
# 
7 7 
* 
= 


SP “SIT 


PLATE LIV. 
A. f. E, E. 
VOL. XXXVII,. 1919 


Fia. 46 [GHERARDI AND JEWETT] 


PLATE LV. 


A. |. E- E. 


VOL. XXXVIII 


1919 


PA DAA RS 


[GHERARDI AND JEWETT] 


Fia. 47 


PLATE LVI. 


A. |, E.E. 
VOL. XXXVIfl, 1919 


& 


iad, eel ea ee oe 


[GHERARDI AND JEWETT] 


Fig. 48 


1919] TELEPHONE REPEATERS 1343 


The longest circuits electrically, that is, those having the 
greatest attenuation, which have been operated with repeaters 
along this route, are New York-Washington circuits, consisting 
of No. 19 gage cable loaded with coils of about one-fourth henry 
inductance, spaced at intervals of about 1.16 miles. The 
distance is about 225 miles. This gives a line equivalent of 
about 62 miles standard cable. By the use of four repeaters 
at Princeton, Philadelphia, Elkton, and Baltimore, the equiv- 
alent of this circuit is reduced to about 13 miles of standard 
cable. 

The above circuits make use of the 22-type repeaters. 
Where there is but one repeater in a circuit, however, the 
21-type gives, under many conditions, satisfactory service. 
For example, between New York and Philadelphia, a distance 
of about 90 miles, a group of circuits is being worked on No. 19 
gage conductors, with a single 21-type repeater at Princeton. 
The circuit without repeaters has an equivalent of about 24 
miles of standard No. 19 gage cable. The repeater reduces 
this to about 14 miles. 

SUMMARY 


In the foregoing pages we have endeavored to present a 
short history of telephone repeater development, a statement 
of the factors which control their successful operation, an idea 
of the possibilities and limitations of different types of repeaters 
and repeater circuits, and three or four typical.examples of the 
present commercial line combinations in which telephone 
repeaters are vital links in the every-day telephone service of 
the public. These, we believe, will give the members of the 
Institute a fair picture of the state of the art as it now exists, 
both technically and commercially. 

In concluding the paper it seems only necessary to add a 
word with regard to the further influence which the telephone 
repeater is likely to have on telephonic communication in the 
future. e.. 

As indicated in the earlier parts of the paper, the net 


result of the vast amount of work already done has been to 


produce amplifying devices capable of taking energy from a 
local source or sources and under the control of enfeebled 
telephonic currents from a distant transmitting station deliver 
back into the telephone line currents which are faithful repro- 
ductions of these enfeebled control currents but with many 


times their energy. Furthermore, the work already done has 


- 


1344 GHERARDI AND JEWETT: [Oct. 1 


developed the methods which permit of utilizing the amplifying 
properties of these repeaters in the various kinds of telephone 
lines which go to make up the modern telephone network and 
methods of constructing and maintaining lines to secure maxi- 
mum efficiency and economy from the use of repeaters. The 
tools thus at our disposal are of such a character as to permit 
of our forecasting the changes which their use.is likely to pro- 
duce in the evolutionary growth of the telephone plant. When 
combined with the benefits to be derived from the loading of 
cable circuits, the use of the practically perfect repeaters now 
available puts an entirely different aspect on many of the 
problems which have confronted the telephone engineer in the 
past. Not only will there be the opportunity to utilize smaller 
gage wires than has hitherto been possible but the economical 
field for underground and overhead toll cables will be greatly 
extended into the region which it has heretofore been possible 
to serve only with some form of open wire construction. 
Viewed from the standpoint of continuity of service alone, this 
is an advantage of almost inestimable value. Further, the 
range of reliable and commercially possible long distance 
telephony will be very greatly extended. 

Numerous fields which have in the past been fruitful regions 
of experimentation have likewise been made obsolete by the 
development of the telephone repeater. Most noteworthy of 
these is that looking to the production of powerful or so-called 
loud speaking transmitters. Many investigators have in the 
past devoted much effort to the production of this type of 
equipment and for many years a large group of telephone 
engineers, notably those in Europe, looked upon the production 
of a practical loud speaking transmitter as a key to the solution 
of long distance telephony. Comprehensive studies by the 
engineers of the Bell System early convinced us that the solu- 
tion did not lie in this direction and the success of the telephone 
repeater is a vindication of the adequacy of these early studies 
and of the consistent line of development which followed them. 


In conclusion, the authors wish to express their appreciation 
to Mr. E. H. Colpitts, Assistant Chief Engineer of the Western 
Electric Company, Incorporated; Mr. O. B. Blackwell, 
Transmission Development Engineer of the American Tele- 
phone and Telegraph Company; Mr. A. B. Clark, of the Ameri- 
can Telephone and Telegraph Company, and Mr. H. E. 


Bs" 19197 “ TELEPHONE.REPEATERS ~  ——~=«WALBS4S 


___ Shreeve and Mr. John Mills of the Western Electric Company 

~ Incorporated, for the very great help they have rendered in the 

selection from a mass of information of the data for this paper : 
and for their assistance in its preparation. — 


September 18, 1919 Se | 


‘ \ 


Presented at a joint meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Institute 
of. Radio Engineers, New York, October 1, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E. 


PRINCIPLES OF RADIO TRANSMISSION AND RE- 
CEPTION WITH ANTENNA AND COIL AERIALS 


BY J. H. DELLINGER 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


Coil aerials are coming to replace the large antennas in radio 
work. The advantage of the coil aerial as a direction finder, in- 
terference preventer, reducer of strays and submarine aerial, 
make it important to know how effective such an aerial is as a 
transmitting and receiving device in comparison with the ordi- 
nary antenna. In this article the mathematical theory is 
presented and, as a result, the answer to this question is obtained. 
Experiments have verified the conclusions reached, and the 
formulas which are obtained are a valuable aid in the design of 
an aerial to fit any kind of radio station. 

A great many questions and hazy ideas on the behavior of 
radio waves are cleared up by the study which was made and 
here presented. 

It is found that the coil aerial is particularly desirable for 
communication on short wave lengths. A coil aerial is as 
powerful as an antenna only when its dimensions approach those 
of the antenna. For other reasons, however, a small coil aerial 
is in many eases as effective as a large antenna. 

It is shown that an advantageous type of radio aerial is a 
condenser consisting of two large metal plates. This type of 
aerial has many of the advantages of the coil aerial. 

The fundamental principles of design of aerials are given in 
this paper. On the basis of this work the actual functioning of 
any type of radio aerial can be determined either from measure- 
ments made upon the aerials or from actual transmission experi- 
ments. 

The investigation has opened up a large and most interesting 
field for further research and progress in the utilization of radio 
waves. y 


I. INTRODUCTION 

N a radio transmitting or receiving set, either the condenser 

or the inductance coil ismadeof large dimensions. It is then 
called the aerial, and effects the transfer of power between the 
radio circuits and the ether. The coil aerial has the inherent 
advantage of serving as a direction finder and interference 
preventer, but is less effective quantitatively as a transmitting 
or receiving device than the condenser type of aerial, commonly 
called theantenna. Both kinds of aerial are very simple in con- 
struction, consisting merely of one or more wires. An antenna 


1347 


1348 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


consists of a wire or set of wires connected in parallel and con- 
stituting one plate of a condenser, the other plate being’ the 
ground beneath. The coil aerial is one or more turns of wire 
constituting a simple coil or loop. When an antenna is used 
its circuit is completed, in general, by placing an inductance 
coil in series with it and the ground; and when a coil aerial is 
used its circuit is completed by connecting a condenser across 
its terminals. The typical connections are shown in Figs. 
and Za 

The antenna is used when it is desired to communicate over 
as great a range as possible or reduce the power of the apparatus 
as much as possible. The coil is used when directional prop- 
erties are particularly important. The coil radiates and re- 
ceives electric waves better in the direction of its plane than 


Antenna 
L 
bd 
Ground 
Fig. 1—SimpLe ANTENNA CirR- Fic. 2—Simpie Corn AERIAL 
CUIT CIRCUIT 


in the direction of its axis, whereas the performance of the 
antenna is much more nearly independent of direction of the 
waves. By arranging a coil so that it can rotate it makes an 
excellent direction finder. When thus used on a ship or an 
airplane, a coil aerial is sometimes called a radio compass. 
It has also been called a radio goniometer. By turning it 
so that its axis is parallel to the direction of propagation of 
the waves from some particular station, that wave is not 
received while waves from other directions are received. The 
coil may thus serve as an interference preventer. It is possible 
to attain some slight reduction of the effects of strays, com- 
monly called static, by using combinations of coil aerials. 
Submarine communication is more successful with coil aerials 
than with antennas because the coil can be protected from the 
short-circuiting effect of the water while an antenna can not. 
The numerous advantages of the coil aerial make it highly im- 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1349 


portant to know the relative sensitiveness or power of trans- 
mission of the device in comparison with the antenna. This 
publication provides the answer to this question and sets forth 
the theory of radiation and reception and the action of antenna 
and coil aerials. The relative effectiveness of any coil and 
antenna is given by formula (32) to (36) in Sec. IV 1 below. 
The uses of the coil as a direction finder, interference preventer, 
reducer of strays, and submarine aerial, are not treated in 
this article. 

The most important question considered is the practical one: 
How far can communication be maintained by the use of any 
specified antennas or coil aerials. Formulas are developed by 
which the current received in an antenna or coil is calculated 
in terms of the current in a transmitting antenna or coil, 
resistance of receiving aerial circuit, the distance, wave length, 
and dimensions of the aerials. The formulas have been found 
to be useful in the design of aerials and in the selection of an 
aerial for a particular kind of communication. They were 
worked out before there was any experimental information 
available to answer the question of the comparative quantita- 
tive value of the two kinds of aerials. Not much inform- 
ation on this has been obtained from experiment even yet 
(1919), but such experiments as have been made have sub- 
stantiated the formulas. The work described in this 
paper was done in 1916 and 1917. The results were given in 
“Radio Transmission Formulas,” a confidential paper of July, 
1917, which was circulated in the Signal Corps and Navy. 
Publication was withheld during the war at the request of the 
Signal Corps. The formulas have also been given by the writer 
of the present paper on page 234 of ‘The Principles Underlying 
Radio Communication,” 1918, Signal Corps Pamphlet No. 40, 
a book which can be purchased from the Superintendent of 
Documents, Washington, D. C. 

Historical. The coil aerial and the condenser aerial (an- 
tenna) both date back to the first experimenter with the | 
electric waves that make radio telegraphy possible. H. Hertz 
in 1888 used an open oscillator, which was the forerunner of 
the antenna, as his transmitting apparatus. For receiving he 
used a circle of wire, which was the first loop or coil aerial, 
and observed its directional properties. 

The possibility of a loop or coil aerial as a transmitting device. 
was discussed from the theoretical standpoint by G. F. Fitz- 


4 


1350 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


gerald and later by J. A. Fleming, in Electrician, 59, pp. 936, 
976, 1016; 1907. Fleming derived expressions for the radiated 
fields, using a curious theory in which the four sides of the coil 
were replaced by Hertzian doublets. 

The use of.a large loop or single-turn coil as an aerial in 
practical radio communication was described by G. Pickard in 
Proceedings of the Wireless Institute of America, 1, May 1], 
1909. He discussed its properties both as a radiation and re- 
ceiving aerial. He described its use as a direction finder, 
stating that he had determined directions with it to better 
than 1 degree. 

In spite of this work and proposals by others, the antenna 
was used almost exclusively as the transmitting and receiving 
device until 1913. The use of the coil aerial received a great 
impetus by the publication of an article by F. Braun in Jahrbuch 
der drahtlosen Telegraphie und Telephonie,8, p. 1, 1914; on 
the Use of Closed Circuits in Place of Open in Radio Tele- 
graphy. He discussed the advantages of a coil aerial as a re- 
ceiver and transmitter, both from the theoretical and the ex- 
perimental standpoint. 

Since 1913 there has been a great deal of development work 
done on coil aerials and they were extensively used in the war. 
The development of the coil aerial as a practical direction 
finder and receiving device was begun at the Bureau of Stand- 
ards in 1915. Using electron tubes as the detecting apparatus, 
transatlantic signals were received on a coil inside a room. 
Experiments with the coil as a transmitting device were carried 
out at the Bureau in 1917. Among the very few published 
treatments of development and use of the coil aerial are those 
in Bucher’s text-book, “‘Practical Wireless Telegraphy”’ 1917, 
p. 256; and ‘Radio Direction-Finding Apparatus” by A. S. 
Blatterman, Electrical World, 73, p. 464;1919. Most of the 
descriptions to date have been confidential reports of the mili- 
tary services of various countries. 

The theoretical discussions by Fleming and Braun are cum- 
bersome and needlessly complicated and the results are not 
well adapted to practical use. The present paper presents 
an original treatment that is relatively very simple but none 
the less exact and leads to conclusions that apply directly to 
practical work. This paper also points out a number of mis- 
conceptions that have existed, and endeavors to clear up some 


of the controversial points on the radiation of waves and the 
functioning of aerials. 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1351 


II. DERIVATIONS OF THEORETICAL FORMULAS 
1. RADIATION FROM AN ANTENNA 


Formula (8) below, giving the radiated magnetic field at a 
distance from an antenna, is a well-known formula. It has 
been given by various writers, and is the only one presented in 
this paper that requires any deep consideration of fundamental 
electromagnetic theory. ‘The result is in fact implicit in Max- 
well’s classical treatise, “Electricity and Magnetism’. The 
derivation given here is much more direct and brief than the 
others the author has seen, and is given only for that reason. 
The derivations of formula (10) and following ones are still 
simpler, and will be of more interest to most readers. 

The units used in this paper are international electric units, 
the ordinary electric units based on the ohm, ampere, centi- 
meter, and second. (See paper by the author on “International 
System of Electric and Magnetic Units’, Scientific Paper of 

_the Bureau of Standards No. 292). The unit of magnetic field 
intensity is the gilbert per cm., often called the cgs. unit. The 
only exception to the use of units of the international system 
is in certain of the practical formulas where lengths are ex- 
pressed in meters or miles where so stated. 

In the following discussion is calculated the magnetic field 
intensity produced by a flat-top antenna, having electric 
current of uniform value throughout the length of the vertical 
portion. Most antennas in practise approximate closely this 
condition. 

The symbols used are: 


4 = instantaneous current 
I, = maximum value of current 
I. = effective value of current 


H, = instantaneous value of magnetic field intensity 
H, = maximum value of magnetic field intensity 

A effective value of magnetic field intensity 

h = height of aerial 

d = distance from sending aerial 

(63) 

t 

r 

c 


= 2 7 times frequency of the current 
= time 
= wave length 
= velocity of electric waves = 3 X 10" cm. per second 
- Subseripts s = sending, r = receiving, a = antenna, ¢ = 
coil. 


1352 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


In Fig. 8 the upper heavy line represents the flat top of the 
‘antenna, and the lower heavy line the grounding area. Suppose 
a current is, flowing, having the instantaneous value 7 in the 
vertical portion. The magnetic field intensity at any point 
due to a varying current is different from that due to a steady 
current. Consequently the field cannot be calculated in the 
same way that the magnetic field intensity of a straight wire is 
ordinarily calculated. When the current is varying, the mag- 
netic field intensity is calculated by the aid of a quantity 
called the vector potential in such a way that the variation 
with time is taken into account. The instantaneous value of 
the vector potential of current in the vertical conductor at a 
distance d in a plane perpendicular to the conductor, is 


ands ou “a} 


where [7] indicates that for any time ¢t the value of 7 is taken for 
the instant (t — d/c). 


Fig. 3—CaLcunaTion oF Maanutic Frevp aT A DISTANCE FROM AN 
ANTENNA 


Suppose the current in the antenna is a sine-wave alternating 
current, 


4=J,8in wt (2) 
suit aAt onneayaee at 
A = At _ nr sin w (t= d/e) (3) 


The magnetic field intensity is calculated from the vector 
potential by the general relation H; = 0.1 curl A, which for 
this simple case of a straight conductor becomes 


1 oA : 

10 dd 4) 
the direction of H; being perpendicular to the plane of h and d. 
From equation (3), 


h w Ty 
H, = - ey : cos w (t — d/e) — ee sin w (t — a7) 
(5) 


ys 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1353 


This equation gives the magnetic field intensity at any point 
P at a distance d from the antenna. The second term repre- 
sents the ordinary induction field associated with the current, 
while the first term is the radiation field. At a considerable 
distance the second term is negligible because the second power 
of d occurs in the denominator. The first term then represents 
the magnetic field radiated from an antenna at the distance d 
from: the antenna. The distance d is measured along the 
earth’s surface, because the waves follow the curvature of the 
earth’s surface instead of proceeding straight out into space. 
For a considerable distance from the antenna, the maximum 
value of the magnetic field intensity during a cycle is therefore . 


hwo 


fo> “Ted 


Expressing in terms of effective values, 
Fer ws ee (6) 


Henceforth H means the radiated field unless it is specifically 
stated to be the total field. The last equation may be expressed 
in terms of wave length instead of w by the relation 


w 20 
ae oe (7) 
ss aa aE 
Se a ds 


Using the subscript s to indicate that it is the sendingrather 
than the receiving antenna which is considered, 


Dit hie D. 
TOI 


7 


ee (8) 

This derivation follows the conceptions presented in the 
early pages of Lorentz, ‘““The Theory of Electrons’. It is 
equivalent to Hertz’s intricate proof, but is more direct. The 
way in which the result is expressed here accords more closely 
with the physical ideas and with actual practise, being ex- 
pressed in terms of current rather than electric charge, since it 
is current that is actually measured in an antenna and the 


1354 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


current furthermore is generally uniform in the vertical portion 
of the antenna. 

Formula (8) gives the radiated magnetic field from a sending 
antenna at a distance d along the earth’s surface. The units 
are the gilbert per cm. for H, the ampere for J, and the centi- 
meter for all lengths, as previously stated. 

Undamped alternating current in the antenna was assumed. 
The same result, however, is obtained if the current is damped. 
At very great distances from the sending aerial, the magnetic 
field is less than that calculated by formula (8), because of 
absorption of the power of the wave as it travelsalong. This 
may be taken into account by multiplying the right-hand 
member of (8) by a correction factor F;. The value of this 
factor for daytime transmission over the ocean, derived from 
the experiments of L. W. Austin, Scientific Paper of the 
Bureau of Standards No. 159; 1911, is 


F, = e ~ 9-000047 d/./ (9) 


ieee oe 


P 
Fra. 4—CaxcunaTIon or Maanetic Firiup RApDIATED FROM A CorL 


for d and X both in meters. This correction ordinarily needs 
to be applied only when the distance is greater than 100 kilo- 
meters. 


2. RADIATION FROM A CoIL 


It was formerly the belief that a coil could not radiate, be- 
cause the current up one side of the coil (Fig. 4) produces a 
field equal and opposite to that down the other side of the coil. 
This is erroneous because the two equal fields are not exactly 
opposite. The phase between the two departs from 180 deg. 
because of the finite time required for the field to be propagated 
from one side of the coil to the other. It is only along the axis 
of the coil that the calculated radiation is zero. The actual 
resultant field radiated from the coil may be deduced in either 
of two very simple ways, both of which are interesting from the 
physical standpoint. The first deals with the instantaneous 
ee of the magnetic field, and the second with the effective 
values. 


ee 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1355 


The following additional symbols are used: 


! = horizontal length of coil aerial. 
N = number of turns of wire of coil aerial. 
@ = phase angle between values of field intensity a dis- 


tance / apart in the wave. 


First Deduction. Consider a rectangular coil of height h and 
horizontal length /. The magnetic field at a point P in the d 
direction is the resultant of the fields arising from current in 
the two vertical sides of the coil, the horizontal sides contribut- 
ing nothing. The magnetic field at P due to any one of the 
vertical wires of the coil is calculated from equation (5) above. 
Neglecting the second terms, because d is large, the instantane- 
ous values of the magnetic field (Fig. 4) at the distance d and 
(d — l) respectively from the two vertical sides are 


He = ee cor ot — a0) 
ted Nea ds 5 ies) 
Ha-1 — + AOweldeeatiloce: cs (1 eerie 


The resultant field H; is the algebraic sum of these two, which 
becomes since (d — 1) is very nearly d when d is large, 


hN wl, : ad — 1/2 ) rH 
He a at, 3 asin o (¢— 2 sin 5; 


The effective value of the resultant field is 


Cad AL 5 
c IN 
and sin al ig ott 
c em 


the latter holding when the angle is small, 7. e., )small compared 
with the wave length, 


4 7? Veale Na de , (10) 
10 wd 


1356 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


This is the radiated magnetic field from a sending coil aerial 
at a distance d along the earth’s surface, the direction of d being 
in the plane of the coil. The units are international units 
as stated under equation (8). The deduction assumes that 
the ground below the coil is not so good a conductor as to form 
an image of thecoil. Thus the formula applies to a radiating 
coil in an airplane as well as to one at a ground or ship station. 

The formula applies for either damped or undamped current 
I,in the sending antenna. For very great distances the right- 
hand side of the formula mist be multiplied by the distance 
correction factor F, given in (9), the same as for a radiating 
antenna. A 

Second Deduction. The radiated mag- 
netic field due to one of the sides of the 


coil is N, H,, and from formula (8), NeH| 
CaM aaah * 


If the two vertical sides of the coil coin- 
cide, their magnetic fields would be equal 
and opposite, as shown by the lines O A and 
O B, Fig. 5. But since the two vertical sides 
are separated by the distance J, at any ag NOt 
instant the field at P (Fig. 4) from the left yo. 5— Puase 
side of the coil has traveled a distance | Retations or Mac- 
farther than the field from the right side, N®™¢ Frerps Rapr- 
If then N, H, is the field at P due to the *7® FROM 4 Com 
right side, the field at P due to the left side is shifted in 
phase from the position O B to O C in Fig. 5, where the angle 0 
between them is the phase angle between the values of the 
field a distance / apart in the wave. 

The distance / is the same fraction of the wave length that 
the angle @ is of a complete cycle, 2 7. That is, 


] 


27 


| 
| 
| 
l 
| 
| 


l./% 


or 0 


20, 17x (12) 


The resultant of O A and O C is their vector sum, 


H = N,H, V2 0 — cos 8) (13) 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1357 


When 4 is small, 7. e., 1 small compared with the wave length, 


Won = sin'?. = 0 
..H =N,H, 0 (14) 


Thus the radiated magnetic field from a coil is equal to the field 

from one side of the coil multiplied by the phase angle 6 cor- 

responding to the distance | between the sides of the coil. 
From (14) and (11), 


Pee NE: 
= 0 es (15) 


This equation, together with (12), gives identically formula (10) 
obtained by the first deduction. 

It was assumed in these deductions that the current was 
uniform throughout the coil. If the distributed capacity of 
the coil is appreciable the current in the coil will be different at 
different points. Thus the current in the middle may be 
greater than at the ends. This also may give rise to radiation 
from the coil, but is an entirely separate phenomenon from the 
phase angle between the two sides of the coil which has been 
discussed. This question of distributed capacity requires 
consideration particularly when coils are used having dimen- 
sions comparable with the wave length. The phenomenon is 
discussed further under “‘Antenna Effect” in Sec. VI 3 below. 


3. RECEIVED CURRENT IN AN ANTENNA 
The current flowing in the receiving aerial circuit when the 
field intensity of the wave traversing the aerial is known can 
be calculated in several ways. An electromagnetic wave in 
space has both an electric and a magnetic field intensity which 
are at right angles to each other and to the direction of propa- 
gation of the wave. The two field intensities are related to 
each other by- 
& = 300.H (16) 
where © is in volts per cm. and H in gilberts per cm. 
The following additional symbols are used in this and the 
following section: 
= electric field intensity 
= electromotive force in receiving aerial 
resistance of receiving aerial circuit 
magnetic flux 


CWE & 
I 


- 


1358 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


First Deduction. The electromotive force, and thence the 
current produced in an antenna may be calculated from the 
principle that relative motion of a magnetic field and a con- 
ductor create an electromotive force in the conductor whose 
value is 

E = 10-*h, He (17) 
when the directions of the field, the motion, and the conductor 
are mutually perpendicular, h, being the length of the conductor 
and c the velocity of the relative motion. This then gives the 
e. m. f. in an antenna of height h,, produced by electromagnetic 
wave having magnetic field intensity H and travelling with the 
velocity of c. 

In ordinary practise, the reactance in series with the antenna 
is varied to produce resonance to the frequency of the incoming 
wave, so that 


E 
Inserting for c its value, 3 X 10'° in equation (17). 
Apit 
I, == B00.. R (19) 


This is the current in amperes received in a flat-top antenna 
using the centimeter as the unit of length, with resistance of 
circuit in ohms, and the magnetic field intensity in gilberts per 
cm. 

The received current is less than that given by the formula 
if the wave is damped, since an undamped alternating field was 
assumed in the discussion. For a damped field the e.m.f. 
acting on the aerial is similarly damped and equation (18) does 
not hold. Correct results are obtained by multiplying the 
right-hand side of formula (19) by the correction factor F: 
obtained as follows: 

If the magnetic field intensity and hence the e. m. f. has the 
decrement 6’, the effective current is not I,, defined by (18), 
but another value which we shall call J,. The value of J,may 
be found by the aid of the generalized definition of decrement 
given in the author’s paper, ‘“‘The Measurement of Radio- 
Frequency Resistance, Phase Difference, and Decrement’”’, 
Proc. f..R: E., T, pe 2T; Feb. 1919; 

For decrements smaller than about 0.2, the logarithmic 
decrement is one-half the ratio of the average energy dissipated 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1359 


per cycle to the average energy associated with the current at 
the maximum of the cycle. 
Taking the average power as E?/R, the average energy dissi- 


pated per cycle = ae . The average energy associated 


with the current at the maximum of each cycle = LJ,?. The 
energy-ratio definition of decrement just given applies to the 
sum of the decrements acting, viz., the decrement 6’ of the 
e. m. f. and the decrement 6 of the aerial circuit. The value 


of 6 is Applying the decrement definition 


dette” 
2FL’ 


eee 


12 == 


From the relation, £?/R? = I,’, 


ee ear oe Trey fii 
iste oe) Uses Aa eeaae Be a 
Aires cans 


where L is in microhenries and }) is in meters. 

This reduces to I, = I, when 6’ is small compared with 6. 
Thus in the particular case of an undamped wave, where 
6’ = 0, no correction is needed. 

Correct results are obtained from equation (19) for any 
damped wave by multiplying its right-hand member by the 
correction factor F2, given by 
ae 20 
a 20 


Rx 


1360 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


where L is the inductance of the receiving aerial circuit in 
microhenries and ) is wave length in meters, and 6’ is the log- 
arithmic decrement of the damped wave that is being received. 

Second Deduction. The same formula may be derived from 
entirely independent consideration of the electric field asso- 
ciated with the wave. The e. m. f. between two points in 
space is the product of the distance between them by the 
electric field intensity along the line joining them. Thus the 
e. m. f. produced in a flat-top antenna is & times the height, 
the direction of © being assumed to be vertical. 


E=h,© (21) 
Inserting the value of 6 from (16) and dividing by the resistance, 
h,H . 
= = ae 
I, = 300. R (22) 


This is identically the same formula obtained above from 
consideration of the magnetic field. 


4, RECEIVED CURRENT IN A COIL 


The current in a receiving coil aerial can be calculated in a 

number of different ways, all very simple and all giving the > 
-same result. The first conception which will be presented is 
simply that an e. m. f. is produced in the circuit by the time 
variation of magnetic flux through it. 

The other modes of calculation involve the phase angle 
between the two vertical sides of the coil. The e. m. fs. 
acting in the two vertical sides are exactly equal and oppose 
each other in producing a current around the circuit when the 
plane of the coil is perpendicular to the direction of propagation 
of the wave. When the coil is turned in any other direction, 
however, the e. m. fs. in the two sides are not exactly opposite 
in phase because of the difference in time required for the field 
to be propagated to one side of the coil and to the other. The 
e. m. f. can be calculated either from the electric or the mag- 
netic field, as in the discussion of received current in an an- 
tenna. The resultant e. m. f. can be found either from the 
algebraic sum of the instantaneous e. m. fs. in the two vertical. 
sides or the vector sum of the effective e. m. fs. These two 
methods are used in the second and third deductions respec- 
tively, below. 

The phase angle between the two sides of the coil is a very 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1361 


different thing from the phenomenon caused by the distributed 
capacity of the coil. It is assumed in the deductions given 
here that the current is uniform in all parts of the coil, which is 
not true when the distributed capacity is appreciable. Such 
capacity is large in coils of dimensions comparable with the 
wave length, and in such cases consideration must be given to 
the separate and additional phenomenon of distributed capac- 
ity. 

First Deduction. Assuming that the dimensions of the coil 
are small compared with the wave length, the magnetic field 
intensity is practically uniform throughout the coil. When 
the plane of the coil is parallel to the direction of propagation 
of the wave, the e. m. f. induced in the coil is 


H=10?% w@ 
Now, ¢ = uwh,l,N,H 


Since the permeability 4 = 1, and J, = E/R because in ordi- 
nary practise the condenser in series with the coil is adjusted 
to produce resonance with the frequency of the incoming wave, 


Bie Ae) te ee a LAL NH 
1, = 10% —— at pa RP 
rt ae 
=27c10- RX 
- = 600 NA (23) 


This is the current received in a rectangular coil aerial of N 
turns, with its plane parallel to the propagation of the wave. 
The units are international units as stated under formula (19). 
No image is assumed in the ground, so the formula applies not 
only to a receiving coil at a ground or ship station but also to 
an airplane direction finder. The heights at which airplanes 
fly are such that the field of the wave is usually not much 
different from its value at the ground. 

There are two correction factors that may need to be applied 
to this formula, both of which make the result smaller. If the 
wave is damped, the right-hand side of the formula should be 
multiplied by the decrement correction factor F', given by (20), 
the same as for a receiving antenna. 

When the plane of coil is in some direction other than parallel 


1362 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


to the direction of propagation of the wave, the right-hand side 
of formula (23) must be multiplied by the direction correction 
factor F’; given by 

F; = cosa (24) 
where a is the angle between the direction of propagation of the 
wave and the plane of the coil. 

Second Deduction. The e. m. f. produced in any one of the 
vertical wires of the coil is given by either equation (17) or (21) 
above, deduced from considerations of the action of the mag- 
netic and the electric field intensity, respectively. Each of 
these equations reduces to 


E, = 300. h,H (25) 
The instantaneous e. m. f. in either of the two vertical sides of 
the coil is therefore 
e’ = 800h, N, Ho cos wt 


The instantaneous e. m. f. in the other side of the coil is pro- 
duced by the magnetic field existing in the wave a distance / 
away, when the plane of the coil is parallel to the direction of 
propagation of the wave. This e.m.f., e’’, has the same 
direction in space but the opposite direction as far as producing 
current around the circuit is concerned. 


e’’ = — 800 .h, N, Hy cos (t — L/c) 


The resultant e. m. f. in the circuit is the algebraic sum of 
these two, 


Ze 


The effective value of the resultant e. m. f. is 


MOM he Cetera w (1-5) sin SE 


He hO0 FONE aie 
De 


Since when the angle is small, 7. ¢., ]small compared with the 
wave length, 


sin wd = ot wy 
2c 2¢ aN 
E = 600 .1 thd Dini (26) 


Dividing by R, this gives the identical value of J, obtained in 
(23) by the first mode of deduction. 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1363 


Third Deduction. Thee. m. f. produced in one of the sides of 
the coil is N, E,, where from either equation (17) or (21) above, 
2. e., from consideration of either the magnetic or the electric 
field intensity, respectively, 


E, = 300 . ‘Und ek (25) 


If the two vertical sides of the coil coincided, the e. m. fs. 
produced in them would be equal and exactly neutralize each 
other, as shown by the lines O A and OB, Fig. 6. But since 
the two vertical sides are separated by the distance /, at any 
instant the field acting on one side of the coil has traveled a 

A distance / farther than that acting on the other 
side. If then N,£E;, is the e. m. f. in one side 
of the coil, the e.m.f. in the other ‘side is 
shifted in phase from the position O B to the 
position OC in Fig. 6, where the angle @ be- 
tween them is the phase angle between the 
values of the field a distance / apart in the 
wave. 

The distance / is the same fraction of the 
wave length that the angle 6 is of a complete 
cycle, 2 7, 1. é., 

7) 
iD a 
Fic. 6—Puase The resultant of O A and OC is their vector 
RELATIONS OF sum 


ELECTROMOTIVE We Ns ea cos 8). (28) 


Forces in ReE- 
CEIVING COIL = When @ is small, i. e., / small compared with 


Lr 
=-— (27) 


= ] = a] 
NE. sin 6 
-E =N,E,80 (29) 
From (25), 


Thus the e. m. f. acting in the coil is equal to the e. m. f. in one 
side of the coil multiplied by the phase angle 6 corresponding 
to the distance | between the sides of the coil. 

Equations (27) and (30) combined give (26) and by dividing 
by R formula (23) is obtained. 


1364 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


III. DISCUSSION OF THEORY OF RADIATION AND 
RECEPTION 


1, DISTINCTION BETWEEN INDUCTION AND RADIATION 


Certain fallacies which have appeared in text-books and 
discussions arise from insufficient understanding of the differ- 
ence between an induction field and a radiation field. Such 
fallacies are: 

a. An “open” circuit can radiate, while a “closed” circuit 
can not. 

b. There is no radiation from a circuit at low frequencies. 

c. Induction and radiation are the same phenomenon, 

d. The action of an antenna differs from that of a coil aerial 
in that the former is due to electrostatic fields and the latter to 
magnetic fields. 

These fallacies will now be discussed. hae c has led to 
the supposition that the radiation and reception of electric 
waves can be taught in terms of transformer action. It should 
not be difficult to separate the two ideas, for there is a definite 
and clear distinction between the field due to induction and that 
due to radiation. The total magnetic field at a distance d 
from a radiating antenna is, from equation (5) 


eta oh age 
“io hd + E (31) 


where j indicates that the two terms differ in phase by 90 deg. 
The first term represents the radiation field and the second term 
the induction field. The fact that one contains \d in the 
denominator while the other contains d? makes them radically 
different in nature. This gives the mathematical distinction 
between induction and radiation. The physical difference is 
discussed in Sec. 3 below. 

The radiation field becomes relatively more important than 
the induction field as the distance d is increased or as the wave 
length is diminished (7. e., the frequency increased). The 
question whether radiation or induction predominates in any 
given case can be settled by calculation from the formula. 
Thus, the two fields are equal at a distance 

r 
dae 27 
For points closer to the antenna than this the induction field 
predominates. For points farther away, the radiation field 
predominates and the induction field falls off rapidly with 
distance and becomes negligible. 


H= 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1365 


Certain early experiments in wireless signalling used true 
induction, e. g., the induction telegraphy of Preece and of 
Dolbear. When higher frequencies were used by later experi- 
menters, signals of appreciable strength were received at 
distances of several wave lengths. These were genuine radia- 
tion signals, now commonly called radio. 


2. IS RADIATION LIMITED TO HIGH FREQUENCIES? 


The answer to this should be obvious from formulas (8) and 
(10). The radiated field does not become zero, no matter how 
great Nis. For alternating current of any frequency, no matter 
how low, radiation takes place from the circuit. To be sure, 
the radiation is greater the higher the frequency, so that high- 
frequency circuits are better radiators than low-frequency 
ones, and this is all the basis there is for the mistaken idea that 
only high-frequency circuits radiate. 

This applies to radiation from a coil as well as from an 
antenna. It has sometimes been stated that a coil will not 
radiate, the statement being put in the form that only “open” 
circuits radiate. The statement is doubly faulty since elec- 
tricity can flow only in closed circuits. The meaning intended 
by “open” circuit is a circuit containing a condenser of open 
form, that is, with two plates well separated. There are two 
misconceptions at the base of the belief that a ‘‘closed”’ circuit 
or one not containing a condenser would not radiate. In the 
first place, some have doubtless thought that waves would be 
started in the ether only by an electrostatic disturbance and 
thus could not be produced by a metallically closed circuit. 
Or, supposing it was understood that a magnetic disturbance 
in the ether would send out a wave just as readily as an electro- 
- static disturbance, it may have been thought that the radiation 
from one side of the circuit would be neutralized from that 
from the opposite side. As has already been shown in this 
paper, the two disturbances do not exactly neutralize each 
other, on account of the finite time of propagation from one 
side of the circuit to the other, and the resultant is what gives 
rise to the radiation from a metallically closed circuit. 


3. EQUIVALENCE OF ELECTROSTATIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS 
IN A WAVE 

The physical distinctions between radiation and induction 

are: (a) the latter is fixed in space and the former moves 


1366 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


through space with the velocity of light, and (b) in the case of 
radiation the magnetic field is always accompanied by an 
electrostatic field of value 


6 = 300 .H (16) 


and vice versa, whereas in the case of induction there is no 
fixed relation. It is, of course, true that whenever magnetic 
induction varies an electrostatic field is produced, and similarly 
whenever electrostatic induction varies a magnetic field is 
produced. But it is only in a radiated wave that these varia- 
tions take place in such a way that one can be calculated from 
the other by the fixed relation (16). When there is a fixed 
electrostatic field associated with a circuit which does not vary, 
the magnetic field associated with this electrostatic field is 
zero, and vice versa. 

In a radiated wave, then, the electrostatic and magnetic 
field are no longer independent phenomena but are strictly 
equivalent. Indeed, they are but two aspects of the same 
thing. Perhaps this will be clearer from the analogy of a sound 
wave. In a mechanical apparatus, elastic action and inertia 
act independently in various parts of the apparatus. In a 
sound wave, however, the effects of elastic action and inertia 
are mutual parts of a single phenomenon, the sound wave. 

In considering any effect of the electromagnetic wave, it is 
equally permissible to consider the electrostatic or the magnetic 
field associated with the wave. They are equivalent and lead 
to the same result. This has been amply demonstrated above 
in this paper. The current received in an antenna, calculated 
from the electrostatic field, was exactly the same as calculated 
from the magnetic field. The same agreement was found for 
the coil aerial. This disposes of the question whether the 
current produced in an antenna or a coil aerial is caused by the 
electrostatic or the magnetic field present in the wave, or both. 

Complete discussions of electromagnetic waves are given in 
such treatises as Maxwell, “Electricity and Magnetism”, 1873; 
Jeans, “Electricity and Magnetism’, 1907; Lorentz, “The 
Theory of Electrons’, 1909. 


4. WHAT RADIATION Is 
It has been shown that radiation differs from induction by a 
definitely calculable amount, that either kind of circuit radiates 
at. any frequency, that there are both an electrostatic and a 


ns Seer 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1367 


magnetic field present in every wave, having a constant ratio, 
and that any effect of the wave may be considered as due either 
to the electrostatic or the magnetic field of the wave. 

Radiation is the moving disturbance of the ether, the energy 
associated with which does not return to the radiator. 

This conception leads to more correct ideas than are current 
on the mechanism of radiation from an antenna ; and permits © 
explanation of the radiation from a coil aerial, which is not 
covered at all by the usual explanations of radiation in text- 
books. Such explanations have led to the impression that the 
radiation largely depends on the form of the electrostatic lines 
of force which are present at the edges of the radiator. It 
might thus be supposed that in a flat-top antenna or a con- 
denser aerial the current in the central portions of the condenser 
was not effective in causing radiation while only that which 
spread into the surrounding space from the edges was effective. 
This appears incorrect. If it were correct, the builders of long 
flat-top antennas must have wasted a great deal of wire. All 
of the dielectric current sends a moving disturbance out into 
the ether. The portion of the energy associated with this 
disturbance that does not return to the radiator is that con- 
nected with the first term of equation (31). In this term the 
total antenna current appears. The radiation is the moving 
disturbance caused by the whole of the current which the an- 
tenna makes flow in the dielectric. 

The ordinary treatment of the mechanism of radiation from 
an antenna is misleading also because it deals with radiation at 
the fundamental wave length. In practise, antennas are 
usually loaded. The radiation depends to no degree whatso- 
ever on the value or location of any of the field lines attached 
to the aerial, but only on the variation of the lines. And all 
the lines when varying give rise to radiation. Thus the sta- 
tionary field is given by the second term of formula (31), the 
first is the radiation term, and they are independent. 


IV. COMPARISON FORMULAS 
1. DERIVATION FROM THEORETICAL FORMULAS 
Formulas are here derived to answer the practical question 
of how far a given coil will send or receive in comparison with a 
given antenna. The formulas also answer such questions as 
the length of a coil aerial required to give a particular ratio of 
performance of coil and antenna. 


1368 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


The ratio of the magnetic field radiated from a current coil 
to that from an antenna, for a given sending current, distance, 
wave length, and height, is obtained from equation (13). The 
ratio of the distance from a coil to that from an antenna, at 
which a given magnetic field is produced, is the same as the 
ratio of the magnetic field produced by a coil to that produced 
by an antenna at a given distance. Either ratio is therefore 
given by the following expression, which assumes the same 
current J,, wave length i, and height h,, for the coil and the 
antenna, 


d./da = N,V 2 (1— cos 8) 

Inserting the value of 6 and neglecting the subscript s, 
d.-/da = N VW 2 (1— cos2 rl/d) (32) 
When the length of the coil / is small compared to X (i. e.,. 
for most practical purposes, less than 0.1 X), this simplifies to 
d-/da = 6.28 N1/X (33) 
This could have been deduced directly from (8) and (10). 
The expression is similarly deduced for comparison of the dis- 
tances obtained with a coil and an antenna of different heights, 
d./da = 6.28 N1/X h./ha (34) 


The length of a coil required to give a particular ratio of 
performance to an antenna is given by solving these formulas 
for 1. From (32), 


ae, 1 athena: 
lS alan dy = c 
U=l5— cos (1 oyr|a-]) (35) 
When the length of the coil is small compared to X, the simpler 
formula suffices, 


= 0.16 \/N d./d, (36) 


The relative distances at which an antenna or a coil will 
receive a given wave are given by the same identical expressions 
that have just been deduced for sending aerials. Thus formula 
(32) may be deduced from (28) and (33) from (19) and (23). 
They give the ratio of the distance from the source at which a 
given e.m.f. will be produced in a coil aerial to that in an 
antenna, assuming the same height h, and wave length X for 
the coiland the antenna. They also give the ratio of thee. m. f. 
produced in a coil to that in an antenna for a given value of © 
magnetic field intensity, or the ratio of currents when the 


TOLD) DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1369 


resistances and other quantities are the same in coil and an- 
tenna. Equations (34), (35), and (36) similarly hold for receiv- 
ing as well as sending aerials. For comparison of current in a 
coil and an antenna of different resistances as well as different 
heights 
d.-/da = 6.28N1/X h./ha R./R. (37) 
The relative distance of transmission between two coil 
aerials and between two antennas, for a given sending current, 
is similarly found from equations (8), (10), (19), and (23). 
The ratio of received current for coils and antennas the same 
distance apart is given by the same formula, which assumes the 
same sending current J, and wave length X for the pair of coils 
as for the pair of antennas. 


dee _~ 395 Poe PR Ne Crt ig 
je : ~ CPR eS (38) — 


All of these formulas assume that the decrement correction 
factor F, is the same for coil and antenna in all cases. If 
waves of different decrement are used, apply the factor F, as 
stated in connection with (20). If the plane of the coil con- 
sidered is not parallel to the direction of propagation of the 
wave, apply the factor, cos a, as stated in connection with (24). 


2. EXAMPLES OF COMPARISON OF COIL AND ANTENNA 
What is the length of the coil, either as sender or receiver, 
equivalent to an antenna of the same height? The answer is 
given by (36). Ford./d, = 1, 
1 = 0.16 A\/N (39) 


This is the correct length except for a single-turn coil. Then 
_N = 1 the more exact formula (35) must be used. This gives, 
for the equivalent coil, 


PRS 195") 


Thus a single-turn coil of length 1/6 the wave length is equiva- 
lent to an antenna of the same height. For a coil of 8 turns, 
however, the length of the coil equivalent to an antenna of the 
same height is, from (39), 0.02 of the wave length. 

When the length of the coil is small compared with the wave 
length, 7. e., as already stated, / less than about 0.1 A, the 
performance ratio is given by (33). For a length greater than 
0.1 A, however, the more accurate formula (32) must be used. 


1370 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


Thus, when the length is exactly a sixth of a wave length, from 
(32), 

O:/ Ga = IN 
Thus any coil of length 1/6 the wave length is equivalent to an 
antenna of N.times the height of the coil. When the length 
of the coil is a quarter wave length, similarly 


d./da = V2N 
For a coil of length equal to half the wave length, 
de/ ders ZN. 


This is the maximum or best performance for a coil aerial. 
If the length is increased beyond a half wave length, the 
performance ratio decreases, and at | = ) it is equal to O just 
the same as for / = O. 

These values of the performance ratio of a coil aerial are 
obvious from Fig. 5 or 6. 

These comparisons all apply to either transmitting or receiv- 
ing aerials. They assume, however, in the case of a transmit- 
ting antenna or coil, that the same current flows; and, when 
applied to receiving aerials, that the resistance is the same in 
either coil or antenna. As a matter of fact, however, it is 
easy to secure a considerably lower resistance in a coil aerial 
circuit than in an antenna circuit. This is taken account of by 
the factor R./R, as in (37) and (38). The difference in current 
in a transmitting coil and antenna is taken account of by multi- 
plying the right-hand members of (32) and (33) by the ratio 
of the sending currents J,/I,. On this account a coil is some- 
times a more effective radiating or receiving device than an 
antenna of considerably greater dimensions. 

The comparison formulas and conclusions drawn from them 
are subject to the same errors as the transmission formulas, as 
discussed in Sec. V 2 below. 


3. THE CONDENSER AERIAL 
Since the dimensions of a coil aerial which would give the 
same performance as a given antenna are a length equal to 


ae times the wave length and a height equal to the an- 


tenna height, rather large structures are required. For 
example, a flat-top antenna 30 meters above the ground 
operating on a 600-meter wave is equivalent to a four-turn 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1371 


coil 24 meters long by 30 meters high. The dimensions of 
the equivalent coil are thus of the same order as the dimensions 
of the antenna. 

It is possible to escape from the apparent necessity of large 
structures for effective radio transmission and reception in two 
ways. First, the coil aerial can easily be made to have a lower 
resistance than the antennas ordinarily used, and its size 
reduced in proportion to the reduction of resistance. This is 
mainly because the condenser used in the coil aerial circuit can 
be one having practically no resistance while the condenser 
consisting of antenna and ground has a large resistance. Thus 
by due attention to the minimizing of resistance in its circuit, 
the coil aerial may be of small dimensions and yet highly 
effective. The size may, of course, be reduced also in propor- 
tion as the number of turns is increased. 

It is equally possible to avoid an aerial of large dimensions 
without having recourse to a coil aerial. The alternative is to 
use the antenna principle, but use a special construction of 
much lower height. At first sight it would appear that this 
would make a poorer antenna, since the effectiveness is pro- 
portional to the height, according to either (8) or (19). And 
this is true if the antenna is merely lowered a moderate amount. 
Such lowering increases the capacity only very slightly, not 
nearly in proportion to the decrease in height. In order to 
secure an appreciable gain it is necessary to have the height 
very small and use a special construction to reduce the resist- 
ance as much as possible. A good method is to replace the 
ordinary antenna-ground structure in which the antenna is one 
pate of a condenser and the ground the other plate, by an 
aerial consisting of two horizontal metal condenser plates. 
This may be called a “condenser aerial’. The formulas 
derived for antennas apply to it. 

Such an aerial has lower conductor resistance than the 
ordinary antenna, and since it has greater capacity a small 
inductance will be used in series with it which will also have 
smaller resistance and thus reduce the resistance of the circuit. 
Furthermore, the resistance of an antenna largely arises from 
the imperfect dielectrics, such as vegetation, buildings, and 
poor insulators, present in its field (as shown in Scientific Paper 
of the Bureau of Standards No. 269, by J. M. Miller), and the 
resistance from the grounding wires to ground. These can be 
eliminated in a condenser aerial. Finally, then, the resistance 


1372 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION (Oct. 1 


of the aerial circuit can be reduced to more than compensate 
for the reduction in height. This will result in a larger current 
I, in formula (19), or in a larger H in formula (8) because of 
the increase of the sending current. 

The advantage of the very low antenna has been observed in 
the experiments of the Kiebitz and others on so-called earth 
antennas. It is probable that still greater advantages would 
be obtained by the condenser aerial as here described. The 
special construction required to eliminate dielectric loss would 
involve making the lower plate considerably wider and longer 
than the upper plate, or else having both plates a considerable 
distance above the ground, and keeping the space between the 
plates free.from poor dielectrics. An aerial consisting of a 
pair of metal plates elevated from the ground was used and des- 
cribed by Oliver Lodge in 1897, and again by Lodge and Muir- 
head in Proc. Royal Soc., 82, p. 227; 1909, who found that it 
worked best without being grounded. The author is informed 
that the same sort of an aerial has recently been tried on air- 
planes, using the upper and lower planes as the condenser 
plates. Such an aerial would be ideal for airplanes if-the 
space between could be kept free from poor dielectrics. If the 
plates of the condenser aerial have their length and width 
approximately equal, the aerial radiates in all directions. If 
a long narrow condenser is used it would probably be very 
directional, both as a transmitting and receiving device. Such 
a condenser might consist of a pair of parallel wires, which 
would be a considerable improvement on the ground antenna. 

An example will make clear how the size of the condenser 
aerial compares with other aerials. It was found above that 
antenna 30 meters high was equivalent to a four-turn coil 24 
meters long by 30 meters high, both operating on a 600-meter 
wave and with circuits of the same resistance. For the same 
wave length and with an inductance of 100 microhenries, in 
series, the capacity of a condenser aerial would need to be 
0.00102 microfarad, which would be given by a pair of square 
plates 1 meter apart and 10.7 meters on a side. The height is 
thus reduced in the ratio of about 25 to 1, and the horizontal 
dimensions 8 to 1 in comparison with the coil aerial. 

The aerial can be made as small as desired. If a given coil 
is to be used in series, the capacity of the aerial is maintained 
constant by reducing the distance between the plates when 
the area of the plate is reduced. The author made some 
interesting experiments with a small condenser aerial as a 


a ns 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1373 


receiving device, used inside the laboratory with no ground 
connection. The plates consisted of copper netting. The top 
plate was 250 cm. square and the distance between them was 
15cm. The signals received, with either a crystal detector or 
electron tube, were roughly of the same intensity as those 
received with a simple coil aerial of the type and size ordinarily 
used as a direction finder. 

The indication of absolute direction of propagation of the 
waves as well as line of propagation which has been developed 
by French and other workers, using combinations of ordinary 
antenna and coil aerials was observed in the experiments on 
the condenser aerial. An inductance coil of rather large dimen- 
sions used in series with the condenser acted as a receiving 
aerial. As this coil was rotated, the signal varied from maxi- 
mum in one angular position to zero in a position 180 deg. 
from the first, instedd of 90 deg. as occurs when a coil aerial is 
used independently of any antenna action. Apparently the 
action of the condenser aerial reinforced that of the coil in one 
position and neutralized it in the opposite position. When 
the connections to the coil were interchanged, the effect shifted 
180 deg. Reversing the connections of the coil reverses the 
e. m. f. in the coil, E, in Fig. 6, just as a reversal of the direction 
of the wave would do, whereas the direction of the e. m. f. in 
the antenna or condenser aerial is unchanged. The reason why 
the condenser e. m. f. can neutralize the coil e. m. f. is probably 
that the capacity of the coil introduces different values of 
reactance to the two e.m.fs. Thus, when the circuit is tuned 
for one of these e. m. fs. the currents due to the two differ 90 
deg. in phase. This phase angle may be shifted 180 deg. by a 
very slight variation of the reactance of the circuit. Because 
of this, systems for determining the absolute direction of radio 
waves require very delicate adjustment. 

The ordinary laboratory type of condenser used in radio 
circuits does not function as a condenser aerial. This is be- 
cause the interleaving of the plates results in the current in 
each portion of the dielectric being balanced by the current in a 
neighboring portion. This is discussed further below in Sec. 
VI 3 and illustrated in Fig. 17. 


V. TRANSMISSION FORMULAS 
1. STATEMENT OF FORMULAS 


‘The current received in any aerial may be calculated in terms 
of the current in any transmitting aerial, either antenna or coil 


1374 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


by the following four formulas. They are derived by combin- 
ing equations (8), (10), (19), and (23). The symbols are as 
previously given, also stated in the Appendix below. 

Antenna to antenna: 


188 < heeel 
Lerma oe 
Antenna to coil: 
T1S4A Welt, ty INs Ls 
hati Rd ole 
Coil to antenna: 
Via Pn eG 2s 1 
I, = Red (42) 
Coil to coil: 
pak THOO oa dritr lr Ng Ng Le (43) 


kd 


Formulas such as (40) have existed heretofore. The for- 
mulas here given generalize the antenna-to-antenna formula, so 
that calculations can be made for any kind of aerials. 

The lengths in these formulas may be in any units, provided 
the same unit is used for all the lengths. The meter is usually 
the most convenient unit. If the heights and wave length are 
in meters and the distance d in miles, the four constants in the 
four formulas become respectively: 


To calculate the distance at which a given current will be 
received, as when a particular receiving arrangement is speci- 
fied, the formulas may be stated explicitly ford. J, and dare 


interchanged in each formula. For example, the formula for ~ 


antenna-to-coil (41) becomes 


_ 1184 .A,h-1,N, I, 


d  Pidiaaas (44) 


All of these transmission formulas are for daytime trans-— 


mission. Greater values are obtained at night, probably be- 


Ee 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1375 


cause the waves are reinforced by reflection from ionized layers 
of the upper atmosphere, which are broken up by sunlight in 
the daytime. The formulas are all subject to correction fac- 
tors for distance and for decrement. If the distance js very 
great (in ordinary cases, over 100 kilometers), the right-hand 
side of the formula should be multiplied by the correction factor 
F,. The value given below for F; is for transmission over sea 
water. Its value for transmission over land would be greater. 
If damped waves are used, the correction factor F, should be 
similarly applied. Furthermore, if the plane of the receiving 
coil is not parallel to the direction of propagagtion of the wave, 
the correction factor F; must be similarly applied to formulas 
(41) and (43) and related formulas such as (44). In formulas 
(42) and (43) the direction of the wave is taken to be that of 
the plane of the transmitting coil. The three correction factors 
are: 


Fy = €-0:000047 d// (9) 
i | 1 (20) 
a J 1 cee ‘ 6 
3 = cosa (24) 


All of the correction factors make the resultant numerical 
values smaller. 


2. DISCUSSION OF TRANSMISSION FORMULAS 


The power of wave length in the denominator is different in 
the several formulas. Thus when a coil aerial is used for both 
transmitter and receiver the received current is inversely 
proportional to the cube of the wave length. Thus trans- 
mission between coils is better the shorter the wave length. 
This advantage of coils at short wave lengths applies only for 
short-distance transmission. When the distance is hundreds 
or thousands of kilometers, the increased absorption of the 
waves makes the correction factor F'; so great that short waves 
are impractical, so for long distances the comparison favors the 
antenna rather than the coil. The coil compares most favor- 
ably with the antenna, then, for transmission _over short 
distances with very short waves. This is subject to the 
proviso that current of the same order of magnitude can be 
gotten into a transmitting coil aerial as into an antenna, or 


| 
/ 


1376 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION : [Oct. 1 


that the resistance of a receiving coil is the same as that of a 
receiving antenna. Neither of the assumptions is wholly 
fulfilled, in practise, with the result that the difference of 
applicability of the two kinds of aerials at long and short wave 
lengths is less marked. For additional comparisons of an- 
tennas and coils and further discussion, see Sec. IV above. 

Limitations of Formulas. The formulas can not be expected 
to give results of great accuracy, certainly not better than a 
few per cent, because of the ideal conditions assumed in their 
derivation. Thus it is assumed that no image of the aerial 
exists in the ground beneath it, that is, the ground is not 
perfect as a conductor. Asa matter of fact, the ground varies 
greatly in conductivity; and while in most cases the currents 
induced in the ground below a transmitting or receiving aerial 
probably have very little effect, these currents may be appre- 
ciable in some cases. This is discussed further below under 
“Height of Aerial.” On account of the uncertainty introduced 
by the ground, the formulas may apply better to airplane 
aerials than to those on ships or on land. 

There are other sources of uncertainty in the application of 
these formulas. An antenna does not form a flat-plate con- 
denser with the ground of such form that the curving of the 
field at the edges can be neglected. The simple method of 
calculating the radiated field is thus in doubt. Similarly, in 
the case of a radiating coil, the field from the top and bottom of 
the coil may have some effect at a distance, which has not here 
been taken into account. It is not certain with how great 
propriety the earth’s surface can be taken to be equivalent to 
the equatorial plane of the radiating aerial. Frequently radio 
waves have a wave front that is tilted and not perpendicular 
to the earth’s surface as assumed in the calculation of received 
current. Furthermore, the formulas assumed uniform current 
throughout the aerial, which sometimes does not hold because 
the antenna may have a vertical portion of appreciable capacity 
or the coil may have rather large distributed capacity. Calcu- 
- lations involving coil aerials are subject to the additional 
uncertainty arising from the capacity of the coil to ground or 
the surroundings so that it acts like an antenna as well as a 
coil. This is discussed under “Antenna Effect” in Sec. VI 3. 
Another difficulty discussed in the same Sec. is the effects of 
surrounding objects. 

With these departures in the sates of the aerials and the | 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1377 


behavior of the waves from the conditions assumed, it is impos- 
sible to calculate received currents with great accuracy. It is 
almost surprising that the experimental results check the 
formulas as closely as shown in Sec. VI 2 below. 

Height of Aerial. The value used for h is the length of the 
vertical side of a coil aerial, the distance from the surface of 
the ground to the fiat top of an antenna, or the vertical distance 
between the two flat plates of a condenser aerial. In previous 
discussions it has been assumed that the ground beneath an 
antenna was a perfect conductor and thus the height of the 
radiator was twice the value of the h defined here. Experiment 
however corroborates the view here taken, which assumed that 
the radiating structure is independent of the earth, the waves 
becoming attached to the earth soon after leaving the antenna. 
In the present state of our knowledge the most satisfactory 
conception is that the radiating structure is the actual structure 
above the ground level. (Questions of the conductivity of the 
ground, presence of earth currents, etc., near the radiating 
aerial, are expressly not considered). 

Austin’s empirical formula’ for antenna-to-antenna trans- 
mission is equation (40) with a constant twice as great, and 
quantities h, and h. used instead of h, andh,. These quantities 
h, and hz are the “height to the center of capacity’ of the 
transmitting and receiving antenna, respectively. This height 
is not defined, but its value for any particular antenna is the 
value that is required to make experimental results fit the 
formula. Now, as has been stated, such experiments as have 
been performed agree in general with formula (40). For 
instance, see the first two examples in Sec. VI 2 below. It 
must follow since the constant in Austin’s formula is twice as 
great as the constant in (40) that 

hehe = 4/2 hs; 
This may be satisfied by various values of h, and h. One set 
of values would be 


hy — 0.5h, 

he = 1.02, 
Another would be 

hi = 0.707 h, 

he = 0-107 h, 


Austin’s values ton the height of various antennas thus deduced 
in such a way as to make them fit the experimental values 


1. Scientific Paper of the Bureau of Standards No. 226, Equation 5. 


a 


1378 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


observed, do in fact vary from half to full value of the actual 
antenna heights, and average around 0.7 the actual heights. 
It is much simpler and more direct to use the formula and the 
interpretation presented in this paper, bearing in mind that it 
is subject to the uncertainties introduced by the varying charac- 
ter of the ground. 

The idea that the ground is not a good enough conductor to 
form an image of a transmitting aerial, and that the waves 
become attached to the ground after leaving the aerial, is in 
harmony with the ideas of Lodge and Muirhead, already 
referred to. They found that they got better transmission by 
using what amounted to a condenser aerial, elevated from 
ground, with no ground connection. This conception conflicts 
with the commonly accepted view that Marconi’s achievement 
was the connection of a radiating system to the ground. What 
then was Marconi’s achievement? The best answer to this 
may be one stated to the author by Prof. A. E. Kennelly, viz., 
the use of a large radiating system, arranged vertically. 


VI. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION OF FORMULAS 
1. PRINCIPLES OF MEASUREMENT OF RECEIVED CURRENT AND 
VOLTAGE 

The formulas presented in this paper not only make it pos- 
sible to calculate approximately the field intensity produced 
or current received with given aerials, but also give the basis 
for determining what constants to select for the circuit of a 
particular aerial to secure the maximum effect. In other words, 
these formulas furnish the principles of design of aerial circuits. 
There are a great many points not obvious from mere inspec- 
tion of the formulas, which are of importance equally in design 
and in the measurement of received signals. These will now 
be considered. While this discussion is limited to what takes 
place in receiving aerials, the same principles and treatment 
can readily be applied to transmitting aerials. 

The received current or voltage can be measured in a number 
of different ways. It is important to know just what quantity 
is being considered or measured. Suppose an indicating 
instrument G, which may be a galvanometer or a telephone 
receiver, is connected to a rectifying device D in parallel with 
the condenser of the receiving circuit, as in Fig. 7, where either 
L is a coil aerial or else C is an antenna or condenser aerial. 
Does the indication of the instrument measure directly (a) the 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1379 


e.m.f. which the wave causes to act on the circuit C L, (b) the 
current in the circuit, or (c) the voltage across the condenser? 
The answer is, of course, none of these things. The system 
can, however, conveniently be calibrated in terms of the voltage 
across the condenser. This voltage V is related to the received 
current J, by the relation 


ES 
Vi= a (45) 
and since J, is related to the e. m. f. acting by 
I, = E/R, - (46) 
the relation of V to E is 
E 
Ye rae an 


When a detecting apparatus like that of Fig. 7 is used, in 
| \ 


a> 
EE, ‘ 
S> 
Les 
cS 
ee, 
os 
Fig. 7—AERIAL CIRCUIT WITH Fic. 8—AERIAL CIRCUIT WITH 
Detecting Apparatus Across CuRRENT MeraAsurinG INSTRU- 
THE CONDENSER MENT IN CIRCUIT 


which the deflections or signals depend directly on the voltage 
across the condenser, the results obtained with various receiving 
circuits will be entirely different from those obtained when the 
current in the circuit is directly measured, as in Fig. 8. Equa- 
tions (46) and (47) show at once that the effects of varying the 
constants of the receiving circuit will be different, depending 
on whether it is #, J,, or V that is being measured. These 
three quantities for a receiving antenna are, from equations 
(17), (46), and (47), for unit magnetic field intensity, 


E, = 300 .h, (48) 

I, = 300 .h,/R (49) 
h, 

V, = 8006 (50) 


The quantity h, may be called the “‘e. m. f. reception factor” 
for an antenna, the e. m.f. in the receiving circuit is propor- 
™~ 


1380 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


tional to it. Similarly h,/R may be called the “‘current recep- 
tion factor” since it determines the received current. And 


2 


or the equivalent He may be called the “voltage 


h, 
RwC 
reception factor’ of an antenna since it determines the voltage 
across the antenna. 

The most favorable or optimum value of any of the variables 
that determine the antenna e. m. f., current, or voltage, can be 
determined either by direct experimental measurement of their 
values when actually receiving or by calculation from the 
reception factors. It*is desired to learn simply what will 
produce the maximum E,, I,, or V.. For example, it is obvious 
that FE, increases indefinitely as h, increases, but more careful 
consideration is required to determine what will be the effect 
on the received current of increasing h,. The reception factors 
furnish an alternative to direct reception measurements, re- 
quiring instead measurements upon the constants of the aerial 
circuit. 

Coil Aerial Reception Factors. The e. m. f. applied by 
the passing wave to a coil aerial, the current in the circuit, 
and the voltage across the condenser are, from equations (26), 
(46), and (47), for unit magnetic field intensity, 

a? N i a? N 


Neha cA. (51) 


34) OFiN [tncral a? N 
I = 600 Ch a ee 1 R VOL (52) 


Bi =-600" 3 


eNL Leow ay 

ae 2 12 eS etd eee te 
V -= 36" Pa? 10 Re: ie) RO (53) 
These equations assume the coil to be square having both 
height and length = a. Fora coil that is not square, the for- 


mulas apply, replacing a by /h, l,. Two values are given for — 
each reception factor; the first of the two is the more useful, 
since it is more common to consider the dependence of the 
reception on \ than on C. 


E. m. f. reception factor = ae . (51) 


Current reception factor 7 eo (52) 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 13881 
eN L 


Voltage reception f = a ee 
ption factor RY 


(53) 

Design of Receiving Coil Aerials. The response produced in 
a coil aerial circuit may be measured in a great variety of ways. 
In the first place, it may be considered either from the view- 
point of the e. m. f. acting, the current, or the voltage across 
the condenser. The first of these, the e. m. f., E, may be 
determined for any particular case from the e. m. f. reception 
factor in (51). The current J or voltage V may each be deter- 
mined in four different ways: (a) by direct measurement with 
a suitable instrument, (b) by measurement of the quantities 
which make up the appropriate reception factor, (c) by mea- 
surement of signal strength in some such device as sketched in 
Fig. 7, which has been calibrated in I or V, (d) from a “signal 
intensity reception factor,’ which can be calculated for any 
signal measuring device when the law connecting the signal 
intensity with either J or V is known. 

The design of a receiving coil requires knowledge of the 
dependence of the current or voltage upon the dimensions, etc., 
of the coil. Measurements made in all of the ways just 
enumerated give results in agreement with one another, pro- 
vided due care is given to the avoidance of errors. The sources 
of error are numerous, as discussed in Sec. 3 below. 

While direct measurement of the received current or voltage 
can be replaced by calculation from the reception factors, the 
fact remains that the design of an aerial requires experiments. 
This is because the quantity FR in the reception factors cannot 
be obtained by calculation. It must be obtained by measure- 
ment for the particular coil and mode of connections employed. 

Measurements upon receiving aerials to determine their 
constants and the best design for given conditions constitute a 
most interesting study. In later publications, the results of 
experiments will be published giving such data for typical coil 
aerials. 

The capacity C in the formulas is the total capacity of the 
circuit, including the capacity of the coil, L is the pure induc- 
tance of the coil, and R is the actual resistance of the circuit. 
R includes the resistance of the conductors, effective resistance 
of the condenser and of the coil capacity, effective resistance of 
the detecting apparatus, and radiation resistance. All of 
these vary with frequency, and thus measurement of F at the 


1382 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


frequency concerned is necessary. On account of the com- 
plexity of the quantities entering into the total R, its measure- 
ment is no easy matter. The capacity of the coil and other 
stray capacities may easily vitiate the measurement of R, C, or 
L. The effect of the detecting apparatus always requires most 
careful consideration. Even if D in Fig. 7 is an electron tube, 
it is necessary to consider the resistance which it introduces 
into the aerial circuit. 

Dependence of Received Current and Voltage on Dimensions of 
Cow and Wave Length. Let R. = resistance of coil and R, = 
resistance external to coil; 


K= Ra + he 
a? N 


Tepe eee Ss eae 


Current reception factor = 


Fig. 9—DEPENDENCE oF Rr- Fig. 1O—DEPENDENCE oF RE- 
CEIVED CURRENT ON NUMBER OF CEIVED CURRENT ON WAVE 
TURNS LENGTH WHEN EXTERNAL ResiIs- 

TANCE IS LARGE 


The variation of received current with number of turns, wave 
length, and size of coil is readily found by considering the 
the variation of the quantities in (54). In the following dis- 
cussions the spacing between turns of wire, which affects 
resistance and inductance, is assumed constant. 
a. Varying N, with \ and a constant. When R, is large 
compared to R., we see from (54) 
IaN 


When R. is large compared to R., since R. a N, roughly, 

I a constant 
However, R, increases somewhat faster than proportional to N 
as N is increased, because of the proximity of the added turns, 
and hence J decreases somewhat as N increases instead of 
being strictly constant. . 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1383 


k, is likely to be large compared with R, when N is very 
small, and hence for small N, the variation of I with N will bea 
straight line, as shown in Fig. 9. As N increases, R, becomes 
large compared to R, and the tendency of I to increase with N 
is reversed. Asa result the curve of J hasa maximum. The 
value of N at this point may be called the “optimum number 
of turns.” Its value will be greater the greater the external 
resistance. 

b. Varying \ with N and-a constant. When R, is large 
compared to RF, and does not vary appreciably with wave length 


Lali/xr 
This variation is shown in Fig. 10. When R, is large compared 


I I 
es 
Fig. 11—DErPENDENCE oF RE- Fic. 12—DrpENDENCE oF RE- 
CEIVED CURRENT ON WAVE CEIVED CURRENT ON SIZE oF Coin 
LENGTH WHEN Coit RESISTANCE WHEN EXTERNAL RESISTANCE IS 
Is LARGE LARGE 


to R,, however, since R, a = , roughly, 


1 

Vr 

However, the effect of the adjacent turns increases R, faster 

than stated as \ is diminished and hence J tends to approach a 

constant value for short wave lengths, as shown in Fig. 11. 

These conclusions may, however, be vitiated by the variation 
of R, with X. 

ec. Varying a, with N and 2 constant. When R, is large. 

compered to R., ; 


Ia 


Tad 


This is shown in Fig. 12.. When R, is large compared to R,, 


since R, aa, 
Iaa, 


oo 


1384 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


giving the straight line in Fig. 18. From these two extreme 
cases it follows that an actual curve is likely to have a form 
that is a combination of these two, as shown in Fig. 14. 

d. Varying a, with ) constant, allowing N to vary in such a 
way that length of wire is constant. The condition is that 
N al/a, 

When RF, is large compared to R., 
Iaa 


The curve of J is thus a straight line. When R, is large com- 
pared to R,, the same conclusion holds but only roughly. R, 
increases slightly as a is decreased because of the proximity of 
the added turns, hence IJ increases a little faster than propor- 
tional to a... This is shown in Fig. 15. 


I Nae | 


Fig. 13—Drrenpence Fia.14—Derrenpence F1G.15—DEPENDENCE 
or RECEIVED CURRENT OF RECEIVED CURRENT OF RECEIVED CURRENT 
ON S1zE oF CoIL WHEN ON SIZE oF CorL IN’ ON SizE or Cor, WHEN 
Coin Resistance 1s Tyricau Case LenetH oF WIRE Is 
LARGE Kept ConsTaNnT 


The voltage reception factor differs from the current rec ep 
tion factor by L/X. 
Thus, 


eNL 


V a Voltage reception factor = —.——_~ — (55). 


(fz + Re) 


It is thus a more complex problem to determine the variation 
of voltage with N, \, and a, because the variation of L must 
be considered in addition. This may be done in each case, 


just as was done above for current, taking into account the 
relations: 


id Fie Baht Boa N+ 
a 1 
Lax Rea GE 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1385 


where the + or — sign after the exponent indicates that the 
actual power is slightly greater or less than that given. 

The relations obtained for voltage are similar to those 
obtained for current. There are some characteristic differences 
as, €. g., with varying N the optimum number of turns comes. 
out greater than for received current. Thus when the 
detecting apparatus depends essentially on the current the 
size of the coil should be as large as possible, whereas when it 
depends essentially on the voltage across the condenser the 
number of turns should be as large as possible. 

On the whole, the received current or voltage or signal 
intensity is increased by increasing the dimensions (N and a), 
and by decreasing the wave length. These conclusions are 
subject to the limitation, discovered by French experimenters, 
and qualitatively obvious from the known increase of R near 
the natural wave length X, of a circuit, that poor results are 
obtained if 4, > 1/3 X. Thus the dimensions of the coil can 
not be increased, or the wave length decreased, indefinitely. 
Beyond the limit mentioned, in fact, better results are obtained 
by decreasing the dimensions of the coil. 

It is an interesting fact that these discussions apply not only 
to the design of a coil aerial for receiving signals but that they 
also solve the problem of design of wavemeters. The choice 
of constants of a wave meter coil for any particular case is 
settled by the formulas and ideas here presented. The con- 
siderations given for received current and voltage apply 
respectively to the design of wavemeters for measurements 
upon undamped or damped waves, 7. e., to the securing of 
minimum resistance and minimum decrement respectively. 


2. EXAMPLES OF MEASUREMENTS 


Measurements having as their object the verification of the 
transmission formulas were discussed in the preceding section. 
Any experiments which verify the transmission formulas may 
also be considered as checking the ‘‘theoretical formulas” and 
“comparison formulas’. In fact experimental tests of the 
transmission formulas are the most rigorous test of the theory 
presented in this paper. All of the limitations and errors 
discussed in Sec. V 2 affect the transmission formulas while 
only a portion of them affect the theoretical and comparison 
formulas. 

The complicated practical conditions of any experiment, the 


1386 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


tilting of the wave front, the combination of antenna and coil 
effects discussed in the next section below, and other uncer- 
tainties make close agreement between theory and experiment 
unlikely. Agreement to 30 per cent should be considered as 
highly satisfactory verification of the essential correctness of 
the theory. On account of its field being more definitely 
localized, experiments with a coil aerial may be expected to 
yield greater accuracy than experiments with-an antenna. 
The same advantage appertains to a condenser aerial. No 
quantitative data have been obtained with condenser aerials, 
to the author’s knowledge; such experiments would be very 
desirable. 

Experimental data obtained at the Bureau of Standards on 
radio transmission and reception are presented below. The 
agreement between the received current observed and the 
values calculated from the transmission formulas can be con- 
sidered as very satisfactory. The author is informed that 
experiments made by the Signal Corps have led to a similar 
verification. In some of the Signal Corps experiments it was 
thought at one time that wide departures from the transmission 
formulas for coil aerials were observed, the received current 
for very short waves being much less than the transmission 
formulas indicated. When, however, the actual values of the 
resistance at wave lengths used were determined, the agree- 
ment was very good. Particular care must be given to proper 
measurement of the resistance of the receiving aerial circuit. 

Antenna to Antenna. Experiments which supply a check on 
formula (40) have been published by Dr. Austin, chief of the 
Naval Radiotelegraphic Laboratory located at the Bureau of 
Standards. 

For transmission between two antennas located on ships 
(Jour. Wash. Acad. Sciences, 1, p. 275; 1911), h, = 29.2, 
hp = 29.25 1,.= 30.5 Ro= 250A = 1000.55 d= "10002 The 
lengths given in all these examples are in meters. Calculating 
from (40), ¥ 
I, calculated = 0.19 
I, observed = 0.21 

For the Washington Navy Yard antenna transmitting to an 
antenna at the Bureau of Standards (Bull. Bureau of Standards, 
a Doel: 1914), h, = 36., h, = 30., I[¢= 7.0, R= 70., 
A = 2800., d = 10,000. Calculating from (40) and (20) 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1387 


I, caleulated =-0.53 < 10 — 3 
I, observed = 0.55 xX 10 — 8 

As already pointed out, the agreement of observed values 
with the transmission formulas indicates that it is proper to 
take as the antenna height the actual height from the ground 
to the flat top. 

Antenna to Coil. A number of experiments to check the 
antenna-to-coil transmission formulas have been made at the 
Bureau of Standards radio laboratory since early in 1917. 
The first ones did not involve quantitative measurements but 
served to give a rough check on the formulas. The calculated 
value of current was compared with the current as estimated 
from the loudness of signal in a telephone receiver connected 
to various types of detecting devices. These signals were 
interpreted on the assumption that a fairly audible response is 
given by the currents indicated with the several types of 
detector. 

10-2 ampere, thermoelement. 
10-4 ampere, crystal detector. 
10-* ampere, simple audion. 
10-8 ampere, oscillating audion. 

For the Arlington antenna received on a coil aerial at the 
Bureau of Standards, h, = 122.,h, = 4:,l, = 4.,,.N, = 22., 
I, = 102., R = 25., \ = 8800., d = 7800. Thereceived cur- 
rent calculated from (41) is 0.0018 ampere. The observed 
signal using crystal detector and telephone, was very loud, 
thus checking in a qualitative way the result calculated value. 

Two similar qualitative experiments were made, transmitting 
from an antenna at the Bureau of Standards and receiving on 
a portable coil aerial. In one experiment, h, = 36., hy = 

= 1.07, N, =11.,1, = 0.5,R =2., x = 850.,d = 16,000., 
whence calculated J, = 11. X 10-%. In the other, h, = 12., 
peat, =F 0 IN, S11.,- 17 = 0°25, (R= 27h = 6002, 
d = 11,000., whence calculated J, = 5.7 X 10-*. In both 


cases the observed signal was loud with a simple audion, again 
giving a qualitative check on the formula. 

A number of experiments have been made by Dr. Austin 
during 1918 and 1919, who has kindly placed the results at my 
disposal. A couple of typical ones will be given. For the 
Arlington antenna transmitting to a coil aerial at the Bureau 


1388 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


of Standards, h, = 122., h, = 1.82, 1, = 1.29, N, = 56., 
I, = 100., R = 50., \ = 6000., d = 7800. 

I, calculated = 1.4 X 10 

I, observed = 2.1 X 10-4 
For the same antenna transmitting to a large coil suspended 
from masts outdoors, h, = 122.,h, = 21.6,1, = 24.4,N, = 7. 
I, = 100., R = 50., \ = 10,000., d = 7800.,;..a@ = 42 deg. 
From (41) and (24), 

Ff, calculated. =-1.0.x 10> 

I, observed = 1.2 X 10% 

A large number of transmission experiments from antenna 


to coils have been made by the radio laboratory of this Bureau 
in the early part of 1919. In a typical case, where h, = 21., 
heal, = V4a NN, =] 8) Te= 85° RTE Heo 
= 4800., 6’ = 0.1, L = 541. microhenries. From (41) and 
(20), 
I, caleulated = 24. X 10-° 
I, observed = 28. X 107 

The fact that the observed current is larger than the calcu- 
lated, in these and other cases, is probably due to the antenna 
effect, discussed in the next section. The coil structure has 
capacity, which makes it receive the wave by antenna action in 
addition to the coil action, thus increasing the current actually 
received. 

Coil to Antenna. In an experiment made by Dr. Austin, 
with a large coil at the Bureau of Standards transmitting to 
the Arlington antenna, h, = 21.6, 1, = 24.4, h, = 122., 
N, = 4., | 
N,,=-7,, 1, = 1,8 = 50.,.A = 2800., d = 7800, a = 42 deg. 
From formula (42), 

I, calculated = 1.3 X 10 
I, observed =1.5 X 10-4 

Coil to Coil. The only data available to the author on the 
use of the coil aerial for both transmitting and receiving are 
from experiments made in 1917 by Messrs. Kolster, Wil- 
loughby, and Lowell, and these are only qualitative. For 
transmission from a coil at the Bureau of Standards to a 
portable coil 40. kilometers away, h, = 1, = 3.,h, =1, =1., 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1389 


N,=4., N,=15., I, =10.,R =1., \ = 600., d = 40,000. 
The received current calculated from formula (43) is 4.6X 


10-°. The observed signal was loud with a simple audion. 
For transmission from a coil located at a lighthouse to a coil 


on a ship 48 kilometers away, h, = 1, = 3.05, h, = 1, = 1.22, 
N, =3.,N,=10., J, =10., R =2., \ = 550., d =48,000. 
The calculated J, is 1.6 X 10-*. The observed signal was 


audible on a simple audion. Comparing with the current 
sensibility of an audion stated above, it is seen that both of 
these results furnish a rough check on the formula. 


3. DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTS 


The agreement of the experiments with the theory is highly 
satisfactory in view of the simple conditions assumed in the 
theory. The complex practical conditions preclude the likeli- 
hood of agreement within a few per cent. The various limita- 
tions of the formulas arising from actual experimental condi- ~ 
tions are discussed above in Sec. V 2. 

One characteristic of the experiments with coil aerials is 
that the observed value of received current is in every case 
greater than the calculated value. This strongly suggests that 
the action of the coil structure involves something additional 
to the pure action asacoil. This would be expected also from 
theoretical considerations. The inevitable capacities between 
parts of the aerial circuit must introduce an action analogous 
to that of an antenna. When it is borne in mind that the coil 
action is really a second-order effect in comparison with the 
action of a system of antenna nature, it appears extremely 
likely that the stray capacities of any coil aerial circuit would 
introduce an antenna effect which would have to be considered 
in addition to the pure coil effect. Besides the reasons thus 
given by theory and by the excessive values of current observed 
in experiments with coil aerials, there are two other lines of 
evidence that the antenna effect is not negligible in coil aerials. 

One of these additional lines of evidence is furnished by 
measurements of current in different parts of a coil aerial or 
the circuit thereof. If the capacities between parts are appre- 
ciable some of the current must leave the conductors and flow 
off into the dielectric; the current observed with an ammeter 
must therefore be different in different parts of the circuit. 
These differences are actually found. The fourth kind of 


1390 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


evidence that the antenna effect is appreciable in coil aerials is 
furnished by considerations of radiation resistance, which will 
now be discussed. Following that, the antenna effect will be 
considered in more detail. 

Radiation Resistance. It is possible to determine whether in 
a given system the antenna effect or coil effect predominates by 
measurements of radiation resistance. The radiation resis- 
tance has different values and follows different laws for antenna 
and coil. 

Radiation resistance in general is defined by 


P=RP (56) 


in which J is the current in the aerial used as a transmitting 
device, P is the power radiated, and R the radiation resistance. 
The study of radiation resistance is an important means of 
facilitating work on aerials. This may be seen from the simple 
fact that the magnitude of the radiation resistance gives at 
once the power radiated, and hence the effectiveness of a 
transmitting aerial or the range of communication can be 
judged without making transmission experiments. Field tests 
are thus in large part replaced by laboratory measurements. 
In addition to this, it is possible to discriminate between the 
antenna and coil effects. 

The magnitude of the radiation resistance of a flat-top 
antenna, at wave lengths considerably greater than the funda- 
mental, is given by the well-known expression 


Re = (89.7 h/d)? (57) 


An approximate expression for the radiation resistance of a 
coil can be derived very simply, as follows. When a radiated 
field exists in any part of space, the relation of the power 
radiated through that portion of space to the magnetic field 
intensity there existing is 

ye i (58) 
for any given distance from the source, whatever the source may 
be. The total power radiated is proportional to the integral 
of P over any surface entirely surrounding the source. This 
integral will be of the same form for H.,, the field due to a coil, 
as for H,, the field to an antenna, except for the effect of the 
variation of H, in a plane around the radiating coil, which 
varies from zero to the value given in (10) for any given distance 
from the source. As a first approximation, this variation may 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1391 


be considered to make the integrated value of H, one-half as 
great as it would be if H, had the value given in (10) in all 
directions around the radiating coil. 

P; A inet 5 We 


2 ; RD ra? Fe (59) 


From (8) and (10), for a given distance from the source and a- 
coil and antenna of same height with same current, 


H, LN 
SEs de i tee (60) 


From (56), 


Hence from (59) and (60) 


> tN? 
= 2 7 2 


Inserting the value of R, from (57) 


h? I? N?2 
dé 


If the coil is a square one with h = 1 = a, 
R, = (18.3.a/h)* N? (61) 


This approximate expression for radiation resistance of a coil 
gives at once the variation with size, number of turns, and 
wave length. HLH. g., for a set of coils of varying size, in which 
the length of wire is kept constant, R,a1/N*. It shows that 
for a given ratio of size to wave length, R. a N*. The principal 
point of interest is that FR, is inversely proportional to the 
fourth power of wave length. 

Since the radiation resistance of an antenna is inversely 
proportional to the second power of wave length, and that of a 
coil inversely proportional to the fourth power, the radiation 
resistance furnishes a means of determining whether a given 
structure functions as a coil or as an antenna. Rough deter- 
minations of radiation resistance which were made upon a 
particular coil aerial showed a variation of observed radiation 
resistance inversely as the third power of the wave length, thus 
verifying the idea that the action is a combination of coil and 


R, = 31,100. 


1392 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


antenna effect. The observed values however were all higher 
than the sum of the theoretical R, and R.. The measurement 
of radiation resistance is an extremely difficult operation, and 
satisfactory methods can not be said to have been developed as 
yet. 

Antenna Effect. Since there are differences of potential 
between various parts of a coil, acting either as a transmitting 
or receiving aerial, there must be some dielectric current 
through the space around the coil and between the coil and 
ground. It follows that there must be some antenna action, 
proportional to the amount of this dielectric current and the 
length of path over which it flows, and this will produce a 
current additional to that produced by the coil action unless 
the coil structure happens to have an exact symmetry which 
causes the antenna effect in each part of the coil to be balanced 
by an antenna effect in some other part. 

Fig. 16 shows the origin of the antenna effect. As in ordi- 
nary practise, the leads cause some part of the apparatus to be 
practically at ground potential, the shield of the condenser is 
shown connected to ground. An appreciable dielectric current 
flows from various parts of the conducting circuit to other parts 
and to ground. Typical paths of this dielectric current are 
shown by the dotted lines. The line a b suggests the dielectric 
current from the coil structure to ground, the lines cd and ef 
the dielectric current between turns of the coil, and the line 
g h the dielectric current between coil and leads. The flow of 
dielectric current between turns of the coil is in a horizontal 
direction when the coil is of prismatic form with the turns 
separated and all of the same area. This part of the antenna 
effect arises in a receiving coil of this form only when the wave 
front is more or less tilted from the vertical. 

On account of the flow of current off through the dielectric 
from various parts of the circuit, ammeters placed at different 
places in the circuit would show different values of current to 
be flowing. In radio circuits it can not be assumed that the 
current is the same at all points around the conducting circuit, 
as was shown by the author in his investigation of high- 
frequency current measurement described in Bureau of Stan- 
dards 8. 206; 1918. 

To the extent that these dielectric currents flow, the con- 
ductors of the circuit may be considered as an antenna system. 
Perhaps only the current typified by the line ab might be 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1393 


thought of as giving rise to an “‘antenna”’ effect, since the others 
do not flow to ground; still this part of the dielectric current 
does not differ from the others in nature or effect, and it seems 
hence advisable to use the suggestive term “‘antenna effect’’ to 
indicate all of the effects arising from the presence of currents 
in the dielectric. 

It might be supposed that the same sort of an effect would be 
caused by the flow of dielectric current in the condenser of the 
coil aerial circuit. This is not true ordinarily because a con- 
denser of the laboratory type is used, in which the condenser 
plates are interleaved. As shown in Fig. 17, the current in one 
direction in the dielectric is balanced by a current in the oppo- 


REALE \ 
r 4 

| 

h | 

I 
Fig. 16—Patus or  DIevEc- Fic. 17—Drtrections or Frow 
TRIC CURRENTS WHICH CAUSE or Dr®Lectric CURRENTS IN 
ANTENNA EFFECT IN Cott AERIAL LABORATORY TYPE OF CONDEN- 


SER 


site direction in the neighboring part of the condenser. This 
is a non-radiating condenser; and is the analog of a non- 
inductive coil, which is also non-radiating. A condenser 
-eonsisting of a single pair of plates would radiate, but is not 
ordinarily used because it would be much bulkier than the 
laboratory type of condenser. The condenser consisting of a 
single pair of plates would be in fact the “condenser aerial,” 
which has been recommended by the author in Sec. IV 8 as 
worthy of serious consideration in radio practise. 

The effect of the distributed capacities of the aerial circuit 
must not be confused in any way with the phase angle between 
the fields existing at the two vertical sides of the coil aerial. 
The phase angle referred to is the seat of the action of the coil 


1394 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


aerial assuch. The dielectric currents flowing in the distributed 
or stray capacities of the circuit, however, give rise to the 
direct action as an antenna, not depending in any way on the 
separation between the two vertical sides of the coil. All of 
these remarks apply both to transmission and reception. 

It is rather difficult to determine what fraction of the effect 
of a coil aerial is due to antenna action and what part to coil 
action. In many cases, doubtless, the antenna action pre- 
dominates. It is possible, however, to separate the effects in 
any particular case by the several different methods. The 
. antenna effect may be calculated, at least for parts of the cir- 
cuit, by the aid of careful ammeter readings which show what 
amount of the current has flowed off into the dielectric. The 
antenna effect may be eliminated, thus leaving only the coil 
effect, by a carefully arranged system of shields and grounds; 
or, by asymmetrical arrangement of the coil structure which 
causes the antenna effect in each part to be balanced by the 
antenna effect in some other part. The coil effect may be 
eliminated, on the other hand, in the case of a receiving coil, by 
taking advantage of the fact that the coil effect depends on the 
direction of orientation while the antenna effect (at least the 
major part of it) does not; 2. e., by turning the coil so its plane 
is parallel to the wave front. A method which eliminates the 
coil effect and retains a part of the antenna effect is to open one 
of the coil leads, thus leaving the coil aerial connected to the 
circuit at one point, placing in series with it an inductance coil 
of very small dimensions but of the same inductance, the circuit 
being completed by the capacity of the coil aerial to ground. 

Effects of Surroundings. Currents are induced in metal and 
other objects near a transmitting aerial, and sometimes are 
powerful enough to affect the radiation appreciably. The 
objects near a receiving aerial have currents produced in them 
by the passing wave. “These currents in nearby objects, which 
may include the ground, induce e. m. f’s. in the receiving aerial. 
It is to be noted that this effect of neighboring objects is caused 
by induction, and not radiation from them, which would be 
comparatively feeble. 

The e. m. f. thus induced in a coil aerial from the surround- 
ings is of the same or opposite phase as that caused by the wave. 
It differs in this respect from the e. m. f. due to the antenna 
effect discussed above. The antenna effect ordinarily pro- 
duces an e. m.f. which. is 90 deg. out of phase with the coil 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1395 


effects and does not vary with the orientation of the coil. The 
antenna effect can thus never balance out the coil effect, and it 
is impossible to reduce the received current to zero no matter 
how the coil is turned. The e. m. f. induced by the surround- 
ings, however, depends upon the orientation of the coil. This 
e. m. f. will be reduced to zero by turning the coil at a different 
orientation from that at which the e. m. f. due to the wave is 
zero, unless the line between distorting object and the coil 
aerial is the direction of propagation of the wave. The result 
of this is that the total e.m.f. is reduced to zero at some 
orientation other than that obtained when the wave alone acts 
on the coil aerial. There is thus a distortion in the apparent 
direction of the wave, caused by objects surrounding the coil 
aerial. 


VII. PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. RELATIVE EFFECTIVENESS OF ANTENNAS AND COIL AERIALS 


a. Generally speaking, a coil aerial is as powerful a trans- 
mitting or receiving device as an antenna only when its dimen- 
sions approach those of the antenna. 

b. It is easy to make the resistance of a coil aerial circuit 
much smaller than the resistance of the ordinary antenna 
circuit and thus make a small coil as effective as a large antenna. 
A small aerial as effective as a large antenna can however also 
be secured by the use of the antenna-like aerial called the 
condenser aerial. Heeding these principles and using ampli- 
fiers in receiving, radio aerials can in the future be much smaller 
than heretofore. 

c. The relative effectiveness of a coil and antenna, in terms 
of the wave length, number of turns, etc., is given by formula 
(33) and the related formulas. 

d. A coil aerial exhibits antenna action as well as coil action, 
because of capacities between its parts and surroundings. The 
antenna action sometimes overbalances the coil action. 

e. The advantage of the coil aerial is greatest for short wave 
lengths. It is consequently likely to be well suited to airplane 
communication. The increasing advantage of the coil as a 
transmitting aerial, as the wave length is decreased, is subject 
to the proviso that the same current can be gotten into a coil 
as into an antenna. In fact, the whole practical problem is to 
get as much current as possible into the aerial. 

f. The use of coil aerials at both receiving and transmitting 


1396 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION (Oct. i 


ends of the communication is particularly suitable for short 
waves, since the received current in such a system is inversely 
proportional to the cube of the wave length. 


2. PRINCIPAL FORMULAS 
The units used are international electric units, the ordinary 
electric units based on the ohm, ampere, centimeter, and 
second; except where otherwise stated. The principal symbols 
are the following. 


SYMBOLS 
4 = instantaneous current. 
I) = maximum value of current. 
I = effective value of current. 


H, = instantaneous value of magnetic field intensity. 

H, = maximum value of magnetic field intensity. 

= effective value of magnetic field intensity. 

= height of aerial. 

= distance along earth’s surface from sending aerial. 

= 2 7 times frequency of the current. 

= time. 

wave length. 

= velocity of electric waves = 3 X 10” cm. per second. 

= horizontal length of coil aerial. 

= number of turns of wire of coil aerial. 

= length of side of square coil. 

= phase angle between values of field intensity a distance 
| apart in the wave. 

= electric field intensity. 

electromotive force in receiving aerial. 

logarithmic decrement of H or E. 

= magnetic flux. 

= resistance of receiving aerial circuit. 

capacity of receiving aerial circuit. 

= inductance of receiving aerial circuit. 

= angle between direction of propagation of wave and 
plane of coil. y 

Subscripts: s = sending, r = receiving, a = antenna, c 

= coil, 


‘2a Bem O ys & Sy 
I 


2 BY © 
oll 


RS RaAAS 
l| 


The following are the principal formulas presented in this 
paper: 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1397 


Radiated Magnetic Field Intensity from an Antenna or Con- 
denser Aerial. 


iy meee og & 
ieee (8) 


Radiated Magnetic Field Intensity from a Coil. 


= Saat metre Cr , 
Recewed Current in an Antenna or Condenser Aerial. 


h, H 
I, = 300. R (19) 


Received Current in a Coil. 


h,l,N,H 
Distance Correction Factor. 
Fy = ©70:000047 d (PUBS (9) 
Decrement Correction Factor. 
| 1 3 
NA ORT NOW AE 3 (20) 
Noe 
Direction Correction Factor. 
F; = cosa (24) 
Antenna-to-Antenna Transmission. 
188.h,h, I 
= 8 Tr 8 40 
I, Rdd Shh 
Antenna-to-Coil Transmission. 
1184.h,h,l,N,I 
= * 8 ie A Tr & 41 
Coil-to-Antenna Transmission. 
Fie 1184. Be le We ela (42) 


erry Ay 


1398 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


Coil-to-Coil Transmission. 


7450. h. leh, lt, N,N, I, 


ee Ryd 


(43) 


The lengths in the four preceding formulas may be in any 
units. Meters are commonly used. Any of these formulas 
may be expressed in terms of d. E. g., 

Distance at Which a Given Current is Received in a Coil for a 
Gwen Transmitting Current in an Antenna. 


1184. h,h,l, N,Is 


a RI, 


(44) 


Total Magnetic Field from an Antenna, Including Radiation 
and Induction. 


(31) 


Relative Effectiveness of Coil and Antenna, for Same Height 
and Wave Length. 


d./da = N V2 (1 — cos2 7l/d) (32) 
Ditto, | small compared to X. 

de/d,a = 6.28 N UX (33) 
Length of Coil Aerial Equivalent to Antenna of the Same Height. 

l= 0.16 A/N (39) 
Current in Aerial Circuit. 

ILS 4 (46) 
Voltage across Condenser in Aerial Circuit. 

Saarare® 0 


Coil Aerial Reception Factors. 


E. oa f. reception factor = X (51) 
Current reception factor = = (52) 
a? NL 


Voltage reception factor 


Has | (53) 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1399 


Radiation Resistance. 
Ra = (89.Th/X)? (57) 
FR, = (13.3 a/r)* N? (61) 


3. FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDED 


The subject of research on electric waves can be considered 
as barely begun. The study presented in this article has 
revealed vast and most interesting problems awaiting solution 
which can be solved. The functioning of aerials, both in 
transmitting and receiving, can now be considered as roughly 
understood. Recent advances in radio measurements and 
technique open the way to experiments and_ progress which 
will bring about far-reaching control of electric waves. A few 
of the detailed problems which border on the subject matter of 
this paper and await solution will now be mentioned. 

Theoretical Problems. 

a. Develop a simple and straightforward derivation of the 
radiated field from a coil, without consideration of shape of the 
coil or dealing with the electrostatic field at all. 

b. Work up an explanation of the mechanism of radiation 
that brings out clearly the relation of the radiation to the 
induction field and shows that all of the dielectric current is 
effective in causing radiation, which shall take the place of the 
usual explanation in terms of the snapping off of lines of force. 

ce. Determine the effects of the phase angle between different 
parts of the dielectric field in an antenna or condenser aerial, 
especially the long, low types. 

d. Deveiop methods of measuring radiation resistance. 

e. Work out laws of variation of voltage reception factor of 
coil aerials, and laws of variation of both current and voltage 
reception factors of antenna and condenser aerials. Similarly, 
develop accurate and useful transmission factors. 

Experimental Problems. 

a. Determine the relative effectiveness over a very wide 
range of sizes, wave lengths, etc., of the various types of aerials. 
Do this by: (1) direct measurements to verify transmission . 
formulas (2) measurements of the factors that enter into the 
reception factors, (3) measurements of radiation resistance. 

b. Make transmission experiments at very great distances 
over typical kinds of land, to obtain distance absorption factors. 

ce. Try out condenser aerials, comparing performance with 
transmission formulas. Build such aerials with minimum 


1400 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


resistance. Demonstrate the non-radiating nature of the 
laboratory type of condenser, comparing it with condenser 
aerials. 

d. Compare trailing wire, condenser aerial, and coil aerial, 
on airplane. 

e. Find out how directive as transmitting devices coil and 
condenser aerials and ‘‘earth antennas” are; measure magni- 
tude and direction of field at various distances from the aerial, 
at numerous wave lengths, etc. 

f. Determine relative magnitudes of induction and radiation 
close to transmitting aerials. Determine also directions of 
fields, to secure complete knowledge of phenomena near 
radiating systems. 

g. Measure currents in ground as well as the fields above the 
ground, to determine how wave attaches itself to the ground. 

h. Study distributed capacities in coil aerial circuit by 
measuring current at different points in circuit. 

i. Determine values of antenna effect, and develop means of 
controlling or eliminating it by shielding systems, ete. 

j. Make quantitative investigation of receiving systems 
combining antenna and coil aerial. Measure phase of currents. 
Determine under what circumstances the indication of abso- 
lute direction is reversed when the tuning is slightly varied. 

k. Determine effects of surrounding objects on currents in 
transmitting and receiving aerials. Measure magnitude and 
phase of currents in typical cases. 

l. Develop methods of connecting generating apparatus to 
various types of aerials to get maximum current into the 
aerial, especially at short wave lengths. 


VIII. SUMMARY 

The advantages of the coil aerial as a direction finder, inter- 
ference preventer, reducer of strays, and submarine aerial 
make it important to know how effective the coil aerial is, in 
comparison with the ordinary antenna, as a transmitting and 
receiving device. This article gives the answer. Simple 
formulas are worked out from fundamental electromagnetic 
theory, by which the performance of any aerial can be caleu- 
lated. Experiments have verified the formulas, and show that > 
they are a valuable aid in the choice and design of an aerial to 
fit any particular requirements. 

The principal formulas are of three kinds; theoretical for- 


a 


1919] DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION 1401 


mulas, giving the magnetic field intensity at any distance from 
either kind of aerial and the current produced by a given field 
intensity in either kind of aerial; comparison formulas, giving 
the ratio of performance of antenna and coil aerial under 
various conditions; and transmission formulas, giving the 
current in any receiving aerial in terms of the current in the 
distant transmitting aerial. 

The theory and nature of radiation are discussed, and applied 
to the elucidation of some current fallacies. There has been a 
vast haziness of ideas on these points. The distinction between 
induction fields and radiation fields is presented. It is shown 
that the receiving action in any kind of an aerial may be con- 
sidered as arising either from the electrostatic or the magnetic 


_field present in the wave. Such questions are discussed as the 


distinction between ‘“open’’ and “‘closed” circuits. It is 
shown that a metallically closed circuit can radiate, and that 
radiation takes place at all frequencies, the amount of radiation 
being greater the higher the frequency. 

The ratio of the range of communication obtainable with a 
coil aerial to that with an antenna is proportional to the num- 
ber of turns and horizontal length of the coil and inversely as 
the wave length. The coil aerial is hence particularly suited 
to communication on short wave lengths. A coil aerial is 
quantitatively as powerful as an antenna only when its dimen- 
sions approach those of the antenna. However, it is easy to 
make the resistance of a coil aerial circuit much smaller than 
the resistance of the ordinary antenna circuit and thus make a 
small coil as effective as a large antenna. 

A small aerial as effective as the ordinary antenna may be 
secured without recourse to the coil principle by using an 
aerial consisting of a condenser having two large parallel 
plates, arranged so that the dielectric of the condenser includes 
no ground. The circuit of such an aerial may be made to have 
a very low resistance. It appears likely that, with the use of 
either condenser or coil aerials together with sensitive ampli- 
fiers, radio aerials will in the future be much smaller than 
heretofore. These principles apply with particular advantage 
to airplane aerials. 

A coil aerial usually functions by a combination of the pure 
coil action and antenna action. The latter arises from the 
stray capacities and capacities to ground which are inevitably 
present. The existence of these capacities may be shown by 


1402 DELLINGER: RADIO TRANSMISSION [Oct. 1 


differences in ammeter readings at different points of the cir- 
cuit. The antenna effect makes the actual received current in 
experiments with coil aerials larger than the values calculated 
from the transmission formulas. The observed values are also 
affected by currents in neighboring objects. 

A formula for the radiation resistance of coil aerials is 
worked out. Comparison of experiment with this formula 
supplies additional evidence that the coil aerial operates by a 
combination of antenna and coil effects. 

The fundamental principles of design of aerials are given. 
The various modes of measuring received current and voltage 
across the condenser are discussed. The relations of these 
two quantities to the electromotive force acting in the aerial 
must be carefully observed in calculations or design. Recep- 
tion factors are derived, to which the received current or voltage 
are proportional. Experimental data on the functioning of 
aerials may be secured either from actual transmission experi- 
ments or from measurements of the quantities which enter into 
the reception factor. 

This investigation has opened up a large and most interesting 
field for further research. Progress in the control and utiliza- 
tion of electric waves depends on the investigation of such 
theoretical and experimental problems as have been suggested 
in Sec. VII 3 herein. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 1403 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘PRINCIPLES OF RADIO TRANSMISSION AND 
RECEPTION WITH ANTENNA AND CoIL AERIALS” 
- (DELLINGER), NEw YorK, N. Y., OCTOBER 1, 1919. 


F. W. Grover: In the derivation of the formula for the 
field of an antenna, the current is assumed to be uniform 
throughout the length of the antenna, and the field of this 
vertical current at a point P is found by using the vector 
potential. In evaluating the latter, the assumption is made 
that the point P is so far away, compared with the height 
of the antenna, that P is sensibly at the same distance from 
all points of this vertical portion. 

Having obtained the equation (5) for the field due to this 
vertical current, it is then tacitly assumed that this is the 
whole field of the antenna. Since it is expressly emphasized 
in the latter portions (and rightly so, it will be admitted by 
every one) that the whole displacement current must be 
reckoned as contributing to the field, some explanation ought 
to be given as to why the displacement currents of the antenna 
are not taken into account in this demonstration. Thus far, 
I have not been able to give a satisfactory explanation, and 
am here setting forth the difficulties that have occurred to me, 
in the hope that I may be set right and that perhaps the objec- 
tions of others may be forestalled. 

First, it would seem necessary to make some assumption 
as to the form of the displacement lines. Here this is difficult, 
because it is assumed (1) that there is no image of the antenna, 
and (2) that the current in the vertical portion is uniform. 
These are of course, strictly speaking, incompatible condi- 
tions, since either the displacement currents must return from 
the flat top to the lower portion of the vertical wire which 
combats assumption (2) or else they must return by the earth 
which modifies statement (1). In any case, they must, on the 
whole, flow in the opposite direction to the current in the 
vertical portion. To some extent, then, it would seem as 
though the resultant effect of the antenna would have to be 
less than that of the vertical portion alone. 

Suppose, to fix ideas, that the displacement currents flow 
vertically. Then, if we consider a filament of displacement 
current C D, it may be regarded as completing the circuit of 
an equal current in the vertical portion BA. Similarly, the 
symmetrically placed filament E' F forms a portion of a circuit 
BAEF. If each current in B A produce a field H at a point 
P in the plane of rectangle, the effect of B A totals 2 H, which 
may be represented by the vector OF (Fig. 3). EF produces 
a field H which is 6 degrees different in phase from the vector 
opposite to OF. This may be represented by OG, just as 
in the demonstration for the coil. The currents A D and 
BE balance out in their effects at a distant point. In like 

manner, current C D gives a field H of phase O K. The field 


1404 RADIO TRANSMISSION [October 1 


due to currents A C and DB balance out at point P. The 
resultant must accordingly be H’ = 2H— 2H cos 0 
or ; 
H’' =2H (1— cos 0) = 4H sin’ 0/2 
= 4H 62/4 = H @& when @ is small 
= H .4 7? (I/X)? 
which is much smaller than H. 

This treatment may be extended to the whole antenna, each 
filament of displacement current being regarded as completing 
the circuit of an equal current in the vertical portion. It 
would seem, then, that the effect of the whole antenna, of the 
symmetrical construction here shown, must be much less than 
that of the vertical portion. In fact, whereas the radiation of 
a coil is a second order effect, that calculated above is a third 
order effect, being the difference of two coil effects. _ 

Now, actually, the displacement lines of flow will not be 


“ 
ad i 


straight lines but curved. Each element of a curved path of 


to---—*-----------+10 


B F 
Fic. 1 Fia. 2 : Fia. 3 


current may, however, be regarded as equivalent in its magnetic 
effect to the sum of a vertical and horizontal element (Fig. 4). 
Summing up for the whole line, the horizontal elements tend 
to balance out in their effects at a distant point, while the 
vertical elements sum up to give the effect of a vertical current 
between the antenna and the ground. In any case, where 
-the antenna is symmetrical about the vertical portion, the 
above conclusion of a resultant field much smaller than that 
due to the vertical portion alone seems to be justified. 

Likewise the same ideas and conclusions seem to follow for 
an antenna consisting of a single vertical wire. For the dis- 
placement lines may be regarded as equivalent to vertical 
currents opposite in direction to the current in the wire. Any 
two current filaments symmetrically placed about the vertical 
wire may be combined with equal currents in the vertical wire 
and are equivalent to equal rectangles in the same plane as in 
the previous demonstration. If the point P is in their plane, 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1405 


the equation for the resultant field given above holds. Other- 
wise the factor cos a has to be applied to this, and the resultant 
would be very small in every case. 

Applying the same ideas to an L antenna, it would seem that 
it should be equivalent to a coil of width somewhere between 
zero and the length of the antennal. That is, such an antenna 
should be directive like a coil and its field should be a second 


Fic. 4 Fie. 5 


order effect like that of a coil, 7. e. less than that due to the 
vertical portion. 

In the case of the low condenser aerial we are not met by 
these difficulties, since we may regard the circuit as being com- 
pleted through a coiled wire of negligible vertical portion and 
the coil is of such small dimensions that it may be negligible 
in its “‘coil effect.” The current in the dielectric only would 
then need to be considered. 


Fia. 8 


Recapitulation. To agree, then with the formulas of this 
paper and with the experimental results, it would seem neces- 
sary to consider for coil effect only the current in the metallic 
portions. The condenser aerial may be treated by considering 
only the dielectric current. The antenna can be treated by 
considering either the current in the dielectric or the current 
in the vertical portion alone. Taken together they nearly 
cancel out. For unity, it would seem to be the dielectric cur- 


te : 


1406 RADIO TRANSMISSION [October 1 


rent which should be chosen as in the condenser aerial. Finally, 

then, what is the reason why the whole circuit should not be 

considered ? 

DISCUSSION OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN RADIATION AND 
INDUCTION 


The magnetic field due to a vertical current i = J) sin wt 
is, for a point P at a large distance d from the current, 


hwo / h Io ‘ ate Peadi 
Histology 5 qt COS EIS ey gee 
ae ely (8 Be hIo 
Se ies vie d/c) — 10 @? sin w (t — d/c) 


The negative signs simply take account of the fact that if the 
current is along the positive Z axis, and the distance d is 
measured along the positive X axis, the magnetic field must 
be along the — Y axis. The first of these terms is called the 
radiation field and the second the induction field. 

The time d/c is the interval which must elapse for a dis- 
turbance at the origin to travel the distance d to the point P. 
That is, action at P at any moment ¢ depends upon the value 
of the current at a moment d/c seconds previous. 

A comparison of the expressions for the two fields shows that 
the induction field isin phase with the current (excepting for its 
interval d/c) but that the radiation field is 90 degrees different 
in phase. Due to the presence of d? in the denominator the 
induction field falls off rapidly with the distance. For small 
values of )\, the radiation field diminishes not only less rapidly 
with the distance than the induction field, but for a given 


distance greater than om , it is greater in amplitude than the 


induction field. 

It is thus easy to see that the “induction field” is the usual 
field sensibly in phase with the current, which we consider as 
inducing e. m. f. in nearby circuits. Further, at low fre- 
quencies (long wave length) the radiation field is negligible. 
Thus the discussion in the paper of the mathematical dis- 
tinction between the two terms is easily seen. The term 

‘Snduction field” is, as just stated, appropriate, and the first 
term, which formulates the only portion of the field which is 
important at radio frequencies and distances is very properly 
called the “radiation: field.”’ Also, it is very important to 
emphasize the fact that both fields are always present, even 
though one of them may be entirely negligible. A further 
point which may be properly emphasized is that, since the 
time d/c required for the propagation of the field can never 
be exactly zero, it is never rigorously correct to speak of the 


1919] DISCUSSION ‘AT NEW YORK 1407 


magnetic field at a point as being strictly in phase with the 
current which produces it. 

It is not so easy, however, to agree entirely with the state- 
ment in the paper of the physical difference of the two fields. 
It would seem to be misleading to speak of the induction field . 
as “fixed in space” (last line of p. 1865). The presence of the 
quantity d/c in the sine factor of the induction field shows that 
this field must travel with the velocity of light, as well as the ra- 
diation field. At each point, the field oscillates, but for two 


points separated by a distance )\, the quantity a differs by 


2m, so that the field is in the same phase at such points,— 
although the amplitude of oscillation is different. 

This propagation of the induction component of the field 
with the velocity of light is also evident from a consideration 


1 


Direction of 
Wave Propogation 
does — Pieter 


Fig. 9 


of the induction of e. m. f. With regard to this the induction 
field hasno monopoly. _ The induction of e. m. f. in a conductor 
by the radiated field is treated in equation (17), the usual 
idea of relative motion of conductor and field being employed, 
except that here the relative velocity is the velocity of light, 
a velocity far transcending any velocity attainable in electrical 
generators. The ordinary induction case, analogous to this, 
is the induction of e. m. f. in a coil through which the number 
of magnetic lines is suddenly changed by varying the current 
in the circuit or in an adjoining circuit. It is easy to show that 
the usual method of calculating the e. m. f. as equal to the time 
rate of change of the number of magnetic lines through the 
coil is entirely equivalent to that derived on the assumption 
of a relative motion between the coil and the field equal to the 
velocity of light. The following is a proof of this point. } 
Consider a rectangular circuit of height 6 and length J in 
the direction of propagation of the wave. The induction field 


has a value a sin w (t— d/c) at points along the nearer 

side of the circuit, so that the induced e. m. f. in this side 
; : he be Too 

is by (17) (relative motion conception) See sin w (t— d/c). 


Thee. m. f. induced in the further side is likewise 


1408 RADIO TRANSMISSION [October 1 


hbelo 


i0@ +)? sin w ( i fat.) . The resultant e. m. f. in 


the coil is the difference, 
Kie hbec Iy 


To | Uae sin @ d/c) 


l ; d+l 
- apn oe é )| 


If 1 is small compared with d, this gives 


Pe hbcly d + 1/2 Pee 
E=- Ge | Boos o(t- fate) sin Te 


or, for | small compared with ). 


Hoe Mee cos a ( t- d+1/2 ) 


10 d? c 


According to the usual conception, we find the number of 
lines through the coil, H 61, and differentiate with respect to 
the time. For H we may, for values of / small compared 
with \, consider the average phase as that of the center, and 
neglect the difference between d? and (d + 1/2)’. 


Thus 
i 3 vo an a(t s41e | 


10 d? 
and 
dN hblwl d+1/2 
pa SH Mire cos o( 1 $412) 


The two methods are in agreement, and for coils whose 
dimensions are small in comparison with the wave length, and 
whose distance from the source is small, we have our usual 
expression giving an e. m. f. 90 deg. behind the field (current) 
in phase. 


Repeating the demonstration with the radiation field, we 
have from (17) 


h 
E = Mote | eos = de)~ oon o( ¢- a )| 


- 2hobdh . ol | d+1/2 
e 108 sin ¢ sna (4 . 


9191] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1409 


10cx c 
By the second method 


N = hw Io bt 008 o( «2412 ) 


et heb Tym oh fas 1412 | 


10c x Cc 
Bt Neo LT, d+1/2 
LT Vee BEE sin o(e- £412 ) 


In this case also the two methods lead to identical results. 

The conclusion, therefore, seems to be certain, that both 
fields are propagated with the velocity of light, and that both, 
when they cut a conductor, give rise to an induced e. m. f. 
which induces it. Since the two fields differ in phase by 90 deg. 
the e. m. fs., will also. On account of the relatively insig- 
nificant magnitude of the radiated field, however, at the usual 
a-c. frequencies, and the small distances involved in usual 
apparatus, the e. m. f. induced by the induction field only 
need be considered in electric generators and transformers. 

Another distinction, which is made in the paper, is that 
accompanying the radiation field, there is propagated an elec- 
trostatic field which bears a constant ratio to the magnetic, 
while with the induction field there is no such constant prede- 
termined relation. From what has already gone before, it 
would seem that this constant relation between H and # must 
also be true of the induction field. The induced e. m. f. in a 
wire of length h has been shown to be equal to cHh.10- 
(equation 17) and I have shown above that this equation is 
true for both components of the magnetic field. Now, in the 
present case, the field is supposed to be uniform along the wire, 
so that the electrostatic field, which is equal to the e. m. f. per 
em., must be cH .10-8 or 300 H, in which H includes both 
components. The statement is made 1866 that this rela- 
tion is true only in a radiated wave, but it must not be concluded 
herefrom that for H only the radiation field is to be taken. 
Both fields are radiated, and the induction field, however small 
it is, must, strictly speaking, be included in H in the above 
relation. 

As to what is the difference in physical nature between the 
radiation and induction fields, there remains the point men- 
tioned in the first paragraph of 1367, “The portion of the 
energy associated with this disturbance that does not return 
to the radiator is that connected with the first term of equation 
(31)” (i. e. the radiation field). This, of course, means that 
the energy associated with the induction field, although 
naturally it flows back and forth, must average zero. That 
is, the flow through any volume element in one direction over 


1410 RADIO TRANSMISSION [October 1 


half the cycle is equal to the flow in the opposite direction 
during the remainder of the cycle. 

Now this statement appears plausible, and from the usual 
a-c. idea of wattless current is what would be expected of the 
induction field. I have, however, been unable to prove it, 
and the demonstration given below would seem to lead to the 
idea that a portion of the energy associated with each field is 
returned, and a portion radiated, 7. e. that there is no differ- 
ence in nature, respecting net energy flow, between the two 
components of the field. 

In the case of a simple making ofa steady current J, energy 
is flowing out to all points of space during the rise of the cur- 
rent and finally after an infinite time, there is a distribution 


= = per cu. cm. which, since H de- 


of energy through space of 


creases and becomes zero at infinite distance, is less in remote 
regions and greater near the circuit, but finite in sum and equal 
to L/2LhP. 

When the current is broken, this energy all eventually 
returns to the source. If the current is made to rise and fall 
periodically, however, it is easy to comprehend that some of the 
energy sent out would not have a chance to come back before 
the flow of energy again takes place away from its source, so 
that some of the energy would be permanently severed from 
the source. Since this would appear more likely to be the 
case, the higher the frequency, it is natural to suppose that 
this energy would be that propagated by the travelling of the 
radiation field rather than that connected with the moving 
induction field whose amplitude does not involve the wave 
length. In what follows, the idea of the Poynting vector is 
introduced to investigate this matter. 

The Poynting theorem states that the instantaneous flow 
of power through any portion of space is equal to 1/4 7 times 
the integral of the normal component of the vector product 
of the electrostatic and magnetic fields, taken over the entire 
bounding surface of the space in question. 

In the present instance, the electrostatic field is along the 
Z axis, the magnetic field along the — Y axis and the flow of 
energy along the X axis. The flow of energy through an ele- 
ment of volume d V = dx dy dzis equal to the excess of the 
amount through one dy dz face over that through the opposite 
face. Since H and E are at right angles, the vector product 
is their simple product. 


Taking a point (x, y, z) the power entering the face dy dz 


is dy dz. That over the opposite face is 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1411 


(e+ Ea: « \( m+ — iz) 


Aa dy dz, so that the net 


power, is, in the limit, a. (1 me +H a) dy dx dz. 


Now we have shown that E = c H so that the power is 


1 dH dH Bio att 
ts (#4 OLS jav= fend av 


If we place H = H, + H;, the power is 


ah, Ha oe me) av 


a7 
Now 
72 — cos w (t— x/c) 
ST ea 
aS = ee sin w (t— 2/c) 
Tes coo re 
jie Hie sin w (t—.2/e) 
Tet 2 ga eos w= ae) 

ae sin w (t— 2/c) 


The term H, — may be regarded as due to the radiation 


é : Hi; 
field only, that due to the induction field is H; “ rag. and the 


remaining terms 


1412 RADIO TRANSMISSION [ October 1 


may be regarded as the power due to the interaction of the 
electrostatic field of one component magnetic field with the 
other component of the magnetic field. 


2 2 
H, an ad ce (w/c)? cos w (t— x/c) sin w (t— x/c) 
2 2 
be See (w/c)? cos’ w (t— x/c) 
: 2 2 
Hi; eee —— See (w/c) sin w (t— «/c) cos w (t— 2x/c) 
rae oe Cee 
= 00 w (t— x/c) 
GG WI? in2 
ik Te rite sin? w (t— 2/c) 
h2 1 2 bs 
— FOG gr (w/e) sin w (t— 2/c) cos w (t— x/c) 
dH; he] 2 
Hy “7 = — “op g (@/0)? cos? w (t— x/e) 
2 h? I,2 ; 
aac (w/c) cos w (t— x/c) sin w (t— a/c) 


Now the terms in cos (t— «/c) sin (¢— x/c) integrated over 
a whole cycle give zero, but the terms in cos* (t— x/c) and 
sin? (t— x/c) give a finite amount, since the integral of sin? 
or cos’ over a cycle gives 1/2. It would appear, then, that the 
induction component as well as the radiation component con- 
tributes to the radiation of energy. At large distances and 


i 


short wave lengths, however, the H; ae term is the smallest 


of all. On the other hand the H, CE term is equal to the 


aH, 


ude dx 


term. 


In conclusion, then, there seems to be no essenti i 

‘ ; ; lal differ- 

suc in the Age of as two components of the meas 
elds, except in the way they vary with the f : 

distance from the source. dig 2 aban Bee 


1919} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1413 


A. Press: In the paper by Dr. Dellinger mention is made of 
a method which has been referred back to some work of Prof. 
Lorentz. Strangely enough the same general method was 
gone over quite independently by myself but I must say that 
it seems to me that the real value of the method of vector 
potentials suggested is rather approximative. In the case 
of a horizontal antenna which was the case considered in my 
own investigations the difficulty arose in imagining the manner 
in which the interlinked flux lines or rather the interlinked 
flux sheets could disentangle themselves from the conductors 
(or coils). 

The true basis after all of estimating the value of H must 
be the Maxwellian equations of wave propagation. In my 
later work therefore, which by the way was gone into in my 
classes at the University of California about a year ago I gave 
the following derivation: 

A round wire is assumed to carry a current 

a7=I,sinpt i 
It is required to determine the type of magnetic field that is 
set up as a function of the wave length of the system. The 


individual conductors of a two-wire parallel system will be 


investigated with the origin at the center of a conductor. The 
required equations of condition are (for polar coordinates) 


dB, dE 
dt ay 
dé De: dH, 
CLs Ue Saco pe 


The above two equations can be made to result in the following 


@D, _ dD. | @D, 


Lp? “de aa 1/7 d y o. d ¥ 
peek ig” tH, dHy mere 
US a ae ae Bap aE Fy 1/2. fe 
Writing the simpler of the two equations in the form 
d? D d D : 
—— = ¢D 


With — a2 
¢ = ty? TE 


a solution is found to be 


1414 RADIO TRANSMISSION { October 1 


1 I, cos pt 
D, = . ._ 
27a Y 27a 
desea, 
where a is the radius of the wire and p = 2 7f, 
which leads to the corresponding solution for H- which is 


n(#57) 
at di . 
Bln Dae a apo gtety wane 
1, ( X =i) 


It is seen therefore that there is no out of phase term but 
rather that a stationary wave is set up. The above solution 
therefore does not offer any physical difficulties of picturing 
interlinked flux lines disentangling themselves from the sys- 
tem to produce radiant energy. In reality galvanic effects 
above described have been found not to produce any actual 
radiation, in the case of a vertical antenna. The whole prob- 
lem of the vertical grounded antenna has been treated by the 
writer.. The radiation factors are gone into in detail but 
from the standpoint of wave propagation wholly. 


Se 


Presented at a joint meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Ameri- 
can Physical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., October 
10, 1919 


Copyright 1919 by A. I.E. E. 


THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR OF 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT POWER 


BY JOHN H. MORECROFT AND H. TRAP FRIIS 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The first part of this article deals with the operation of the 
tube when separately excited, the variation of power with the 
amount of excitation, the load impedance, etc., and also gives an 
analysis of the forms and phases of voltages and currents in the 
different parts of the circuit. 

The second part deals with the efficiency of the tube as a gen- 
erator; the action is analyzed in detail and the conditions for 
maximum efficiency deduced, the theoretically deduced con- 
clusions being substantiated by experimental data. Oscillo- 
grams are given to show the action of the tube under practically 
all the conditions which are likely to occur. 


EEE three-element vacuum tube utilizes the controlling 
effect of the grid potential on the plate current, that is, 
the electron flow from the hot filament to the cold (compara- 
tively) plate. It may be used as a detector of high-fre-— 
quency waves as used in radio communication, or as an am- 
plifier of electrical signals of any frequency or as a generator 
of alternating-current power of practically any frequency de- 
sired, from perhaps one cycle per second to a hundred million 
cycles per second. This paper deals with its use as a generator; 
it seems that such a paper is well worth while because of the 
undoubtedly wide use which will be made of the tube as a 
convenient source of high-frequency power, especially for 
laboratory purposes, and radio telegraphy and telephony. 

A three-electrode tube, such as the Type P pliotron, will 
give about 500 watts of high-frequency power at any frequency 
desired. In addition to the tube itself there is required a 
small continuous current generator of about 2500 volts and 
a set of suitable coils and condensers. Its only competitor as 
a piece of necessary laboratory apparatus is the high-frequency 


_alternator; this is however no true competitor, its compara- 
tively high cost, difficulty of speed control, limitation of fre- 


1415 


1416 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


quency, decrease of output at frequencies differing widely from 
that for which it was built, attention required to maintain it 
against mechanical failure, make the vacuum tube superior 
unless several kilowatts of power are required; in this case the 
Poulsen are must also be considered. Even then the flexibility 
of the tube circuit gives it a marked advantage over the 
machine. For the very high frequencies the tube is the only 
practical source of power. 

Power output of the tube and its variation under different 
conditions. The relation between plate current, grid potential, 
and plate potential, is given by the equation 


In =A (Ep + Mo E,)* (1) 
in which EH, = plate potential, referred to filament, 
E, = grid potential, 
iz plate current, 
A a constant, depending on the size and spacing 
of the parts of the tube. 


The factor, fo, is called the theoretical voltage amplification 
factor of the tube; it really indicates the relative effectiveness 
of the grid and plate potentials in controlling the plate current. 
The exponent, x, has been given as 1.5 and 2 by various writers; 
it is however a variable, not a constant. Its value is nearly 
2 for most tubes throughout a large variation in EF, and E,, 
but for extreme values of either, x departs widely from this 
value. Equation (1) is based on the assumption that the plate 
current is not large enough to draw from the filament all of 
the electrons emitted from its hot surface, that is, J, is less 
than the saturation current of the tube. 

The study of the output, phase relations, etc., was carried 
out with a type P-10 pliotron, rated at 1000—2000 volts on 
the plate, filament current of 3.65 amperes, and a safe loss on 
the plate of 250 watts. The connections were as shown in 
Fig. 1; in reality the grid is placed between the plate and 
filament but in this diagram, as in the succeeding ones, we 
have placed it on the opposite side of the filament to gain clarity 
in the circuit diagrams. The continuous-current generator 
E,, furnishes about 1000 volts to the plate through a choke 
coil L,, this being suitably large. The continuous-current 
generator E’, serves to maintain the grid at an average negative 
potential of any desired amount, and the alternator EL, furnishes 
the exciting potential to the grid. The condenser C, must 
have a comparatively low reactance if a resistance load is 


-, ae 
~ 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1417 


being studied; in series with this is the load resistance R, 
which absorbs the alternating-current power generated. 

The alternating-current resistance of the plate circuit of the 
tube R, is the factor which determines how large L, and C, 
must be; the value of R, varies somewhat with the magnitude 
of the exciting voltage E,. For large values of i, it is equal 
to E', divided by I;,, if the resistance of L, is low; if this resist- 
ance is appreciable the voltage E,, must be used instead of 
E,. For small values of the exciting voltage HE, the value of 
R, is lower than this, perhaps one half or one third. The 
values of L, and C, must be so chosen that for the frequency 
used the reactance of L, is large compared to FR, and that of 
C, is small compared to R,. The suitable values of L, and C, 
are really determined by the value of the load resistance, R, 
but as this must be of about the same value as FR, if much 
power is to be delivered, R,, does indirectly fix their values. 


So 


U 
eS 
st Ry 
x aN 
gis RSx ER 
og eae 
mr Star, ce xX 
& 
41S ES NESS 
aS} 
G§3 é 


4 


Ff 


Lxciin 
CIP CK, 


Fig. 1 


When the grid potential fluctuates the plate current must 
vary in magnitude according to the relation given in equation 


_ (1);this fluctuating current is equivalent to a continuous current 


with an alternating current superimposed; ‘the alternating 
component will practically all flow through the R-C, circuit 


- because of the high reactance of the coil Zi. 


The first effect studied was the variation of output as the 
value of the load resistance R, was varied, the excitation being 
comparatively low; the results are shown in Fig. 2. The 
curve sheet shows the variation of the various quantities as 
the value of R was changed; it is seen that a maximum output 


- occurred with R equal to 1000 ohms. For the conditions of 


this test the value of R, was 1100 ohms, although the quotient 


of E, and I, gives very nearly 3000 ohms. 


1418 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


In Fig. 3 is shown the behavior of the circuit as the exciting 
voltage, E’, was varied; the connections were the same as those 
of Fig. 1. The alternating-current output increases with the 
square of the exciting voltage up to a certain value of H, and 
then increases more slowly. For the lower values of EH, (less 
than 120 volts) the fluctuating plate current has an approxi- 
mately sinusoidal form but for the higher values the plate 
current becomes a series of pulses. 

The decrease in J, in Fig. 2 and increase in Fig. 3 are 
both due to the fact that the relation between grid. and 
plate potentials and plate current is not linear; if sufficient 


tag 4 z | 
earthy) Ie Sika Bead shed eel ay a [ al 
pee | eto SIE lest i ie Tessie a 
| R of L, 187 Ohms 
40 04 TF al al | 1,-9.8 Henrles 
+— C,=18.4 Microfarads 
E 4-900 Volts 
E,-120 Volts 
30. 0.3++ E100 Volts 
E 8 2.f = 870 
x= 
Sa Ei 1,,-0.0001 Amp, 
ze¢ [ 1,=3.65 Amp. 
ie one 
& 2020.2 f—t- 
5 —_ | 
oe Be om Z =, uN iT 
lu 
ap Mee i deat mi 
SRO ae eee Ee See eS 
a | (a we be: ues 
if 
wD a Ns El a | LO a te wen 
‘Sak ff Ht ft - - Ts 
Od = eg a ae ee al 
0 1000 2000 3000 
VALUE OF_R.IN OHMS 
Fre. 2 


resistance is put in the load circuit, J, remains nearly constant 
as the value of EF, is changed. 

In Fig. 3 is shown the grid current, as read on a continuous 
current ammeter; this reached a readable value when the 
effective value of E, reached 95 volts. The maximum value 
of E, is 184 volts and as EF, was 120 volts it is evident that the 
grid had to be positive as much as 14 volts before it took an 
appreciable current. The value of E, at which J g becomes 
readable depends to some extent on the value of the load 
resistance R. 

Safe load of a vacuum tube. The two factors limiting the 
output of a vacuum tube are the safe filament current and the 


ioe cd 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1419 


amount of power which can safely be dissipated from the 
plate (generally double). The heating of the plate is due to 
heat radiated from the filament and to the bombardment 
by the electrons leaving the filament, being accelerated by 
the high positive potential of the plate, and then being 
suddenly stopped when impinging on the plate. With a 
properly evacuated tube the amount of power which can be 
thus expended on the plate is sufficient to bring it to a dull 
red heat, this color being judged when the filament is incan- 
descent; if the filament current is quickly reduced to zero the 
plate has quite a bright cherry red color. ; 
When the tube is not generating any alternating-current 


80 04 e: = 


60 03 = a + Power 1 
I, 


E,= 900 Volts 

E,= 120 Volts 

° R = 1000 Ohms 
27€ f = 870 

_Ip =3.65 Amp. 


| | 7 CTT, 
HH a | HEEEE 


ee — 1. 
°5 25 50 75 100 25 (250 [5 200 kane a = 1D) S00 coer RSOM, Siar 
VALUE OF Eg, IN VOLTS (EFFECTIVE) 


w 


nN 
iGRID CURRENT, MILLIAMPERES 


POWER IN WATTS 
£ 
ro) 
CURRENT IN AMPERES 
fo) 
iy 


Fic. 3 


_ power all of the input H, J, is used in heating the plate but 
when alternating current is flowing in the load circuit some of 
the power supplied to the tube circuit is used up in RF and the 
amount of power used on the plate is equal to EH, J, minus 
whatever power is used in the R-C, circuit. If the values of E, 
and E, are properly adjusted the amount of power used in R 
may be equal to or even greater than that used on the plate so 
the safe value of E, I, may be as much as three times the safe 
plate rating without endangering the tube; if however the tube 
stops oscillating for any reason the input must be at once 
reduced or the tube will probably be spoiled. 

_ An approximate idea of the behavior of the tube circuit as 


1420 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


the exciting voltage is increased is given in Fig. 4; assuming a 
constant input, the output and losses follow the variation shown. 
The efficiency may reach quite high values when suitable 
adjustments are made. In the small sets used by the Signal 
Corps the tubes were adjusted for an efficiency of about 30 per 
cent but it has been found possible to so adjust one of these 
tubes in the laboratory as to get a fair output with an efficiency 
better than 70 per cent. 

Phases and Forms of Currents and. Voltages in a Tube Circuit. 
If the impedance of the power supply circuit (Fig. 1) is very high 
compared to that of the load circuit the current J; is constant, 
and the equations of the alternating current circuit may be 
worked out as though the power supply circuit did not exist. 

When a voltage LE,,, sin wt is impressed on the grid the 


swat ttre tore ee ee --- ++ --- 


a 
9 
ie) 


(Fy Yfeciercy 


FPoper relative increase in 40nd E, 


Fig. 4 


changes produced in the plate current are the same as though 
ajvoltageJ oH m, sinjwt had been introduced into the plate 
circuit. The changes produced in the plate current circuit by the 
grid excitation may be calculated on the assumption that the 
voltage fo Hime Sin wt was operating in the plate circuit. Thus 
a voltage E,{on the grid is replaced in our calculations by a 
suppositious voltage7}uo E, in the plate circuit; the current 
produced by this voltage can be at once calculated from the 
impedance of the circuit in which the alternating-current must 
flow, namely R,, R, and C;, in series. 

The vibrators of an oscillograph were introduced in the cir- 
cuit as shown by Fig. 5 and the polarities so adjusted that 
currents in the directions indicated by the arrows are positive; 
when a current is shown_onjits film below the zero line the 


PLATE LVII. 
Aw). E. EB. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


E, = 900 I, = 0.25 EF, =120 EH, = 50 Frequency = 140 
Loap R = 1000 onms C = 18.4 uf 


Fig. 6 


[MORECROFT & FRITS] 
_ £E, = 900. I, = 0.34 HH, = 120 H, = 100 f = 140 5 
sone Loap R=1000Hms C = 18.4uf 


ae 
a gh se; 


PLATE LVIII- 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 
E, = 900 J, = 0.34 EF, = 120 E, = 300 f = 140 
Loan R= 10000Hms C = 18.4 yf 


Fig. 7 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1421 


direction of the current was in the opposite direction to that 
shown by the arrow. The oscillograph used had only three 
vibrators; it was sometimes necessary to take several exposures 
to get all the quantities wanted. This was done by always run- 
ning the film at the same speed and making one curve (generally 
7») common to all films; it was then possible to so place the 
films together for reproduction that all quantities were in their 
correct relative phases. 

In the first circuit tested the total resistance in the alter- 
nating-current circuit (R, plus R) was about 4000 ohms and 
the reactance of the condenser C, was 62 ohms; we should 
expect therefore that the current I, and voltage E’, would be in 
phase and moreover if the grid excitation is kept low the 
alternating component of the plate current, I,, should be of the 
same form as_the grid voltage. Then as the voltage e, is 


Hie. 5 


determined by the constant voltage'H, and the_drop in R, this 
voltage must also have a sine wave fluctuation in such phase 
that when the plate current is a maximum the plate voltage is 
a minimum. Fig. 6 shows the form of plate voltage, plate 
current, and grid voltage, for the conditions noted below the 
film. It will be seen that both e, and 7, are sinusoidal in form 
and that e, is 180 degrees out of phase with e, The grid 
current was zero for the conditions given; it may be seen from 
the film that E, was not sufficiently large to force the grid to a 
positive potential. 

In Fig. 7 are shown the various quantities for a much greater 
excitation than was used for Fig. 6. The plate current rises to 
a value of 0.66 amperes and decreases to zero; the current 
flowing in the alternating-current circuit must therefore have a 


_maximum value of 0.33 amperes giving an J R drop in F equal 


1422 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


330 volts. The fluctuation in e, as measured in the film is 340 
volts. The grid takes current all the time the grid is at positive 
potential, but it is very small, due to the fact that the plate 
potential never falls to lower than 660 volts. 

If a greater variation in the plate voltage is desired it can be 
brought about only by increasing the value of R; if this had 
been 3000 ohms instead of 1000, the plate potential would have 
fluctuated throughout a much wider range. As the normal maxi- 
mum output (assuming sinusoidal variations of voltage and cur- 
rent, is obtained from a tube when both i, and e, vary from 
zero to twice their normal values it is evident that R should have 
been increased to 3000 ohms to get maximum output. But by 
referring to Fig. 2 it would seem that 1000 ohms was the proper 
value of R for maximum output. This discrepancy arises 
from the fact that the results for Fig. 2 were obtained with low 
grid excitation while the curves in Fig. 7 were obtained with an 
excitation three times as large. As previously stated, R, 
varies with the excitation, and the maximum output is obtained 
when the load resistance and tube resistance are the same. 

The amount of fluctuation in J; is small; the value of the 
alternating component is fixed by the requirement that the 
reactance drop in Ly, due to it, must be equal to the alternating 
component of the fluctuating plate voltage. If the fluctuation 
in e, were sinusoidal the fluctuation in I, would also be of that 
form. 

With lower values of load resistance the distortion in plate 
current occurs even with low excitation; this is shown in Fig. 8 
for which R had a value of only 100 ohms. Although there was 
the same alternating current produced in the output circuit as 
for the case given in Fig. 7 the fluctuation in plate voltage is 
very small, due to the very low impedance of the load circuit. 

The alternating current of the tube circuit may be analyzed 
by the laws of the ordinary circuit, in case we are interested 
only in the sine wave components of the quantities studied. 
The vector diagrams of the three possible kinds of load circuits 
are shown in Fig. 9; in these diagrams cos ¢ gives the power 
factor of the load circuit itself and cos 6 gives the power factor 
of the whole alternating-current circuit, including the resistance 
of the tube as well as the load circuit resistance. 

In Fig. 10 are shown the curves of e,, es, and 4, for circuits 
corresponding to those assumed in Fig. 9; the three circuits as 
actually used had the same excitation and nearly the same 


\ 


eg 


PLATE LIX, 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


SNHO QOST = 1M SNHO 0G = UY 
dvoO'yT WATLLOOGNT 


[S11ua zy LAOAIAAOW] 


OFSehe 
OOl="% O2L="% 006=“H SaVOTT TIY YOY 
Qo 
SWE O OSM Lise ae Oneal . 
avoryT AAILIOVdV() 


SORE ES 


SWHO QOOT = Y 
avory GONV LSISHY, 


PLATE LX. 
PS ey Lee a 
VOL. XXXVI, 1919 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 
Le —=0. 2955 fe — 1000 15 SOP R= 2010 
E, = 900 ) B= 120 | Ey = 100% 7 ='140 
Bresit 


> 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1423 


magnitude of impedance in the load circuit, the first being 
resistive, the second, capacitive and the third, inductive. 


= Zhen 


Ind«chve load 
wl 
fan io] = 72+ Top 


Capac thie load 


Z Sas 3 Ne 


SE - Fhase relatos nn Tahe cireusls 
‘ + Fia. 9 


3 With resistive load the plate current (alternating component) 
is in phase with the voltage E,, with the capacitive load it 
leads and with the inductive load it lags; the angles and 0 


a 


1424 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


measured from the film, and the calculated values, agree 
within the precision of measurement. , 

There is considerable distortion in all three circuits which 
could have been nearly eliminated by increasing the impedance 
of the load circuit to about three times the value used. This 
would however, have required a corresponding increase in the 
inductance of L, and a suitable coil was not at hand. 

The effect of varying the resistance of the output circuit is 
well shown in Fig. 11; in one case the resistance was 1000 ohms 
and in the other it was 2000 ohms:-. It will be seen at once that 
the distortions produced by the tube can be reduced by suffi- 
ciently increasing the impedance of the output circuit. In 
the case given in Fig. 11 the reactance of the power supply 
circuit was not increased when the resistance of the output 
circuit was increased with the result that a much larger fraction 
of the generated alternating current passed through the supply 
circuit in the second case than in the first. The greater the 
amount of alternating-current power used in the power supply 
circuit, of course, the less efficient is the circuit. 


EFFICIENCY OF A TUBE 


From the oscillograms given thus far it would appear that 
the efficiency of a tube generator could not be very high. On 
the assumption that the plate current and plate voltage both 
have sinusoidal variations the maximum possible output of 
the tube would be just half the input; such a high fraction 
could not be obtained however because the conditions required 
could not be satisfied. The plate voltage would have to fluc- 
tuate between 2 E, and zero and the plate current between 
21, and zero; this latter condition could be satisfied but the 
first could not be. The plate voltage must not fall below a 
certain minimum if high efficiency is to be obtained because of 
the excessive grid current resulting. With the tube we used 
this minimum was about two hundred volts. 

The possible efficiency of 50 per cent mentioned above, it 
must be remembered, does not: consider the amount of power 
required for heating the filament nor the possible losses in the 
exciting circuit. If these losses are considered the possible 
efficiency would be much less, especially in the smaller tubes. 
We shall now show however that by using peculiar shaped 
plate currents it is possible to have an efficiency considerably 
jn excess of 50 per cent; in fact the result of this study is that 


\ 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1425 


the efficiency of a tube may be pushed possibly as high as 90 
per cent by proper design and proper operation, this value 
neglecting the filament power input. 

The importance of getting a high efficiency will be at once 
appreciated when it is mentioned that a given tube (the one 
used in this test) has an output of about 200 watts in normal 
operation whereas if the efficiency could be increased to 90 per 
cent the safe output would be 2250 watts. 

The tests carried out involved an adjustment with separate 
excitation to find the conditions for maximum output and 
then transferring the grid connection to a proper point of the 
circuit to get self excitation, recording for each condition the 
forms and phases of currents and e.m.fs. The tests were run 
at low frequency so that oscillograph records might be obtained; 
the results obtained were duplicated later in a high-frequency 
run. 

Fig. 12 shows the circuit used; simpler ones may be used 
but the laboratory apparatus at hand was best suited to this 
one. The diagram also shows where the oscillograph vibrators 
were introduced and the direction of currents assumed as 


Fie. 12 


positive; if, on a film, a current is shown below its zero line, it 
was flowing in the opposite direction to that shown in the 
diagram. If the frequency of the exciting voltage EH, is chosen 
the same as the resonant frequency of the load circuit 


Ci + C, 


ia Jet@in) ) 


the impedance of this circuit between the two points M and N, 


1426 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 
where the tube is attached, will be resistive only, its magnitude 
being equal to bestia ohms. 
a)? Ci? R 
The quantities to.be considered are shown conventionally in 


their phases in Fig. 13; the current 7; which flows in the reso- 
nant load circuit may be several times as large as the current 7, 


f 
RO 
| ; 
Sf 
Ss 
0.4 oy, 
| 1, =3.65 Amp. 
5 
s 
r r | é | 
| 
5 (Coles i 
5 ee | 
a S 
roared F 
Bu 02 =h. = + 
a iL. 7 | 
| | § | 
; z 
/ 2 /\ | 
ms 
0 | 
0 800. 1200 
VOLTS 
E, PLATE VOLTAGE 
Fig. 14 


furnished by the tube. The two important things in this 
diagram are shown in the lower part of the figure, namely, the 


curves of ¢, 7, and of e, 7. These curves give the power loss on. 


the plate and the power supplied by the tube to the load circuit, 
respectively. It is at once evident that 


Energy loss on plate per cycle = fie €p 1, dt = Area A 


fia aa 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1427 


Energy supplied to load circuit = al: 3 ent di; = Area C 


— Area B 
It is evidently desirable to make the latter as large as possible 
and the former as small as possible, if the tube circuit is to 
operate efficiently. Any ordinary scheme of analysis, using the 
relation given in equation (1) must fail because ther elation does 
not hold good for those values of e, and e, which are the most 
important ones in the cycle of operation, namely low e, with 
positive e,, and very high values of e, with large negative e,. 


0.5 


0.4 


ES 

ane 

wW 

a z 

Ss 

ce) 0.3 Ec ie x E 

tut ~ 

=o E,-100 Volts E,=32 Volts @ 

ot 8 

b= Be 

6S 02 as 
= =< 

= ue 
0D 


Ma 


0.1 


0 80 160 240! 
VOLTS 
PLATE VOLTAGE 


Fig. 15 


Ey 


The ordinary so called static characteristics of the tube used 
are given in Fig. 14; they are not of much service in predicting 
the behavior of the tube when the output is forced as high as 
possible. They did bring out the fact however that the fila- 
ment ammeter, if a continuous current instrument, does not 
read correctly the filament current when the tube is generating 
alternating-current power. The ammeter indicated 3.65 
amperes when getting the curves of Fig. 14 and the total emis- 
sion for such a current is evidently about 0.5 amperes. Now 


when the tube was oscillating, the filament ammeter reading 


[Oct. 10 


MORECROFT AND FRIIS: 


1423 


ol. Pld 


INSYYND LNIWVAS 21 
Sua WV 
Zev ge 


i) 


ce 


= —————— 


a: 
Oo 


SS 
S 


839A 006 =" Ff 


5 


S3Yuad NV 


ay 


_ Sauad WV 
INayuNd ald 


a, 


IN3YYND FLWI1d 


‘4 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1429 


3.65 amperes the total emission was about 0.8 amperes, 
showing that the filament temperature was much hotter than 
when not oscillating. Holding the voltage across the filament 
constant (approximately the condition when the tube is oscil- 
lating) the set of curves given in Fig. 15 were obtained. The 
grid was held at a positive potential of 100 volts and the plate 
voltage suitably varied. The electron current to the plate 
increases the filament current at one end and decreases it at 
the other; the relative increase and decrease will be determined 
largely by the resistance used in series with the filament 
battery. It can be seen that even with the larger filament 


0.8 


=) 
N 


=) 
a 


S 
on 


AMPERES 
S 
- 


Ig |, GRID & PLATE CURRENT 


. 3 
80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 
VOLTS 
E, PLATE VOLTAGE 
Braet] 


current as great as 3.75 amperes the emission was only 0.5 
ampere. 2 

From some preliminary oscillograph records we knew that in. 
operation the total emission was about 0.8 ampere when the 


filament ammeter read 3.65 amperes. A brief test showed 


that the filament current required to give this much emission 
was 4.00 amperes but this seemed like an excessive current so 
we got the characteristics required from extrapolation. In 
Fig. 16 are shown a set of curves showing the variation of plate 
and grid currents for various filament currents and grid and 
plate potentials. From this set of curves the results given in 


_ Fig. 17 was obtained; as these are important curves they were 


1430 = MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


verified for correctness of form by actually getting them for a 
lower filament current. These are given in Fig. 18, and are of 
just the same form as those of Fig. 17. 

It is well to point out here that even if we had been able to 
get the curves of Fig. 17 with a filament current of 4.00 amperes 
they would not have given the proper values of 7, and 7, for 
the tube in operation. While getting these static characteris- 
tics the plate and grid get very hot, much hotter than when the 
tube is in operation as a generator. The emission from the 
filament is fixed by the filament temperature, and this in turn 
is fixed by the filament current and the temperature of the 
plate; if this is hotter when getting the static characteristics 
than when the tube is generating, the value of 7, and 7, obtained 
would probably be too large. 


0.5 


450 


® =F, Volts| 


AMPERES 


1, GRID & PLATE CURRENT 


b 
oO 
~~ 


Ig 


80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 
VOLTS 
E, PLATE VOLTAGE 


Fig. 18 


The curves of Fig. 17, in connection with Fig. 13 enable us 
at once to give the minimum potential to which the plate should 
drop and the maximum positive potential for the grid. In 
order to make the area A Fig. 13 small the plate potential, at 
time 7/2, should be as low as possible. This minimum will be 
controlled however by the other requirement that the area C 
should be large. If during the time when e, is low 7, does not _ 
have its maximum possible value (saturation current) then the 
positive alteration of 7 will not be as large as it should be and if 
this is not large the power input to the load circuit, determined 
principally by the area of C, will be lower than its proper value. _ 

As the average value of i must be zero, if its positive loop is 
to be as large as possible, and the area of A to be kept as small 
as possible the conditions should evidently be so adjusted that 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1431 


at minimum plate potential saturation current should flow, and 
this flow should last for a short time only. During the rest of 
the cycle the plate current should be zero. 

Fig. 19 shows the calculated losses on the plate and input to 
the load circuit for four different forms of plate current, the 
plate voltage having the same form for each. It will be seen 
that both the losses and the output of the tube are greatest for 
the sinusoidal plate current, but the efficiency for this condition 
is only 39 per cent; as the form of plate current approaches a 
short pulse the efficiency increases, being 82 per cent for the 


fore | ise ice t — 
i ae / a 
icy Yas ol, oN. ] | p 
| | 
| 


CI 


EEE EH 


LH Hise | Te 


f eptpdt = 72 fe Uy dt = 35 f epipd! = 35 If 2p bp dt = 7 

feptpdt = 47 fepip dt = 31 fepipdt = {28 feptpdt = 23 ty 

EFFICIENCY =39% Rvricrawer 47% Erriciency =49% Bresummere 77%\ 
Fig. 19 


form shown in curve (d). The trapezoidal form shown at (c) 
resembles very closely the form we used; the test actually gave 
about 60 per cent efficiency. 

All four curves are drawn with the maximum plate current 
the same, supposedly the saturation current for the filament 
current used; by carrying out other constructions it will be 
evident that any other condition would result in poorer opera- 
tion. 

By referring to Figs. 18 and 17 it may be seen that for the 
tube we have, the plate potential should not fall lower than 200 
volts, that at this time the grid should have a positive potential 


1432 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


of 150 volts. With greater or less grid potential, the plate 
potential being 200 volts, the plate current would be less than 
saturation value; with less plate potential the current (at 
time 71/2) would be less than saturation value, and with 
greater voltage than 200 volts the loss on the plate would be 
greater than necessary. 

It is to be noted that the efficiency will increase for all the 
cases given in Fig. 19 if the value of the power supply, E,, is 


T 


Sf eripdt = 15 fepipdt = 19 
fepidt = 345 fepidt = 71.5 
Erriciency = 70% |Erriciency = 79% 
Fig. 20 


increased, providing that conditions are suitably changed to 
have the same minimum plate voltage as given in Fig. 19. 
This is shown by Fig. 20; the two cases given suppose the same 
form of plate current and same minimum value of plate voltage 
but in the second the voltage HE, is about twice as large as in 
the first case. It is seen that the loss on the plate is increased 
only 25 per cent whereas the input to the load circuit has been 
more than doubled. The higher the value of EH, the higher is 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1433 


the efficiency, the limit being fixed by the safe voltage for the 
tube. 

In the tube we used the efficiency did not rise as high as 
might be expected, due to fact that it took excessively high 
negative potential on the grid to bring the plate current to 
zero. The oscillograms showed this effect, so a static character- 
istic curve was taken to investigate this point; it is shown in 
Fig. 21. If equation (1) were valid for this tube a negative po- 
tential of 260 volts on the grid would have brought the plate 
current to zero, whereas it took about 1000 volts; although 
the plate current is small with a grid negative more than 300 
volts, this small current has a marked effect on the loss of power 
on the plate, because of the very high plate voltage during that 
part of the cycle when this small current is flowing to the plate. 


0.2 


ico] 


pl= 1000 Volts 


F365 Amp. 


AMPERES 
° 


PLATE CURRENT 


Vy 
° 
= & 
mas 


200 -300 -400 500 


VOLTS 
E. GRID VOLTAGE 
Fig. 21 


Experimental proof of foregoing theory. ‘To test the validity 
of the ideas presented above a series of runs was made with 
the tube, using the circuit given in Fig. 12 and the results 
therefrom are shown in Table I. The frequency was kept at 
the resonant value for the output circuit and each time a set 
of readings was taken the value of R was changed properly to 
maintain the current in the oscillating circuit constant. This 
was necessary in order to keep the form of the voltage, e,, con- 
stant as the values of E, and EH, were varied. While it was 
not thus pointed out in discussing the current forms of Figs. ’ 19 
and 20 the values of E. and E, are the factors which bring 
about the change of current form as the form of e, is maintained 


1434 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


constant. The form of current shown in (a) Fig. 19 was ob- 
tained with relatively low EH’, and E,, the value of each of these 
being increased for the succeeding diagrams of the figure. 


TABLE I. 
Ep = 1000 volts. Ci = 2yF. C2 =3.91pF. ~= 138. Li =9.8H. If = 3.65 Amp. 


Rita ee Eg Input Te R Outpat |7 = Outoat 
volts effective watts effective wo RI? Input 
volts amps. watts % 
E 120 220 334 0.98 149 143 42.8 
150 220 298 1.00 149 149 50.0 
180 220 241 1.02 119 124 51.5 
210 220 186 1.00 89 89 47.8 
250 220 119 0.96 42 39 32.8 
150 260 302 1.00 149 149 49.3- 
180 260 273 1.03 149 158 58.0 
210 260 241 1.99 149 146 60.5 
240 260 197 0.99 119 117 59.5 
270 260 161 0.96 89 82 51.0 
150 300 302 1.00 149 149 49.3 
180 300 283 1.02 149 155 54.8 
210 300 261 1.02 149 155 60.0 
240 300 246 1.00 149 149 60.8 
270 300 212 0.98 134 129 60.8 
A 180 340 291 1.01 149 152 5203 
210 340 278 03 149 158 56.8 
240 340 265 1.04 149 161 60.8 
270 340 244 1.01 149 152 62.4 
B 300 340 229 0.99 149 146 63.8 
330 340 186 0.99 119 117 63.0 
270 400 260 1.02 149 155 59.7 
300 400 250 103 149 158 66.3 
330 400 235 1.02 149 155 66.0 
360 400 222 1.00 149 149 67.3 
390 400 197 0.96 134 124 63.0 
420 400 150 1.02 89 93 61.8 
C 450 400 126 0.98 74 gh 56.3 
D 410 460 228 1.02 149 155 68 
420 500 245 1.05 149 164 67.0 
450 500 237 1.04 149 161 68.0 
480 500 222 1.01 149 152 68.6 
510 500 195 1.04 119 129 66.2 
540 500 176 1.02 104 108 61.5 
570 500 157 1.04 89 96 61.2 


In Fig. 22 are shown the efficiency curves for the various 
runs of Table I and on the curve sheet are given the calculated 
values of the maximum positive grid potential for that condi- 


Pos _- 


’ 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1435 


tion in each run which gave maximum efficiency, as indicated 
at a, b, c, d, etc., For the comparatively low value of current 
in the oscillating circuit which obtained during these tests 
the form of plate voltage is somewhat different from a sine 
wave, and the variation of best grid potential may have been due 


60 


= ) 
z = E.1-500 Volts 
oS 3 Point a: eg, = 140 Volts oe 
ic = eg = 158 Volts _ Point ¢: ee. = 175 Volts 
AG :eg = 180 Volts Point e: eg 210 Volts 
Point f: eg 230 Volts 
1 : =} 
100 200 300 400 500 
« VOLTS 
Ee 
Fie; -22 


to this cause. It is also possible that the change in efficiency 
was caused by the change in minimum plate current for the 
different excitations. The increase in efficiency with increase 
of EZ, and E, is as would be expected from the analysis 
given for Fig. 19. 

A series of runs was then carried out (results given in Table IT) 


TABLE II. 
Ep = 1000volts. Ci = 2yF. C2 = 3.91 pF. ~=138. Li = 9.8H. If = 3.65 Amp. 
ep Ec¢ Eg Input T2 R Output | Beas 
Tener min volts effective watts | effective w = RI.? Input 
volts volts amps. watts watts 
A 30 270 300 ° 134 1.12 37 46.5 34.7 
100 270 300 179 1.10 85 103 57.5 
160 270 300 204 1 02 117 122 59.8 
250 270 300 217 0.91 149 123 56.8 
B 490 270 300 255 0.60 297 107 42.0 


to study the effect of varying the value of the minimum plate 
voltage, other conditions remaining the same; this was ac- 
-s complished by varying R, thus cutting down the value of the 
oscillating current and hence the variation of voltage across 
the condenser C,, Fig. 12. The variation of potential across 
this condenser, it will be noticed, is what controls the fluct- 


uation of plate voltage. 


> — 


1436 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


The value of minimum plate voltage can be ¢alculated by 
subtracting from E, the I, resistance drop through L; (which 
-was very small for most of our tests) and from this subtracting, 
the maximum value of the alternating potential drop across 
C,. These calculations were made and the results are shown 
in the curve of Fig. 23; the results verify, better than might 
be expected, the conclusions reached from theory. With the 
exception of the first value of e, (min.) the calculated values 
agreed with the values measured from the films; the value 
of 830 was obtained by measurement of the films the cal- 
culated value not agreeing very well in this case. Too much 
reliance cannot be placed on the results of this test however 
as the exact form of the e, curve might affect the results con- 
siderably; as the value of R was varied the relative magni- 
tudes of i and i, (Fig. 12) changed and this would: affect 
the form of é,. 

For various of the runs given in Table I oscillograms were 
taken of some or all of the quantities involved. For the con- 
ditions of run A the curves of e,, e,, and 2, are given in Fig. 24. 
From this film, as from the succeeding ones, the first thing to 
be noticed is that the grid voltage and plate voltage are just 
180 degrees out of phase, showing that the load circuit was 
resistive only. The maximum positive potential of the grid 
measures on the film 296 volts and the corresponding value 
of plate potential measures 
220 volts. By reference to 
the curves of Fig. 17 it may 
be seen that for these re- 
spective voltages a large part 
of the electron current is 
drawn to the grid, resulting 0 200 400 
in the peculiar double nears 
humped curve of plate cur- = 

: : Ig. 23 

rent. The maximum negative 

grid potential was 650 volts, but even this was not sufficient to — 
make the plate current zero. Its values follow, exactly as can 
be measured, the values given by the curve of Fig. 21. The 
slight deformation occurring on the positive alternation of E, 
is due to the pulse of current taken by the grid at this part of 
the cycle; the wave form of the alternator used for E, was 
nearly a pure sine wave, as may be seen from some of the other 
films to be given, in which the grid took no current. 


¢ 


60 


WZ) erriwit NUT 
PERCENT 


> 
o 
{ 
l 


— Run A Tasie I 
Fig. 24 


PLATE LXl. 
Ae le BoE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 


PLATE LXIl. 
A. |. E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


rt elie 


Area A=590 
Area B=180 
Area C =1030 


Efficiency= 
_ 850 = 5 
$50+590 


9% 


ie ; TE HELV = 1040 1,=0.296 E,=300 Ey= 340 f =140 
ara aR HE jLosses not caused by Tube= 70.5 Watts 
(EAE), 1,- Losses =237 Watts input 

AEG TTR=149 Ohms I,=0.97 Output= 140 Watts 


i Efficiency = 2 = 59.2% 


ssuecsee 
t 


aes aceat 


Bil HHUGUDS Jud teateatted teat EH 237 
as HH nee + aaa! 
+ ettataeas Hitt 

it ‘ e He 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 


Kre. 25 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR "1437 


For run B a set of oscillograms was taken to show all of the 
quantities involved in the operation of the tube; it required 
five oscillograph records to get all the quantities wanted. 
These five films were combined to make the record shown in 
Fig. 25; in fitting the various films together care was taken to 
see that they had their proper respective phases. The white 
line drawn vertically through all the records gives a line of 
equi-phase. 

This set of curves gives the complete story of the circuit 
and tube. The plate current is very nearly the form shown in 
Fig. 20, and the plate potential is nearly of the form shown in 
condition (a) of the same figure. The slight depression in the 
peak value of 7, is due to the grid taking some current, this 
depression coinciding in time with the peak of grid current. 
The form of the positive alternation of the 2 curve is not like 
those previously given, due to the fact that it has been as- 
sumed that I, was constant whereas it actually had considerable 
fluctuation, as shown in the record. If the coil used for L, 
had more inductance this variation in J, would be diminished; 
we had only 10 henries with a resistance of 189 ohms, the coil 
being air core. In practise an iron core coil of greater in- 
ductance would be used but we did not want to introduce any 
other sources of distortion than the tube itself. 

The form of current in condenser C;, differs from that in con- 
denser C, because of the effect of 7,, which will practically all 
flow through C;, for the circuit as arranged. 

The grid current has just the form and magnitude predictable 
from Fig. 17; the amount of current taken by the grid in this 
test and the values of E, and EF’, used caused a loss of power 
on the grid (due to bombardment) of about 10 watts. 

The two filament currents 7; and i,’ have forms which might 
be predicted from curves similar to those given in Fig. 15; in 
that end of the filament carrying the large current the con- 
tinuous current ammeter measuring the current indicated only 
3.65 amperes whereas the current actually went as high as 
3.99 amperes when the plate was taking its maximum current. 
The exact amount of emission from the filament when the 
tube is acting as a generator cannot be predicted from the 
static characteristic; the temperature distribution in the fila- 
ment which exists in the oscillating condition cannot be dupli- 
cated in a static test and it is this temperature distribution 
which determines the emission. 


1438 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 16 


The drop across the condenser C, was taken to see whether 
or not it had the right magnitude and phase to serve for excita- 


SPYVareE Les. SAGES 
N 
8 


PN eld ba aera 
moh ned Caeee ores, 
RES eeS 
Hoa a9 |e Ga 
ee eee 


Fig. 26 


4. 


PUaxe Currenrs. 


tion of the grid when the tube was run self-exciting; the value 
of C; had been adjusted with this point in mind. . 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1439 


_The scheme of getting the efficiency indicated in Figs. 19 
and 20 was tried on this record of e,, 27>, and 7, the power curves 
of e,7, and e,2 being shown in Fig. 25; the value obtained, 
59 per cent, agrees within the precision of the test with that 
measured by the meters in the test. The value of 63.8 per 
cent given in Table I was the value obtained when the oscillo- 
graph circuits were not connected; the closing of the circuits 
changed the conditions enough to drop the efficiency to 59.5 
per cent. 

Fig. 26 shows the form of 7, which is predicted from Fig. 17 
after the forms and magnitudes of e, and e, have been assumed; 
this form of 7, is very close to the actual form given in the oscillo- 
gram of Fig. 25. 

The result of our tests and analysis have then shown that 
the efficiency of a tube as a generator can be accurately pre- 


dicted from the three sets of curves given in Figs. 14, 17, and 
21 after we have determined, from the curves of Fig. 17, what 
the best minimum plate potential is and also what the maxi- 
mum positive potential of the grid should be. 

To get a fair efficiency (60 per cent or better) the value of I, 
should not be greater than 25 per cent of the saturation current 
of the tube; with the efficiency known and the safe radiation of 
power from the plate being known, the proper value of E; is 
fixed. 

Self Excited Tube. Using the circuit and constants used in 
getting the records of Fig. 25 an attempt was made to run the 
tube self exciting by changing the connections slightly as shown 
in Fig. 27. The choke coil L. serves to prevent the grid from 
being short-circuited to the filament (for the a-c. excitation) 
through the machine E,. The voltage for excitation was 


1440 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: (Oct. 10 


obtained from the drop across the condenser C2, the insulating 
condenser C; being necessary to prevent short-circuiting the 
machine #;. With this connection the grid does not get quite 
as much excitation as shown by the curve e,2 in Fig. 25, be- 
cause an appreciable part of this voltage is used in overcoming 
the reactance drop in C3. (In this calculation the capacity of 
the grid circuit of the tube itself must be considered; in some 
of the type P tubes this capacity is as high as 200 u uw f. when 
the load circuit has its proper impedance for maximum output.) 

The circuit of Fig. 27 refused to act as it did for the separate 
excitation, giving a small output at a low efficiency; a more 
careful examination of the record in Fig. 25 gave the reason. 
The alternating components of e, and e, must be exactly 180 
degrees out of phase if the maximum output and efficiency are 


Grid excilalon at adjustable pase 
Fig. 28 


to obtain, as becomes at once evident if the construction of 
Fig. 19 be carried out for any other than the 180 degree rela- 
tion. Measurement of the film of Fig. 25 shows e,. to be 33 
degrees out of the 180 degree phase with e, and that much phase 
displacement is sufficient to completely upset the conclusions 
so far reached. It was therefore necessary to change the 
relative phases of e, and e.2. A possible scheme is conventionally 
indicated in Fig. 28; a rotating field is produced by proper 
connection to the load circuit and a rotatable coil placed in this 
rotating field serves for the grid excitation. We hada simpler 
scheme at hand so did not try this one. 

The difference in phase in the voltages across C, and C, 
comes from the effect of the current i, present in C, toa greater 
extent than in C;. By making the effect of this current small 
its disturbing effect may be reduced, and this can be done by | 


° 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1441 


increasing the values of C, and C2, and decreasing the value 
of R, the value of L being properly reduced to maintain the 
same frequency. The increase in capacity will increase the 
value of the oscillatory current 7; and as i remains constant 
its effect on the relative phases of e¢,, and e.. becomes pro- 
portionately less. 

The arrangement of apparatus remaining as in Fig. 12 the 
constants were readjusted for efficient operation and a set of 
readings was obtained as follows; EH, = 900 volts, FE. = 230 
volts, EZ, = 310 volts, frequency = 148, L, = 9.8 henries, 
I, = 0.321 amperes, C,; = 9.2 microfarads, C. = 18.4 micro- 
farad. The resistance of the load circuit was 7.80 ohms and 
the oscillatory current produced was 4.30 amperes giving an 
alternating-current output of 143 watts. “The input to the 
tube circuit is obtained from the product H, J, after certain 
losses, not chargeable to the tube circuit, have been deducted. 

The condensers C, and C, each consisted of two condensers 
connected in series because of the high potentials occurring in 
the circuit. In order to make the two individual condensers 
divide the voltage FE’, equally it is necessary that their insula- 
tion resistances be alike, a condition seldom encountered. 
That condenser having the higher resistance (the better one) 
will take all of the EF, voltage as well as its share of the alter- 
nating voltage of the circuit, resulting in its probable break- 
down. To prevent this occurrence leak resistances were used 
across each of the condensers making up C, and C2, the leaks 
each being 21,000 ohms making the leak resistance of C; and C, 
each 42,000 ohms. Subtracting the J?R losses in these leaks 
as well as the J? R loss in the choke coil Ly, gives the input to 
the tube circuit 229 watts; the efficiency was thus 62.7 per 
cent. ; 

Oscillograms taken of the currents in this circuit are given in 
Fig. 29. It is evident that the values of EH’, and FE’, might well 
have been greater, resulting in a higher efficiency because of 
the resultant smaller minimum plate current. Although the 
plate current during the time A — B (Fig. 29) is small, the plate 
voltage is large and so results in a high unnecessary loss on the 
plate. 

The phase of H, is now practically coincident with that of 
E, and it should therefore serve as a source of excitation. The 
circuit did not give as much power however when made self 


1442 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


exciting as it should, so the constants were changed slightly to 
get more power. As finally tested the self-exciting circuit had 
the constants and performance given herewith: H, = 1040 
volts, I, = 0.335 amperes, C, = 7.36 microfarads, C2 = 13.8 
microfarads, L = 0.201 henry, L; = 9.8 henry, L. = 9.0 henry 
E, = 230 volts, R = 8.0 ohms. The current produced in the 
oscillating circuit was 4. AO amperes resulting in an efficiency of 
57 per cent. 

Fig. 30 shows the currents and voltages in this self exciting 
circuit and it is at once evident why such a low efficiency was 
obtained; the minimum plate voltage instead of being 200 
volts, as it should for this tube, was 300 volts. For this figure 
the curve of plate current included also the alternating part 
of the grid current, hence the absence of the depression at the 
peak value. 

The current through the plate current vibrator reversed 
during part of the cycle, due to the fact that this vibrator 
carried in addition to the plate and grid currents, an alter- 
nating current which resulted from the voltage across the 
condenser C, acting through the reactance of coil L. and 
_condenser C3, Fig. 27. This current is shown as 7x in Fig. 30; 
when the plate current is corrected by-this small amount it is 
seen that the plate current does not reverse, as we know it can- 
not with the conditions as they existed in this test. 

Action of the Tube at High Frequency. It was desired to show 


that the action of the tube was just the same at high frequency 


as at the low frequencies used, so a circuit was arranged similar 
to that of Fig. 27, with smaller values of capacity and induct- 
ance. The choke coils ZL; and Ly used in the previous tests 
would act as condensers of comparatively low reactance at the 


high frequency to be used, so they also had to be changed.. 


The constants of the circuit used were: EH, = 1000 volts, 
I, = 0.285 amperes C, = 0.0144 microfarad, C; = 0.0284 micro- 
farad frequency = 98,500, L; = 0.023 henry, L. = 0.016 henry, 
E, = 240 volts, R = 6.16 ohms (high frequency determina- 
tion). There were no leaks used with the condensers in this 
circuit so that the product E, J, after subtracting the I? R loss 
on the choke coil Z,, gives the input. It is found to be 284 
watts, and as the output to the load circuit was 160 watts the 
efficiency was 56.2 per cent which is in fair agreement with the 
results obtained at 166 cycles. 


LATE LXIill. 
AVIS Ee. JE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Lr pith 
ae i 


EB, =940 I, =0.310 EH, = 230 H, = 310 
= _ R= 7.80 I, = 4.30 
_- Invur = 229 OvrruT = 143. Errictency = 62.5 PER CENT 
. Fic. 29 - AMORECROFT & FRIIS] 


PLATE LXIV. 
A. 1. EE. 
XXXVIII, 1 


sAbeRTOMR GES. 
SESS. — 
ee 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 


= 1040 7, .= 0.835. BF; = 230 
' R=8.00 J, = 4.40 
Input = 272 Output = 155 EFFICIENCY = 57 PER CENT 
Fig. 30 


PLATE LXV, 
A. |. E, E. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


, 32—Ron B Tasue Il 


PLATE XLVI. 
A.| EWE 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


PLATE Lxvii 
Aco wees 
VOL XXXVIII, 1919 


[MORECROFT & FRIIS] 


1919] THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR 1443 


In Figs. 81 to 35 are shown some special oscillograms of the 
plate current, plate voltage, and grid voltage, all for the sep- 
arately excited tube with the circuit shown in Fig. 12; the con- 
ditions of the circuit were as noted in Tables I and II. 

The conditions obtaining when Fig. 35 was taken show 
the best adjustments for efficiency which we were able to get 
with the type P tube; the high efficiency was obtained without 
unduly decreasing the output. If this form of plate current 
could be maintained and the value of EF, be increased to 3000 
volts the calculated efficiency becomes 85 per cent; this is 
probably as good as could be done with sine wave shapes of 
é, and e, but it seems as though, by suitably deforming both 
of them, the efficiency could be considerably increased over 
this figure. 

Tests similar to those described in this paper were carried 
out using a much smaller tube, that styled by the Signal Corps 
VT-2. The results obtained with the large tube were dupli- 
cated almost exactly in so far as efficiency was concerned. 
Although the normal adjustments used with these tubes were 
such that the tube efficiency was about 30 per cent it was found 
possible to so adjust the values of FE’, and E,, that the tube 
gave an output of 6.3 watts with an efficiency of 70 per cent 
the voltage used in the plate circuit being the rated value, 
namely 300 volts. It was found possible to get over 7 watts 
output with the plate loss considerably lower than its safe 
rated value; if the plate voltage had been increased to perhaps 
400 volts the tube output might have been raised to 10 watts 
while still having the plate loss within its safe value. 

These tests were all carried out with a separately excited tube; 
with the tube self excited the efficiency was not obtained higher 
than 61 per cent, with a plate voltage of 300. This run gave 
an output of 5.6 watts output with a current J, of 0.0305 
amperes; the frequency was 400,000 cycles, the value of R 
was 53 ohms, the oscillating current 0.325 amperes, C, and C; 
being 1360 and 770 micro-micro-farads, respectively. The 
value of H, was 40 volts. 

With the conditions of a self excited circuit adjusted for the 
best conditions as previously outlined difficulty may be en- 
countered in starting the circuit to oscillate, a shock of some 
kind being generally required to start oscillations. Because 
of this possible difficulty it may be the best practise to run 
tubes separately excited, using one tube, (so adjusted that it 


1444 MORECROFT AND FRIIS: [Oct. 10 


oscillates readily) for exciting others. It may well be that with 
a high resistance in the oscillating circuit more output can be 
obtained from two tubes if one only is used as a generator, 
the other being used as exciter only. Certainly if more than 
two tubes are to be used it will be well to use one as exciter 
for supplying the grid voltage for the others. 

Somewhat more manipulation is required with the separately 
excited tube than with the self excited one because two circuits 
(the resonant circuit of the exciter and the output circuit of 
the power tubes) must be tuned, but the probable increase 
in output will make it worth while. 


Presented at a joint meeling of the.American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Am- 
ertcan Physical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 
October 10, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I.E. E. 


THE POSITIONS OF ATOMS IN METALS 


BY A. W. HULL 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


When a narrow beam of X-rays passes through a fine powder 
of any crystalline material, it produces on a photographie plate 
placed just behind the powder a pattern of concentric circles. 
These circles are produced by the reflection of the X-rays from 
the planes of atoms in the crystal, and their diameters are a 
measure of the distances between these planes of atoms. By 
measuring the diameters of the circles the exact positions of the 
atoms can be determined. The results of this analysis are given 
for twenty common metals and several salts; with examples and 
brief description of the method, and a discussion of the results. 


AR HE determination of the exact positions of atoms in solid 
bodies is the next to last of a series of discoveries, that 
have made atoms as real as the bricks of which houses are built. 
The atom of 20 years ago was the “hypothetical smallest sub- 
division of matter.’ The atom of today is a real object of 
definite shape and size. We know what it is made of. We 
know its weight in grams. We can see its splash when it im- 
pinges on a plate of fluorescent material. We know its exact 
speed when it flies about as gas. And, lastly, we know its 
exact position when it forms part of a solid body. 

A brief enumeration of these discoveries is a necessary in- 
troduction to the following discussion. 

First came the discovery of dancing molecules. Heat had 
been considered a substance. The “Kinetic Theory of Gases’ 
proved that it is a condition, viz., the motion of the molecules, 
which fly about like frenzied bees, bumping against each 
other and the walls of their enclosure. Through this discovery, 
all the store of facts and laws about gases can be correlated by 
the single picture of these dancing molecules. We believe in 
these dancing molecules as firmly as in the law of gravitation. 
Whenever we think of gas we see dancing molecules. 

The next discovery was J. J. Thomson’s streaming electrons. 
Our text-books taught, and some still do, that electricity is 
not a fluid, though it behaves in many ways likeone. Thomson 


1445 


1446 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


proved that electricity is a fluid, that its atoms are the electrons 
which constitute the atoms of matter, and that it flows through 
wires just as water flows through pipes. 

Next came the weighing of the atom. Faraday showed long 
ago how to determine the weight of an atom in terms of the 
charge it carries in electrolysis. There remained, therefore, 
only the measurement of this “unit charge” viz., the charge of 
a single electron, by Millikan, to give the exact weight in grams 
of any atom that can be deposited electrolytically. As soon 
as the weight of any one atom is known, the weights of all the 
others can at once be calculated from the known relative 
atomic weights. 

Then came the counting of individual atoms. This began - 
with Sir William Crookes’ “spinthariscope,’”’ and culminated in 
the beautiful experiments of Rutherford and Geiger, in which 
they counted one by one the helium atoms (the so-called “a 
particles’) as they emerged from the surface of disintegrating 
radium; and then allowed them to pass, one by one, into a 
thin-walled glass tube, until enough had accumulated to form 
a gas whose pressure could be measured and spectrum analyzed. 

These counting experiments led directly to the determination 
of the composition of the atom. J.J.Thomson had proved that 
every atom contains electrons. Rutherford proved that it also 
contains a positively charged kernel or nucleus, very small 
compared to the whole atom, but so dense that it contributes 
nearly the whole weight of the atom. The hypothetical atom 
thus became a concrete thing that can be visualized; a tiny, 
(but large enough to be studied) solar system, with nucleus sun 
and electron planets. The only respect in which one kind of 
atom differs from another is the magnitude of the positive 
charge of the nucleus, which determines how many electrons it 
can hold in its planetary system, and hence all its physical and 
chemical properties. 

Finally came the discovery, by the Braggs, of the method of 
determining the positions of the atoms in solid bodies. The 
beautiful “point lattices” of the crystallographers were hypo- 
thetical. They enumerated possibilities, but could not point 
out the reality. The Bragg measurements of atomic distances 
give the actual arrangements. They are as accurate and 
reliable as those of the surveyor or astronomer. The only 
assumption made is that the arrangement of atoms is a regular 
one which repeats itself, and this assumption can be checked by 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1447 


experiment. The method consists simply in the measurement, 
by means of a special ‘‘measuring rod” which will be described, 
of the distance between atoms in three or more different direc- 
tions. From these measurements a model can be constructed, 
which can then be checked by further measurements. The 
model must also agree with known physical properties of the 
substance, such as density, atomic weight, and crystal habit. 
A model which contains but one kind of atoms and satisfies all 
these tests may be regarded as very reliable. The reliability 
is still further increased by the fact that all the models investi- 
gated thus far have turned out to be very simple. In cases 
where there is more than one kind of atom, i.e., compounds or 
alloys, an additional factor, viz., the size and shape of the 
atoms, must be taken account of. There is one type of 
compound, containing only two kinds of atoms, whose struc- 
ture is so simple that it cannot be misunderstood. Examples 
of this type will be included in the following discussion. Com- 
pounds containing more than two kinds of atoms have not yet 
been sufficiently studied to warrant their discussion, but there 
is every reason to believe that their analysis will be equally 
simple and reliable. 

In the following pages, there will be given, first, a general 
survey of the results obtained, then a brief description of the 
method of measurement, and lastly, a more complete discussion 
of the individual models and some of their properties. 

I have referred to the location of atoms as next to last in the 
series of atomic discoveries. For in order to complete the 
picture, one more discovery is necessary, viz., the shape and 
size of the atom. An excellent beginning in this direction has 
already been made by Langmuir! whose theory of atomic 
structure predicts the shapes and relative sizes of all the atoms, 
and gives strong chemical evidence in favor of these predictions. 
The author hopes soon to be able to add the evidence of X-Ray 
measurements, which will determine not only the shape but the 
exact size of the atoms, that is, the een of the electrons in 
the atoms. 

2. Summary of Results. The most striking result of these 
investigations is the extreme simplicity of arrangement of 
atoms in common metals. Among the metals thus far ex- 


1. Langmuir, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 41, 868, June, 1919. 
2. Hendrick, J. Chem. Met. Eng. 21, 3, July, 1919. 


1448 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


amined only three types of atomic arrangement are found, 
and these are, with one exception, the three simplest geo- 
metrical arrangements’ known. The simplest arrangement 
of all is not found among metals, but is characteristic of salts, 
which are composed of equal numbers of positive and neg- 
ative ions. This type and a fifth type, also very simple, 
which is characteristic of non-metallic elements, will be in- 
cluded in the discussion for the purpose of comparison. 

The most common arrangement.in metals is the face centered 
cubic arrangement, shown in Fig. 1. This is also the most 
important since most of the useful metals,—e. g., aluminium, 
nickel, cobalt, copper, silver, platinum, gold,—have this ar- 
rangement of atoms. Perhaps it would be better to say that 


Fig. 1A—Facr CenTERED Cusic ARRANGEMENT (CuBic CLosp Packine) 


those substances are most useful as metals which have this 
arrangement, since, as will be shown later, their ductility is 
due largely to this arrangement. 

The face-centered cubic arrangement is obtained by dividing 
the space occupied by a single crystal or ‘‘grain’” of metal up 
into a system of equal, closely packed cubes (Fig. 1A) and 
placing an atom at each cube corner and at the center of each 
cube face. All the atoms in this arrangement, both corner and 
face atoms, are similarly situated as regards symmetry and 
relation to neighbors. Each atom is surrounded by twelve 
others, all equidistant and exactly similarly situated for every 
atom. It is this high degree of symmetry, combined with the 
close packing, that makes substances of this type so ductile. 
This arrangement is known as “cubic close-packing” and is 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1449 


one of the two alternative arrangements that equal hard 
spheres assume (Fig. 1B) when pressed tightly together, with 
sufficient shaking to allow them to find their places. This 
suggests, and the other evidence at hand points to the same 


Fig. 1s —FAcr CENTERED CusBic ARRANGEMENT (CuBIc CLosE PAcKING) 


conclusion,” that the atoms of the substances which have this 
arrangement are fairly spherical in shape. The necessary 
shaking corresponds to the temperature required for ‘‘anneal- 
ing.” The only difference between the packing of balls and 


Fig. 1c—Face CENTERED Cusic ARRANGEMENT (CuBic CLosE PAcKING) 


that of atoms of this kind is the ability of the atoms to hold 
-on to each other after they have found their places. 

There is one important exception to the rule that the most 
ductile, and therefore the most generally useful, substances are 


2. ef. Langmuir, l. ¢. p. 878. 


1450 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


those whose atoms are in face-centered cubic arrangement, 
viz., iron. The atoms of iron, and also of chronium, molyb- 
denum, tungsten, and the alkali metals, are in centered cubic 
arrangement (Fig. 2). This arrangement is obtained by divid- 
ing the space occupied by a single crystal or grain into equal 
close-packed cubes, and placing an atom at each cube corner 
and each cube center. The two sets of atoms, the “‘corner- 
atoms” and the “center atoms,” are interchangeable, so that 
if the system of lines in Fig. 2 had started with one of the center 
atoms, all the corner atoms in Fig. 2 would become center 
atoms and vice versa. Each atom, whether center or corner 
atom, is surrounded by eight others in perfect cubic arrange- 
ment about it, situated always in the same direction and 
at the same distances. Hence this arrangement has the same 


Fig. 3—CENTERED Cuspic ARRANGEMENT 


high degree of symmetry as the face-centered cubic arrange- 
ment. It is not, however, as closely packed. Smooth, hard 
spheres cannot be packed in centered cubic arrangement 
except by the use of constraints, and when so packed are in 
unstable equilibrium. A slight jar causes them to reassemble 
in one of the close-packed arrangements. (Fig. 1 and 3) It 
is evident, then, that the atoms of these elements are either 
not spherical or that they possess some special forces of at- 
traction localized at cube corners (see Fig. 15). : 
The third type of arrangement found in metals is the heza- 
gonal close-packed arrangement (Fig. 3). It is the second of 
the two alternative arrangements which equal hard spheres 
assume when closely packed by pressure and shaking. It is 
less symmetrical than the cubic close packed arrangement, but 


PLATE LXVIII. 


AQ AS BRE: 


XXXVIIT, 1919 


VOL 


\ 
\ 


! 
Gieoeras a xe 
Sage eee \ 


NAL CLosE-PAacKED ARRANGEMENT 


AGO 


Hex 


2 


Fie 


[HULL 


Fig. 5—TETRAHEDRAL ARRANGEMENT 


PLATE LXIX. 
A. 1. £. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


7-3s—MoLyYyBDENUM 


[HULL] 
Fig. 7-Aa—ALUMINUM 


. Fig. 


Fra. 8—X-ray Spectrum or TuNnGsTEN 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1451 


equally close packed. The two are closely related, and each 
can be produced from the other by a simple gliding, as will be 
shown later. This is the arrangement taken by the atoms of 
magnesium, zinc, cadmium electrolytic cobalt, and probably 
to some extent by all cubic close-packed metals when strained 
(so as to cause gliding.) This arrangement is formed by divid- 
ing the space occupied by a single crystal of the substance into 
a series of equal closely packed right triangular prisms, the 
bases of which are equilateral triangles, and the altitudes equal 
to 1.638 times the length of the sides of the triangles. (Fig.1A.) 
An atom is located at each prism corner and at half of the prism 
centers. This arrangement is simpler and more symmetrical 


Fic. 4—Stmpte Cusic ARRANGEMENT 


than it appears. Each atom is surrounded by twelve others, 
all equidistant and uniformly spaced about it in dodecahedra 
arrangement. These dodecahedra are of exactly the same di- 
mensionsas in the cubic close-packed arrangement, but are not 
quite regular, the upper half being rotated 60° from the posi- 
tion corresponding to a regular dodecahedron. 

There are two other simple types of arrangement, which, 
though they do not occur among metals, are important for 
comparison, and their description will make clearer the distin- 
guishing features of metals. 

The first is the simple cubic arrangement (Fig. 4). It is 
formed by dividing the space occupied by a crystal into a 
series of equal, closely-packed cubes, and placing an atom at 


1452 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


each cube corner. All the atoms are similarly situated, each 
being surrounded by six others, all equidistanct, in the direction 
of the cube faces. In spite of its great simplicity, it has only 
the same degree of symmetry as the two cubic arrangements 
already described. It is an extremely “loose packed” arrange- 
ment for hard spheres, and would be very unstable. A system 
of equal cubes, however, if packed in this manner would fill all 
space. 

No elementary solid has yet been found whose atoms arrange 
themselves in this manner. This fact might be interpreted as 
evidence that none of the atoms are cubical in shape. There is 
strong evidence, however, that many of the atoms, especially 
those of low atomic weight, are approximately cubical in shape’. 
The fact that when these substances crystallize, their atoms do 
not pack together in simple cubic arrangement, is due rather 
to the nature of the forces holding them together (see discussion 
of iron, tungsten, etc., above.) It may be taken as evidence 
that these forces, in the case of cubical atoms, are not localized 
at the centers of cube faces, but at cube corners. 

The substances which have this simple cubic arrangement of 
atoms are composed of equal numbers of positive and negative 
ions. The positive and negative ions alternate in every direc- 
tion as shown in Figs. 4 and 16, so that each positive ion is 
completely surrounded by six negative ions and vice versa. 
The forces holding these atoms together are different from any 
of ‘those thus far considered. In the cases described above, 
and in the great majority of compounds, the cohesion is due to 
the “stray fields” of the atoms. In these zon compounds it is due 
to the electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged 
ions. This is stronger than the stray fields, and causes the 
atoms to pack together as closely as their shape will allow. 
The fact that they choose to pack in simple cubic arrangement 
is additional evidence that they are cubic in shape. No ion 
compounds of this kind, (i. e. containing equal numbers of> 
positive and negative ions of approximately the same size) 
between spherical atoms have yet been examined, but it is to 
be expected that they will show one of the “close packed’’ 
arrangements (face-centered cubic or hexagonal) described 
above. 

The fifth simple type of atomic arrangement is the tetra-. 


3. (See Langmuir, 1. ¢. 41, p. 892 ff.) 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1453 


hedral arrangement. (Fig. 5.) Each atom is surrounded by 
four others, arranged in a regular tetrahedron about it. It is 
not as symmetrical as the three cubic arrangements described 
above (Figs. 1, 2, and 4) for while each atom is at the center of 
a tetrahedron of neighboring atoms, half of these tetrahedra 
are positive and half negative; 7. e., upside down with respect 
to the first. 

The only substances thus far found with the tetrahedral 
arrangement of atoms are diamond, silicon, and the ‘“‘ion com- 
pound” N H.Cl. There is strong chemical evidence that in 
each of these substances, the unit of structure, (viz. the C and Si 
atom, and the N H, ion) is really tetrahedral in shape. 

The Measuring Machine. The determination of these atomic 
arrangements requires the measurement, in as many different 
directions as possible, of the distance between consecutive 
planes of atoms. The arrangement of atoms, whatever it may 
be, is assumed 'to be a regular one which repeats itself through- 
out the crystal’. This assumption can be checked by the 
result. Through such an arrangement a system of equidistant 
parallel planes can be drawn in any direction whatever so as to 
pass through all the atoms. In most directions, these planes 
will be very close together and sparsely settled with atoms. 
In a few particular directions, however, they will be far apart 
and densely populated These are the directions of easy cleav- 
age and gliding. It is these densely populated planes whose 
distances apart are measured. 

The original measuring machine, by which the pioneer 
measurements were made, was a special form of “spectrometer.” 
It has been simply and charmingly described by its inventors in 
a book® worth reading. The measurements described in this 
paper were made with a modified form of Bragg machine. 
The original machine was applicable only to large, perfect 
crystals, required careful manipulation, and was subject to 
serious error unless the crystals were very perfect and the 
number of observations large. The author’s modification is 
free from these errors, requires but one simple observation, and 
is applicable to all substances which are crystalline, 7. e., all in 
which there is any arrangement to measure. 

5. (If the arrangement is notregular, there is nothing to be measured. 
Such ‘“‘amorphous’”’ solids are very few a number, much fewer than was 


previously believed.) 
6. (W.H. and W. L. Bragg, “‘X-Rays and Crystal Structure” G. Bell 


- & Sons, London.) - 


1454 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


The complete machine is shown in Fig. 6. It consists of a 
small transformer (or other source of high potential) capable of 
supplying 1 kw. at about 30,000 peak volts; a Coolidge X-Ray 
tube, X; a thin sheet of properly chosen material, f, serving as 
filter; a pair-of slits, s; and s2, in metal sheets, to limit the beam 
of X-rays; a tiny glass tube, 7’, containing the powdered 
substance to be measured; and a photographic plate or strip of 
film bent in arc of circle, F. The operation consists in filling 
the glass tube with a few milligrams of the substance to be 
analyzed, powdered as finely as possible; ‘‘loading”’ the photo- 
graphic film holder; exposing over night to X-Rays at 30,000 
peak volts and as many milliamperes as the tube will carry 


Fic. 6—Powprer PuotograpH APPARATUS 


safely without watching, (a maximum exposure of 300 milli- 
ampere hours); and developing the film. 

Typical photographs are shown in Fig. 7A and 7B. Fig. 7A is 
a photograph of aluminium filings, taken witha plate and very 
short slits, so that the trace of the direct beam in the center of 
the plate is a circular spot. Fig. 7B is a photograph of moly- 
bdenum powder, taken with circular film and slits as shown in 
Fig. 67. In this case the traces of the circles on the film show 
as nearly straight lines. The circles and lines are due to the 

7. The central line and first “reflected” line in Fig. 7B have been par- 


tially absorbed by a “‘stepped”’ filter, placed directly in front of the film, 
for the purpose of measuring the intensity of the lines. 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN§METALS 1455 


“reflection” of the X-rays by the tiny crystals of molybdenum 
in the tube, as will be described later. The distances of these 
circles or lines from the central line on the film are nearly pro- 
portional, inversely, to the distances between the planes of 
atoms, and from them these atomic distances can be easily and 
quickly calculated. Some examples of calculation are given 
below. 

The Measuring Rod. The measuring rod by which these 
atomic distances are measured is the wave-length of a particular 
X-ray. 

The possibility of measuring the dimensions of any physical 
body depends, primarily, upon the possession of a measuring 
rod of length comparable with the dimensions to be measured. 
Thus, the discovery and calibration of wave-lengths of visible 
light opened up a whole new field of measurements, comparable 
in length with this new measuring rod, such as the thickness of 
films, imperfection of polished surfaces, displacement of vibra- 
ting membranes, increase in length due to thermal expansion, 
etc. In the same way, the discovery that X-rays are of the 
same nature as light, and the isolation and calibration of 
X-ray wave-lengths, opened up a vast new field of measure- 
ments of dimensions comparable with the wave-length of 
X-rays; viz., atomic dimensions. 

We are accustomed to think of the measurement of things 
too large or too small to see and touch as necessarily very 
rough and approximate. It is somewhat of a surprise, there- 
fore, to note that the only measurements accurate enough to 
justify the use of eight-place logarithm tables are those of 
astronomy; that wave-lengths of light are measured to 1 part 
in 10,000,000; and that the wave-length of X-rays, and by 
means of it, the distances between atoms, can easily be meas- 
ured to 1 part in 100,000. 

The spectrum of X-rays is exactly like that of visible light, 
except that the wave-lengths are shorter. - It consists (Fig. 8) 
of bright lines superimposed upon a continuous spectrum. The 
wave-lengths inthe X-ray spectrum depend upon anode 
material and voltage (Figs. 9 and 10) in exactly the same way 
that the wave lengths in the visible spectrum depend upon 
incandescent material and temperature. And just as it is 
possible to obtain nearly monochromatic yellow light by putting 
salt in a flame under proper conditions, so by running an X-ray 
pa EP SEEN Ti Se ER Ee te RT Fada i Aa 


8. (For a more detailed description, see Hull, Phys. Rev. 10, 666, 1917.) 


1456 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS (Oct. 10 


tube with proper anode atjthe right voltage, it is possible to 
produce a single wave length (line) of such great intensity that 
practically all the rest of the spectrum can be absorbed by a 
properly chosen filter, leaving nearly monochromatic X-rays.® 
Fig. 10. Itis in this way that the monochromatic X-rays used 


100 


90 


7O 


TUNGSTEN TARGET 

Na Cl CRYSTAL 

No FILTER 

CURVE NO-/=90 Hv ___ 

80 CURVE NO. P=80 Kv. 
CURVE NO, B= TOKY. 
CURVE NO.F= 60 KY 
CURVE NO 5=S50Kv 
CURVE NO 6=40 KY 


(ONIZATION 


Oe Sn 


ANGLE OF CRYSTAL 
Fig. 9—Erruct oF VoLtTAGE on X-RAY SPECTRUM OF TUNGSTEN 


in these measurements are produced. The ‘measurements 
described in this paper were made with X-rays from a molybde- 
num target operated at 28,000 volts constant potential, and the 
filter was powdered crystal zircon, pressed, with a small amount 
of organic binder, into a sheet 14 mm. thick. The resulting 
spectrum, before and after filtering, is shown in Fig. 10. 


— 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1457 


Calibration of Measuring Rod. The measurement of the 
wave-length of X-rays in centimeters was part of the pioneer 
work of the Braggs’, and was accomplished in the same way 
as the measurement of visible wave-lengths, viz. by the use of 
a “grating” of known dimensions. It is interlocked with the 
determination of crystal structure, since the grating used was 
a crystal, and it was necessary, before using it, to determine its 
dimensions, 7. e. the arrangement of atoms in it. The proce- 
dure was that of experiment and trial. Preliminary experi- 
ments indicated that the atoms of rock salt were in simple 
cubic arrangement, as shown in Fig. 4. Assuming this to be SO, 
a rock salt crystal was used as a grating to measure tentatively 


16 | | T Ht 
te Spectrum of MO X Rays = ~ 
at 28,000 Volts cs nA 
Peete CG 
> — T 
= . 
aw 10; 4 t i = = + Ey + f 
a | | 
i =f a I 
= 
as) | = 
ts No, Filter 
= 
= 6 — li 
a BINS | 
zs Wave Length—> 
4\7 0.35 MM Z, S; 0, Filter 
0.58 MM Z, S, 0, Filter 
7! ( = 
: B 


Cc 
Y 0.46 0.50 0.54 058 0.62 066 0.70 0.74 0.78 0.82 0.86 


Fig. 10—Errect or FIrteER1ING ON MoLtyBDENUM X-RAY SPECTRUM 


the wave-lengths of X-rays. These wave-lengths were then 
used for further investigation of the arrangement of atoms in 
rock salt and other crystals, and were checked and corrected 
by successive trials. pe 

The method of using the rock-salt grating is shown in Fig. 11. 
The crystal C, with its planes of atoms perpendicular to the 
paper, is placed in the path of a narrow beam of X-rays. Each 
plane of atoms acts like a mirror and reflects a small fraction 
of the rays. The reflection is a maximum when the reflected 
waves from all the planes (many million, except in the case of 
very long wave-lengths) are in phase, that is, when each is an | 


_ 9, X-Rays and Crystal Structure, p. 110). 


1458 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


exact wave-length or some whole number of wave-lengths 
behind the next. It is easy to show that this is true only when 


nr = 2dsin 0 (1) 


where n is an integer, usually 1 or 2, \ the wave-length, d the 
distance between planes of atoms, and @ the angle of incidence 
(a in Fig. 11) of the rays on the crystal". 

The determination of \ requires, therefore, the knowledge 
of n, d, and 6. 6 can be observed, and the orders, n, counted. 
d must be determined initially from the physical properties of 


Fic. 11—X-ray SPECTROMETER 


the crystal, viz. its density, atomic weights, and arrangement of 
atoms. This can best be explained by an example: ; 

The atoms of rock salt are in simple cubic arrangement, as 
shown in Fig. 4. There is one atom to each cube, as can be 
seen by displacing all the atoms in Fig. 4 in the direction of a 
cube diagonal to the cube centers. Half of the cubes contain 
sodium atoms and half chlorine atoms. The average weight 
per cube is the mean of the weights of one sodium and one 


10. (It will be observed that in order to measure different wave-lengths 
the crystal must be rotated. This is the only essential difference between _ 
the crystal grating and the ordinary diffraction grating). ‘ 


~ 


PLATE LXX 
Aot_EcE: 
VOL, XXXViIl, 1919 


E [HULL] 
Fig. 12—Typicant X-ray PowpEer PHotToGRAPHS or METAL 


[HULL] 
TypIcAL X-RAY PowpER PHOTOGRAPHS OF SALTS 


Pie 8; 


PLATE LXXl. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 15—Packine or AToMs In CENTERED Cusic ARRANGEMENT 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1459 


chlorine atom, viz. 1/2 (88.00 10-g +58 .50 10% g) =48.25 
x 10-g. Hence the density, which is the weight per unit 


48.25 x 10-% 


volume, must be equal to AD where d is the side 


of one of the small cubes (Fig. 4,) i. e., the distance between 
planes of atoms parallel to the cube faces. This value of 
density must be the same as that obtained by measuring and 
weighing a large crystal, viz. 2.174. This gives 


3} 48.25 X 10-* 


2.174 = 2.814 x 10-8em. = 2.814 A® 


d= 


The wave-length of the “q doublet’? of molybdenum deter- 
mined in this way is 0.712 A%, This is the “measuring rod” 
with which the following measurements were made. 

Interpretation—of Powder Photographs. The X-ray wave 
length thus calibrated can now be used to measure atomic 
distances. If, in the arrangement shown in Fig. 11, the X-rays 
are made monochromatic by proper voltage and filtering, then 
as the crystal is rotated a series of intense reflections will be 
observed at angles whose sines are in the ratio 1:2 :8 etc, 
corresponding to successive integral values of nin Eq. 1. Ifa 
new face is ground on the crystal at an angle to the first, and 
exposed to the rays in the same way, another similar series of 
reflections will be observed, at different angles, corresponding 
to the different distance (d, Eq. 1) between the planes parallel 
to this new face. The process of analyzing a crystal consists 
in observing these reflections from as many faces as possible, 
and calculating, from Eq. 1, the distance between the planes 
parallel to them. When a single crystal is used this requires 
many observations. The work is greatly simplified by using a 
powder, in which all possible orientations are represented at the 
same time by one or more of the tiny crystals, and photo- 
graphing simultaneously the reflections from all these little 
crystals. This is the method sketched in Fig. 6, and gives 
patterns of lines like Figs. 7,12 and 13. It might be expected 


12. (The Angstrom unit or m (= 10-8 em.) which is the standard unit for 
expressing wave-lengths of visible light, is even better suited to atomic 
and X-ray measurements. It will be used or assumed in all the following 
discussions). 

13. (The best measurements of X-ray wave-lengths are those of | 
Siegbahn, Verh. Deut. Phys. Ges. 13,300, 1917. 


1460 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


that the number of lines in these patterns would be infinite, 
since there is an infinite number of different possible planes in 
any crystal. The reflections from most of these planes, how- 
ever, come at angles whose sines are greater than 1, (as is evi- 
dent from equation (1) when d is small) and which therefore do 
not exist.'4 

The analysis of these photographs is very simple in the case 
of simple substances, like pure metals. It consists in finding, 
by successive trials, an arrangement of atoms whose planar 
spacings, beginning with the planes farthest apart and skipping 
none, exactly fit the observed pattern of lines. The calculation 
of the planar spacings for all the important planes is not 
difficult, and with simple substances but few trials are necessary. 

The method of calculation can best be shown by an example. 
Potassium chloride (Fig. 18) gives the simplest pattern of lines 
yet observed. It consists of 6 regularly spaced lines, then a 
slight gap, then 7 more lines, (these may not all show in the 
reproduction), then another gap, etc. The best first guess is 
that a simple pattern like this corresponds to a simple cubic 
arrangement. The equation of solid geometry for the distance 
between planes in a simple cubic arrangement is 


do 
d= ae (2) 


where h, k, and J are any whole numbers, and dy, is the side of 
the cube. The numbers h, k, 1, are called the “indices” of the 
planes. They are the reciprocals of the intercepts of the planes 
on the X, Y and Z axes respectively. 


The largest distance is co , corresponding to the “‘indices”’ 
1, 0,0. This gives the line nearest the center (see equation 1). 


The next line is a4 , given by the planes whose indices are 


d d d 
1,1,0. Then follow —= (1,1, 1), — (2, 0, 0), —% (2, 1,0 
V3 ne | ds Fg 21,0), 
and ae (2, 1, 1). The next line, corresponding to dy ; 


GM] ata (ANGI os an ee a ee 

14. (This means physically that there is no angle of incidence large 
enough to make the reflection from one plane a whole wave-length 
behind that from the one in front.) 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1461 


should be lacking, as there are no three numbers the sum of 
whose squares is 7. Fig. 13 shows that it is ie lacking. 


Then follow, in regular order, —* (2, 2, ere —- (2, 2, 1 and 


a (Slee 1); (2, Bip) aeons 


ts 0) (5,1, :0), 
At Vil V12 H 


(8, 2, 0) and “a (8, 2,1). Then should come another gap, 


corresponding to - Baits , which cannot be formed from the 


squares of three integers. These regularities can be better seen 
in some of the other patterns in Fig. 18, which are exactly 
similar to that of K Cl, except that there are extra lines just 
in front of the first, third and fifth regular lines due to the 
difference in weight and size of the two atoms of which these 
salts are composed. The calculation of the positions of these 
extra lines is also simple, but will not be given here. 
Returning to K Cl, the positions of the lines calculated from 
the above series of inverse square roots are found to coincide 
exactly with the observed pattern. This proves that the 
first guess was correct, that the atoms of K Cl are in simple 
cubic arrangement. The result can be independently checked, 
however, by the density. For the average mass in each of the 
small cubes, divided by the volume of the cube, must equal the 
known density of the substance. The value of dy calculated 


from equation 1 is 3.18 A. The average weight of potassium 
and chlorine atoms is % (64.5 + 58.5) X 10-%g = 61.5 


10-4 
<x 10-% 9g. This gives for the density ise = a0 


which checks with the standard value within experimental 
error). 

One more example may be briefly cited, vz. molybdenum. 
Its pattern is shown in Fig. 10. It is found that the series of 
lines which corresponds to a simple cubic arrangement does not 
fit this pattern. We therefore try a centered cubic arrange- 

15. (These X-ray determinations of density are, in general, much more 
accurate than the standard ones). 


1462 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


ment. The distance between planes in this arrangement is 
calculated in the same way as for the simple cubic arrangement, 
except that half the lines, viz. those due to planes the sum of 
whose indices are odd, are lacking’. Hence the relative 
spacings, beginning with the largest, should be proportional to 


1 1 1 
J2 ’ / m 5) aw 6 ? 
these values is found to fit the pattern of Fig.10 exactly. The 
length d, of the side of the small cube is3.15 A. As check, the 


density of molybdenum should be equal to the weight of two 
molybdenum atoms divided by the volume of the cube, 7. e. 


318 X 10-*4 
(3.15 X 10°)’ 


ete. The series of lines calculated from 


= 10.0 which is the correct value. 


DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 


The results of the measurements that have been made thus 
far are summarized in the following table. The list includes 
most of the metals that are easily obtainable in pure form, a 
few simple salts, as examples, and the non-metallic elements 
carbon (diamond) and silicon. The structure of graphite is 
less simple, and will not be discussed here. It apparently 
contains a mixture of forms, produced by gliding, like cobalt. 

‘The case of cobalt is exceptional. A finely powdered sample 
produced by rapid electrolysis showed a mixture of cubic and 
hexagonal close-packing in nearly equal ratio. After annealing 
in hydrogen at 600 deg. this sample showed only the cubic 
form. Another sample, composed of filings from pure cast 
metal, showed slight traces of hexagonal packing, due presum- 
ably to straining. It is probable that the other cubic close- 
packed metals will behave in a similar manner, but this ques- 
tion has not been studied. 


PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 


Many of the physical properties of these substances are 
evident from an inspection of their atomic models. Thus it is 
clear why metals with face-centered cubic arrangement are 
soft and ductile. For in the planes parallel to the octahedral 
faces (the bevelled face in Fig. 1c) the atoms are so closely 
packed that one plane can slip over the one beneath it without 


16. (For details and theory see Hull, Phys. Rev. 10,673, 1917). 


— 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1463 


appreciable elevation, and without the atoms getting away 
from each other’s attractive influence. There are 4 sets of 
planes parallel to which this easy gliding can take place, viz. 
those parallel to the 4 pairs of octahedral faces, and in each 
of these planes there are three equally easy directions. There 
is no direction, therefore, in which a shearing force can be ap- 


TABLE I. 
Length of side Distance-be= 
Deiilontentar tween nearest 
Substance Arrangement of atoms a aTY | atoms (between 
cube in . 
° centers) in 
Angstroms Angetrotke 
erential... seieetcie= ss « Face-Centered Cubic 4.05 2.86 
Cobalte. Cnc ac. See ae 2 (Cubic close-packed) 3.57 2.b2 
AG at icelicnests a.s/sie-« gis" Shear 2 3 3.54 2.50 
CS DEL het cab ie eae > a 3.60 2.54 
PROGINS, oes id 3.82 2.70 
Sil etemae a eas n ola: oie a 4.06 2.87 
PLAGE alive Saye = & 4.02 2.85 
Ee Oe eet eee - 4.08 2.88 
Pea A dale hens obs ae Bye» bs 4.92 3.48 
Mar otants oS. 7 nee eee Centered Cubic 3.50 3.03 
Bodin, 5.5. > tb aes A e 4.30 Baie, 
Chromium, 72 sldeee. id 2.91 2.52 
OTL eros eee cate hs anette fe 2.86 2.48 
Molybdenum.......... s ode DAMES 
BPN ERE CITS 0 (5 sp: ous oo. #9 =e Bo le ek} 
Magnesium............ Hexagonal (close-packed) S228 
Gree lige co sane kee Ne 2.84 
Gea TIUIT . c's pre ele exe a S15) 
(Oo) ST Se ae eer Md uf 2,53 
WHAMOIIG 455 «oats o srereiets Tetrahedral 3.56 1.54 
SSC EM aero sg) crear ees Taal ba 5.43 2.30 
Lithium Fluoride....... Simple Cubic 2.01 2.01 
Sodium Fluoride........ iy 2.81 2.81 
Sodium Chloride........ Ms 2.81 2.81 
Potassium Fluoride..... ef 2.69 2.69 
Potassium Chloride..... 4 3.13 Fa all} 
Potassium Iodide....... 2 3). 55 3..b0 
Magnesium Oxide...... se 2.11 Zak 


plied to a crystal of this kind which would not be nearly parallel 
to one of these directions of easy gliding. 

If the shear takes place in such uniform manner that each 
plane moves over the one beneath it by the same amount, the 
original arrangement is reproduced and no strain results. If 
only the alternate planes move, however, the arrangement 
becomes hexagonal close packing. This is evident from Figs. 


1464 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


144 and 14B, which give the arrangement of atoms in successive 
close-packed planes (dotted and heavy lines resp.) in the cubic 
and hexagonal arrangements respectively. In the cubic ar- 
rangement there are three different positions of the planes, 
and these alternate 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, etc. In the hexagonal ar- 
rangement there are only two positions, which alternate, 1, 2, 
1; 2, ete. 


IN 


4 

SJ e, 

| xX 
V/ 


AV AY 


3 
Fra. 144a—ARRANGEMENT or ATOMS IN SuccEssive PLANES IN CusBic 
CiLosE Packina 


In the hexagonal close packed arrangement there is only 
one set of planes parallel to which this easy gliding can take 
place. Hence a strained metal becomes less ductile to the 
extent to which its arrangement becomes hexagonal, and it 
is evident that mechanical working should produce hardening. 

The centered cubic metals should be somewhat less ductile 
than the face-centered. For the atoms hold on to each other 


eres: 


1919] HULL: ATOMS IN METALS 1465 


at only 8 points (Fig. 15) instead of 12, and are more likely to 
move out of each other’s influence during gliding. 

In the tetrahedral arrangement gliding is impossible. The 
atoms touch at only 4 points, and in jumping from one stable 
position to the next would entirely lose hold of each other. 
This firm interlocking also accounts for the hardness of these 
substances. 

_In the case of the simple cubic salts (Fig. 16) gliding is im- 


Fig. 148—ARRANGEMENT OF ATOMS IN SUCCESSIVE PLANES IN HExXAGO- 
NAL CLosE PACKING 


possible for a different reason. The atoms are held together 
by electrostatic attraction, each ion being surrounded by six 
oppositely charged ions. The process of gliding would bring 
ions of like charge opposite each other, with resulting repulsion 
and cleavage. 

The electrical conductivity of metals depends on the ability 
of electrons to move between the atoms. A discussion of this 
without a better knowledge of the shape and size of atoms 


F Te 4 


1466 HULL: ATOMS IN METALS [Oct. 10 


would be premature. It can be seen at once, however, why 
‘Gon salts” and crystals like diamond are non-conductors. In 
each of these arrangements the electrons in the atoms are in 
complete groups of eight, which is such a stable arrangement!” 
that large forces (corresponding to the dielectric strength of 
the substance) are required to remove them. The atoms of 
metals, on the other hand, have extra electrons which cannot 
find places in these stable shells, and are therefore ‘“‘free” to 
move from atom to atom. 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES 
It is well known that the ferro-magnetism of iron is not a 
specific property of the iron atom, since iron in solution and 
in compounds is in general not ferro-magnetic. The ferro- 
magnetism must depend, not only on the nature of the atoms, 


but on the way in which they are grouped together. It might 
have been anticipated, therefore, that the cause of ferro- 
magnetism was the centered cubic arrangement which is charac- 
teristic of iron. A glance at Table I shows that this is not 
the case. Nickel, which is ferro-magnetic, has a face-centered 
cubic arrangement, like copper. Cobalt is sometimes like 
copper, sometimes like magnesium. ‘Neither is like iron. 
Chromium, on the other hand, which is not ferromagnetic, 
has a centered cubic arrangement like iron. Manganese has 
not yet been obtained sufficiently pure to determine its ar- 
rangement. It is evident, therefore, that while the centered 
cubic arrangement may be favorable to ferro-magnetism, and 
may make iron more magnetic than cobalt and nickel, it is 
not the principal or even an essential factor. 
17. Langmuir, 1. ¢. p. 873. 


Presented at a Joint Meeting of the American In- 
Stitute of Electrical Engineers and the American 
Physical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., October o, 
Igrg. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. B. 


THE PIEZO ELECTRIC EFFECT IN THE COMPOSITE 
ROCHELLE SALT CRYSTAL 


BY A. MCL. NICOLSON 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

The piezo-electric effect is an electro-elastic property of certain 
erystals. It involves the conversion of mechanical into electrical 
energy, and also the converse effect. The paper presents an 
exposition of piezo-electricity and related optical and other 
properties belonging to these crystals. Special reference is made 
to the comparatively large piezo-electric effects produced by 
Rochelle salt crystals prepared so as to develop the natural 
composite structure usually associated with substances which 
have been exposed to shearing stresses, in this case during 
growth. 

Applications of the piezo-electric effect in such crystals to the 
pee aioe and reception of sound, are described and demon- 
strated. 


INTRODUCTION 


HE expression piezo is derived from the Greek ‘‘piezein”’ 
4° signifying “to press.’”’. It relates to a variety of solids 
in the crystalline state, which when subjected to change 
of stress, become electrically polarized. Piezo-electricity, in- 
cludes, also, the reciprocal phenomenon, whereby the same 
crystals dilate or produce stresses when electric charges are 
applied to certain regions. 

Before discussing the piezo-electric effect in these crystals 
it will be of assistance to consider first the optical activity 
exhibited by the same class of crystals. 

For example, quartz and Rochelle salt are piezo-electrically 
active for the same reason that they are optically active, viz., 
on account of their individual structural asymmetry. 

OPTICAL PROPERTIES 

It has been known for a century that certain’ substances 
either in the crystalline state or in solution possess the power 
of rotating the plane of polarization of polarized light. This 
property in the case of the crystal? as also of the solution’ was 


1. Biot. Société Philomathique, Dec. 1815. 
2. Herschel, Roy. Soc. 1820. 
3. Pasteur, Soc. Chim., Paris. 1860. 


1467 


1468 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


shown to be due to structural asymmetry. In crystallography 
this asymmetry is called hemihedrism and refers either to an 
asymmetric arrangement of perfectly regular and superposable 
molecules or to an arrangement of molecules which are them- 
selves asymmetric. For example, quartz and other minerals, 
so far as we know, do not possess molecular asymmetry; yet, 
on account of the right or left handed spiral or other unsym- 
metrical structure prevailing with respect to a principal axis, 
the optical plane of polarization is correspondingly rotated. 
When, however, the mineral structure or crystal is destroyed, 
the optical activity vanishes. On the other hand, the asym- 
metry of the active organic crystals and solutions resides in 
the molecule, and although optical activity is not always 
strongly manifest in the organic crystal, it is generally strong 
in the solution. Each asymmetric molecule takes part in the 
rotation. Inasmuch as the molecule may offer a dextro- or 
laevo-rotation of light, there must necessarily be an asym- 
metric configuration or “‘stereo-isomerism.” This is generally 
described as a molecular structure having that kind of asym- 
metry that is not superposable with its reflected image, 
possessing neither a center nor a plane of symmetry. In 
stereo-chemistry these so-called “‘enantiomorphic” isomers are 
of three kinds: right forms, left forms, and a mixture of both 
types which is optically inactive. 

A crystal may be built up of one or other of the two active 
isomers—of dextro or laevo asymmetry. The corresponding 
hemihedral crystal is identified by certain simple marks— 
such as a particular face which slopes one way in one isomer, 
and the opposite way in the other, and by other indications. 
These two classes of crystal differ only in their geometry—as, 3 
for example, the right hand differs from the left hand, or as a 
right asymmetric tetrahedron differs from a left asymmetric 
tetrahedron. Chemically, their composition and properties 
are identical.® 

Let us consider some other properties in these optical isomers. 
The crystal form. is only one of many ways in which the 
symmetrical or asymmetrical arrangement of the molecules 
4. L. Pasteur, loc. cit., Nernst, Theoretical Chemistry, p. 88, 1911. 
and J. M. Jaeger: Lectures on the Principle of Symmetry, ch. 7., 1917. 


5. The identity persists so far as they are brought together with bodies 
which belong to the symmetrical class of compounds. But if the isomers 
are associated with other bodies of the asymmetrical class of compounds 
then their properties differ. 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1469 


may be manifested. We know that certain physical prop- 
erties determined by the arrangement of atoms and molecules 
within the molecule, according as this is symmetrical or asym- 
metrical, may disclose themselves in the crystal ;°as for example, 
by selective action of solvents on faces, which are attacked 
in different ways, by unequal development of the faces, by 
electrical polarization due to temperature and stresses, etc. 
If we operate by various physical contrivances on certain faces 
or edges of a hemihedral crystal, then we find a non-uniformity 
in the resulting reaction. The etched figures on the prism 
will be unsymmetrical, or different in character on the basal 
planes. Changes in temperature and variations in applied 
stress will develop so-called analogous and antilogous electric 
poles on the crystal, and impressed electric charges will produce 
dilatation or deformation. 


PIEZO-ELECTRICITY 


The same mechanism in asymmetric crystals which operates 
on polarized light to rotate the plane of polarization also causes 
a liberation of electricity when the crystal is elastically de- 
formed, or a dilatation when electric potentials are applied. 
This mechanism is found only in the hemihedral or hemi- 
morphous crystal possessing either the asymmetric arrangement 
of the atoms in the organic molecule such as the tartrates, 
sugar, camphor, etc., or the asymmetric arrangement of the 
mineral molecules such as quartz, tourmaline, boracite, etc. — 

H. and P. Curie’ discovered the effect and proved that it 
was due directly to stresses, or changes in the applied stresses, 
rather than to changes in temperature which, under the name 
of “‘pyro-electricity,”’ had been known previously as a thermal- 
electric property of these asymmetric crystals; and the name 
“‘piezo’-electrique’’ was applied. Examples of piezo-electric 
crystals of the mineral type are shown in the accompanying 
Figs. 1, 2 and 3,—respectively tourmaline, boracite, and 
quartz. Tourmaline is hemimorphic hemihedral characterized 
by having uniterminal crystallographic poles, associated with 
different faces of the crystal, only alternate ones of which are 
developed. Boracite is a hemihedral tetra-hedron and rep- 
resents a cube having four alternate corners truncated. It will 

6. W. H. and W. L. Bragg, X-Ray and Crystal Structure, p. 146., 
J. M. Jaeger, loc. cit., p. 256. 

7. Compt. Rend. 91, pp. 294 and 383, 1880: 

8. Hankel, Abh. saechs. Ges. d. Wiss. 12, 1881. 


1470 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


be noted that in both crystals there are so-called “sharp” 
and “blunt” ends or corners.* If the crystals be pressed 
between sharp and blunt poles, definite electrification of these 
poles results. If the pressure be released a reversal of the 
electric charge takes place. 

Fig. 3 shows a well-known application of the piezo-electric 
effect for measuring small charges. A blade of quartz cut 


Fig. 1—TourRMALINE 


STRESS APPLIED NORMAL To ‘optic’ ELECTRIC” AXES 


Fie. 83—Inpicating PREPARATION OF THE Quartz ‘‘Pimnz0-NLECTRIQUD’’ 


from the crystal as shown, and coated on its sides with tinfoil, 
or silvered, liberates electricity, the quantity of which depends 
directly on the weight which is suspended from it. An elec- 
trification, with the object, for example, of balancing a charge 
on an electroscope, may thus be accurately “weighted out.” 
This method is used in the measurement of ionization currents. 


*See_S.[P. Thompson, Klementary Lessons, in E'ectricity and Magne- 
tism, Lesson VII. 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1471 


The relation between pressure and electric charge for the quartz 
“‘piezo-electrique” as given by Curie is: 
Q=KP 

where Q = chargeine.s. u. 

K = piezo-electric constant = 0.0677 e. s. u. per kg. 

L = length of coating (normal to crystallographic axis) 

| = thickness between coatings 

P = weight attached in kilograms. 

Amongst many mineral and organic crystals investigated 
by the Curies and others,’ the crystal of Rochelle salt was found 
to have the largest piezo-electric constant, approximately, 
10 e.s.u. per kg. Apparently no other crystal has yet been 
found to approach the piezo activity of Rochelle salt, par- 
cularly if the crystal is carefully chosen and specially prepared. 

In 1917 the Research Laboratories of the American Tele- 
phone and Telegraph and the Western Electric Companies 
commenced an inquiry into application of the piezo-electric 
effect. As an outcome of some of the experimental work 
performed, it was found that Rochelle salt was susceptible of 
greatly increased piezo-electric activity. An absolute electric 
charge of 200 e. s. u. per kilogram pressure has been obtained, 
resulting in potentials as high as 500 volts and alternating 
currents measurable through a thermocouple. Acoustic tones 
from a crystal may be heard at a distance of several hundred 
feet. 

Briefly, the increased efficiency is brought about by the 
following conditions: 

1. Selection of particular habit of growth. 

2. Desiccation. 

3. Development of the crystal into a “composite” polar 
structure. 

4, Application of static compression. 

5. Use of electric poles normal to each other. 

6. Application of torque. , 

CRYSTALLOGRAPHY OF ‘‘COMPOSITE”’ ROCHELLE SALT 


Rochelle salt!® crystals are grown from perfect nuclei pos- 
sessing definite form. The nuclei or seed crystals are immersed 
9. See F. Pockels, Winkelmann’s Handb. d. Phys., Bd. IV., p. 783. 


10. The chemical formula for sodium potassium tartrate is 
NaKC.Hi0¢ 5 4H.0. 


1472 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFEECT [Oct. 9 


in a saturated solution! of the salt under identical conditions 
of temperature. The crystals may be grown by the application 
of temperature gradients to saturated solutions of the salt or 
by concentration brought about by its evaporation. The 
former producing a specific type under conditions of rapid 
cooling, is the method preferred. The crystal may be 
grown in the mother liquor by suspending from a clean 
thread, by flotation on mercury, or by being laid on a glass 


a 


b 
KF jf 4 (@ Aye nN al 
1G. 4—CyrsTAL GROWN BY SUSPEN- Fig. 5—Crystat Grown Horiz- 
SION FROM THREAD OR SUPPORTED ON ONTALLY'ON A PLATE OR ON 
Mercury MERCURY 


aa The two last are the methods practised in our labora- 
ory. 


Fig. 4 indicates the general appearance of the Rochelle salt” 
erystal. It belongs to the rhombic system is hemihedral and 


11. A density of 1.33 at 50 deg. cent. may be conveniently used and 
the seed crystal, previously warmed to the same temperature as the 
nee ere be applied between 38 deg. cent. and 35 deg. cent. 

: is drawing was made by Prof. H. P. Whitl 
of Nat. Hist., New York. sa ahgdbas ety Sis 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1473 


enantiomorphic. It may be possible to classify crystal sur- 
aces into two systems of surfaces or zones which are normal 
to each other. One system of zones will be parallel with the 
principal or crystallographic axis c and will therefore engirdle 
the crystal. The other system of zones will comprise the two 
basal planes parallel with the a and 6b axes. In Fig. 4 the 
zones are shown, respectively, as vertical and horizontal sur- 
faces. In practise, the crystals are grown with the ¢ and b 
axes in a horizontal position as is indicated in Fig. 5. This 
growth forms a particular habit, becoming dominant along the 
c and } axes while development along the a axis upwards 
is partially suppressed on account of the supersaturation and 
consequent gradation in density of the liquor." Jn obtaining 
seed crystals, generally from a previous cropping, we select 
those in which growth along the b axis is fully developed (which 
happens when the seed nucleus grows with its c and 6 axes 
horizontal). These seeds are square, or nearly so, signifying 
that the growth along the 6 axis is about as great as, or greater 
than, that along the c axis." 

On cooling rapidly, the seed crystal will increase in size from 
a few grams weight to 50 or 500 grams, according to the volume 
and density of liquor used. An average size of crystal weighs 
100 grams and its axial lengths approximate 65mm. x 65mm. x 
25mm. The illustration, Fig. 6, shows a group of crystals of 
the habit displayed in Fig. 5. 

Crystals thus rapidly grown develop internal stresses pro- 
ducing strain regions symmetrical with the principal axis. 
The crystal acquires a composite structure” closely related to 
the surface zones referred to and to the electric poles to be 
developed as now explained. 

At each end of the seed-nucleus and along its c axis, there 
appears a pyramid, not always very pronounced in the nucleus 
itself, which forms a polar terminal,—see illustration of crystal 


13. Lamethérie,—La Genese de la Science des Cristaux, H. Metzger, 
p. 187, 1918. 

14. The thickness of the crystal along its a axis is generally 0.4 b; this 
dimension is a function of the density and head of mother liquor. 

15. Growth oecurs principally during the first 12 hours, although it 
may be continued several days during the condition of supersaturation. 

17. Mineralogists have termed this an “hour-glass’’ marking. The phe- 
nomenon is probably due to shearing strains set up by relatively greater 
contractions of the outer-crystal envelops during cooling. 


1474 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


No. 612 in Fig. 7. The pyramids consist of stratifications 
normal to the c axis and to the rest of the crystal structure, 
the stratification of which ordinarily is parallel with that axis. 
~The electrical performance of the crystal suggests that the 
crystal molecules throughout the pyramidal regions during 
growth are subject to forces which turn them, in planes con- 
taining the principal axis, through a right angle. This is in- 
dicated by the fact that the crystal, after subsequent treatment 
tending to render more pronounced these pyramid terminations, 
develops its electric poles*® in accordance with the two systems 
of zones previously described. The poles are accordingly at 
right angles to each other. This signifies that the. pyramids 
are electrically (+) when the rest of the crystal structure is 
(—) and vice versa. The effect becomes very pronounced 
when the crystal is subsequently dried in alcohol and baked 
in an oven.! 


POLARITY AND CRYSTAL DRESSING 


The raw untreated crystal possesses a large number of local 
electric poles which are variable in their piezo-electric effect. 
The desiccated crystal is much stronger” in effect and its 
electric poles are readily found in the case of the composite 
crystal to reside as described on the crystal surfaces with cor- 
responding signs, respectively, in the ‘‘vertical’’ and “horizon- 
tal’’ zones. 

In order to prepare the crystal for piezo-electric use its 
exposed parts are painted over with special varnish, after which 
waxed tinfoil electrodes are pressed on the crystal as shown in 
Fig. 8. 

SENSITIVE REGIONS OF CRYSTAL 


Referring again to Fig. 8, it will be noticed that both basal 
planes of the crystal are filed slightly concave in the central 
or polar regions. The object of this is to render salient the 
four diagonal “‘horns’”’ or ends of the basal planes, which are 
found to be the mechanically sensitive regions of the crystal, 
that is to say, the extreme outer edges parallel with the b 
axis. For the purpose of obtaining an efficient piezo-electric 

18. Plus and minus corresponding with the conventional analogous 
and antilogous poles. 7 

19. 90 per cent alcohol, 24 hours; 100 per cent alcohol 6 hours, oven at 
40 deg. cent. several dare. This treatment reduces the weight 3 per cent. 

20. Aging and compression also improved them ‘slowly. 


PLATE LXXIil. 
Xi bal Se 2F; 
VOL XXXVIII, 1919 


Fic. 6—Group or RocHEeLiEe Sart CrysTALS—UNDESICCATED, 
DESICCATED AND DRESSED 


[NICOLSON] 


HiGiats 


PLATE LXXIill 
A. \. E.UE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 20 | NICOLSON ] 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1475 


action at least two of these four diagonal corners at one crystal- 
lographic pole of the crystal should be perfect and flawless, 
apart from the composite structure already described. 
APPLIED STRESSES 

Analysis of the direction of applied stresses to the sensitive 
regions described has shown that, for the composite structure, 
a twisting couple about the principal axis excites the great- 
est electrification of the crystal electrodes. This may be 
proved in a variety of ways both for small and large piezo- 
electric effects. One method is to prepare a crystal by dropping 
its poles into a pool of melted fusible metal,2! and after the 


qd 


Fig. 8—DReESSING OF CRYSTAL FOR THE GIRDLE ORIENTATION 


crystal has recovered from a temporary paralysis due to the 
heating by the metal, connections should be made between the 
girdle pole and the metal poles with high impedance receivers, 
which will cause sounds produced by rubbing of the metal 
poles to be audible. It will be found that strokes applied so 
as to rotate the crystal about its c axis will sound much louder 
in the receivers than strokes applied in other directions. 
Similarly the electric charge measured by twisting the crystal 

21. Wood’s alloy fuses at 71 deg. cent. and Litowitz’s at 55 deg. cent. 
The crystal should be introduced just before the metal sets into a thin 
plate. 


1476 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


is much greater than the charges produced by applying axial 
or diagonal forces, not only for very reduced torques and 
stresses but for magnitudes of stress approaching saturation 
in the case of the axial and diagonal forces. In the case of 
torsion there exists the advantage of the couple, since the force 
is applied at a given radius from the polar axis. 

(a) The Case of a Slab Cut from a Crystal. It may be men- 
tioned here that a plate cut from a homogeneous” crystal, with 
its electric or a axis properly normal to the c and 6 axis, is al- 
most insensitive to torsion, while the application of ‘‘diagonal’”’ 
stresses, in accordance with Voigt’s” crystallographic classifica- 
tion, does not in our practise appear to be as successful even 
when comparatively clear slabs of crystals are used. This 
may be due partly to the weakening of the structure in slicing, 
with consequent introduction of small flaws, and also to the 
difficulty of preventing in some degree the formation of the 
composite structure. When the uncut, whole crystal is twisted 
about its c axis so as to bend the a and b axes, component strains 
are developed along the principal axis as along the diagonals; 
but-in view of the specific form of crystal and corresponding 

-composite structure (of girdle and pyramids) presented, the 
resulting stresses set up in the crystal axes are very complex. 
Obviously the electric field is not as simple as in the case of 
two parallel plate electrodes. 

(b) Axial Compression. On plotting the relation between 
electric potential and various loads applied to the composite 
crystal, so as to bear on the diagonals simultaneously, we obtain 
the approximately quadratic curves shown in Fig. 9. We 
have, accordingly, found it advantageous to apply permanent 
static compression and obtain thereby greatly increased effect. 
In view of the fact that the pressure is applied to the crystal 
at the limited areas of the top and bottom corners, in the basal 
planes, the crystallographic axis being vertical, it has been found 
that over a large range of size of crystal, namely between about 
30 and 500 grams, the value of the applied static pressure for 
maximum change in slope corresponds to an absolute force 
of approximately 15 kg. At this point in the curve a variation 
of applied axial force of 1 kg. will produce in a good crystal a 
difference of potential of 8 volts. Beyond this point, as shown 
~ 22. A crystal will be practically isomorphic throughout when permitted 


to grow at a very slow and uniform rate. 
23. W. Voigt and E. Riecke, Wied. Ann., 45, 1892. 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1477 


in Fig. 10%, the curve becomes less steep. The static pres- 
sure may be applied permanently to the crystal without ap- 
parent fatigue. 

For experimental purposes the crystal is inserted in an ap- 
pliance we call a ‘“‘spring compressor’ which compresses the 
crystal to the necessary degree and at the same time forms 


Fie. 9—Axtat Compression APPLIED To ‘‘Horns”’ or Crystau (AVER- 
AGE Cross Section 10 cm.?2) 


a convenient method for electrically connecting the polar 
electrodes, previously described. The spring compressors com- 
prise a pair of aluminium disks which are held together by 
stout steel springs. These are attached by eye-rivets to the 
lower plate, while thumb screws tighten the springs after a 
crystal has been inserted. The number of turns of the thumb 


24. The curvesin Fig. 10 show slight hysteresis or fatigue near saturation 
values of the potential. It will be observed that the deflections at release 
of load are much greater than those for compression, probably for the 
reason that the action may be effected more rapidly and consequently 
with less loss of charge. The cycle of operations taken for obtaining the 
curve is as follows: a load is applied to the crystal so as to compress it; 
this gives a deflection on the electrometer of a value, say b; then the crystal 
is short-circuited for a moment so as to give zero reading again (shown 
atc). On releasing the load the greater deflection d is produced (which 
is in the opposite sense when the instrument is polarized, as indicated in 
the upper curve). An adaptation of the Riehle machine was used for 


large values of compression. 


1478 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


screw may serve conveniently asa gage of the degree of com- 
pression after calibration. 

Fig. 12 shows the spring compressor with the dressed crystal 
properly balanced within. Any part of the metal structure 
will readily convey jars and vibrations to the erystal. If this 
crystal transmitter be laid on a large sheet of paper and re- 
ceivers be applied to the electrodes, it is quite easy to hear gentle 
rubbing of the paper and the tick of a watch—transmitted 
along the paper to the crystal. 

Torsion. As previously described in connection with the 
fusible metal poles melted on the crystal, it is probable that the 


E 
200. 


AT RELEASE 


160 


AT COMPRESSION 


1090 
7-E 


Fie. 10—Arrpiizep AXIAL STRESS 


compressed crystal receives and responds to components of 
forces in both axial and twisting senses. In order to analyze 
the relative motions of the crystal it was simple to reverse the 
crystal action by applying alternating potentials at different 
_ frequencies to the crystal electrodes and discover from the 
various modes of vibration of the crystal their relative magni- 
tudes. A special microphone was applied to a crystal pole 
in various positions with respect to the crystallographic axis. 
The microphone, being in a local battery circuit operating a 
thermocouple, was actuated by the dilating crystal when the 
constant alternating potentials of various frequencies were 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC: EFFECT 1479 


applied. The resulting measurements showed conclusively 
that the crystal twisted or moved the microphone button to 
the greatest degree when the axis of the microphone was at- 
tached tangentially to one of the crystal poles. The motions 
applied to the microphone were much smaller when they were 
diagonal or axial in character. 
The relation between piezo-electric charge and torsion is 
linear, see Fig. 11, and is given by 
Q=KFL 
where K = 100 for several crystals tried 
L = lever arm in cm. 
F = force in kg. 
Q = charge in e.s. units. 
The constant for potential in volts, produced under similar 
conditions, is: K’ = 12. 


CHARGE wi 


S00. 
esin, 


Q=I00 FL. 


EL. 
SKgem. TORQUE 


4 
Fig. 11—Euectric CHarGeE OBTAINED Fig. 12—AsseEMBLY 
WHEN TORSION IS APPLIED TO CRYSTAL 


A right-hand torque determines the same electrification that 
is produced by subjecting the crystal to tension. If steady 
potentials be applied to the crystal the torsion is given, in 
one case, by 
10 radian per volt (crystal 7 cm. long) 

while expansion parallel with the crystallographic axis (c) is 
2 xX 10-° em. per cm. of length, per volt and is independent of 
applied pressure. ; 

(d) Alternating Effects. If we apply rapidly alternating 
stresses toa crystal it becomes a generator of electrical oscilla- 
tions, and we may use it as a detector of vibrations of sound, agi- 
tating it, for example, by a watch tick, a moving phonograph 
record, or by speech. If the crystal be tapped, an oscillogram 
shows that such an impact generates trains of electrical oscilla- 


1480 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


tions peculiar to the resonant frequencies of the crystal. Fig. 
16 indicates. trains of oscillations of 300 and 2000 cycles. A 
crystal used on a phonograph record will generate several volts, 
with sufficient power to operate a very large number of tele- 
phone” receivers. 


Ire. 13—PHONOGRAPH Fig. 14—PHONOGRAPH 
TRANSMITTER TRANSMITTER 


500 cw 
Fia. 15—Crystan Trans- Fig. 16—Errect or Tapping A CRYSTAL 
MITTER OR RECEIVER Inpicating Impact OSCILLATIONS OF 


330 CycLies anp 2000 CycLEs 


APPLICATIONS 
Again, to operate effeetively, the crystal applied to the phono- 
graph is subjected to torsional vibrations. Figs. 18 and 14 
indicate the housings employed. By means of the usual needle, 


25. As many as 200 receivers of 12,000 ohms each have been operated 
from one erystal. : 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1481 


vibrations are imparted to a light plate under the crystal. 
In Fig. 13 elastic bands are shown compressing the plate against 
the crystal. 

Sound Transmitter and Receiver. Since, with these composite 
crystals, a given force produces the greater piezo effect when it 
is applied in such a way as to twist the crystal about its princi- 
pal axis, and conversely, an applied electrical force produces 


1500 Zooo 
FREQUENCY 


Fig. 17—Capaciry, CURRENT AND CONDUCTANCE CURVES FOR CRYSTALS 


the maximum mechanical response in the form of twisting 
motion, it is apparent that whether we are interested in pro- 
ducing electrical or mechanical results from the crystal, the 
diaphragms should be so attached as to make maximum use 
of the torsional effect. 

One way is to apply a cylindrical diaphragm so as to surround 


1482 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


the crystal, and to attach the cylinder by means of rings to 
the compressor plates which hold the crystal. By screwing 
one of the rings over one of the compressor plates the cylindrical 
diaphragm itself becomes twisted into diagonal corrugations 
stretched tightly across the crystal poles. This construction is 
shown in Figs. 15 and 20. The “diaphragm” should be made 
of astrong light material like gold beaters’ skin or bond paper. 
When aerial tones strike the diaphragm and actuate the crystal 
as a transmitter, the resulting vibrations reach the crystal 
body through the poles and corresponding electrical oscilla- 
tions are generated. Singing against the diaphragm, near 


CRYSTAL 
‘TRANSMITTER 


D.RPS.T. ORSs.T. 
SWITCH = . SWITCH 
100 HEAD RECEIVERS 100 HEAD RECEIVERS 


Fig. 18—Crrcuit ror CrystaL TRANSMITTER 


resonance (the fundamental may lie between 200 and 600 
cycles), will generate about 20 microamperes of current or 
produce 15 volts on open circuit. A clap of the hands near 
the transmitter will excite trains of oscillations in an oscillo- 
graph similar to the curves shown in Fig. 16. A circuit for 
the crystal transmitter is indicated in Fig. 18. 

If the crystal receiver, as described, is used with a micro- 
phone transmitter and the potential is stepped up to the 
crystal with a transformer as is shown in Fig. 19, very strong 
acoustic effects may be obtained as a “loud speaking” crystal 
receiver. ; 

Crystal Transmitter and Receiver in a Line. With the aid of 
the vacuum tube amplifier, good transmission of speech and 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1483 


music may be obtained by using the piezo crystal at both ends 
of a line as sole transmitting and receiving apparatus. 

Some Electrical Constants. The crystal may be considered 
asa leaky condenser having a shunt resistancein excess of 100 
megohms. The ohmic resistance is several times greater from 
the analogous to the antilogous pole than it is in the reverse 
sense. There is however, no evidencefof current rectification. 


MICROPHONE 
TRANSMITTER 


= 6 VOLTS 
= ORY CELLS 


TRANSFORMER 
100: 200000 


CRYSTAL 


CRYSTAL 


CRYSTAL 
RECEIVER 


Fig. 19—Circurr ror CrystaLt Loup SPEAKER 


The capacity varies with size and may be as great as 10-8 F. 
in a good crystal. It is usually 10-° F. Its impedance at 
acoustic frequencies varies from 100,000 ohms to 300,000 ohms. 
Fig. 17 indicates that these properties depend on the frequency 
of the applied e.m.f. From these curves’ the so called ‘“‘mo- 
tional impedance’”’ of the crystal may be found in the same 
manner as the motional impedance of an ordinary telephone 


26. Made by EH. T. Hoch, Physical Lab., Western Electric Co. 


1484 NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT [Oct. 9 


receiver?” which, as is well known, gives the resonance character- 
istics of the diaphragm. In the case of the crystal the dilata- 
tions reach certain maxima where the applied frequency of the 
alternating potentials (of constant amplitude) coincides with an 
elastic natural frequency of the crystal. At this frequency, 
the apparent capacity passes through the greatest change in 
value—from maximum to zero or negative values, depending on 
whether the crystal response, as a generator, isin phase or out 
of phase with the applied potentials. The impedance decreases 
to a minimum at resonance as indicated by the conductance 
curve. 


CONCLUSION 


Curie’s law that the electric charge generated by a crystal 
is, for a given force, independent of the absolute dimensions 
seems to be well borne out in the variety of crystals discussed 
in this paper. There is a best shape of crystal which we have 
already considered. 

Very small crystals are generally less effectively rendered 
“eomposite’”’ on account of the relative absence of the stresses 
during shorter growing periods. Hence they are generally 
less efficient when mounted as described. On the other hand, 
properly articulated crystals may be grown far larger than is 
necessary for effective operation. For example, Fig. 7 shows 
an illustration of a crystal weighing 910 grams. It is difficult 
however, to prevent cracks and flaws taking place before the 
large crystal has been effectively cured and hardened. 

It has been noticed that the crystals improve with time, 
particularly when they are first made. Moreover, when they 
are paralyzed by being baked at too high a temperature they 
slowly recover. Drying out is probably one cause of this 
improvement and also realignment or recrystallization of dis- 
turbed portions of the crystal molecules. 

It may be said that the crystals, after several months’ use, 
or non-use, reach a very steady operating condition in which 
their activity seems to be permanent, especially for alternating 
effects where weather conditions have negligible action on 
sensitive apparatus associated with the crystal. As regards 
general efficiency and comparison with known apparatus like 
the carbon transmitter and the electromagnetic receiver, it 
should be said that the microphone is more sensitive than the 


27. A. E. Kennelly, Proc. Amer. Acad. Sc., 1912 p. 114. 


1919] NICOLSON: PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT 1485 


crystal transmitter. The microphone with its associated local 
battery gives out more energy than it receives and hence con- 
stitutes an amplifier; while the crystal at present translates 
only that portion of the energy applied to it which affects its 
mechanically sensitive regions. 

The efficiency of the crystal receiver compares favorably 
with the electromagnetic receiver for equivalent resonance 
conditions. It is not improbable that other crystals of or- 
ganic constitution, 2. e., of molecular asymmetry, may be found 
whose piezo electric activity may exceed that of Rochelle 
salt. So far very little is known about the electrical and me- 
chanical orientations set up in other crystals capable of de- 
veloping the composite structure described in this paper. 


1486 PIEZO ELECTRIC EFFECT [October 10 


/ 


DISCUSSION ON ‘THE POSITIONS OF ATOMS IN METALS” (HULL)‘ 
“Ptp70 ELECTRIC EFFECT’ (NICOLSON) AND ““THE OSCIL- 
LATING VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR OF ELECTRIC 
POWER” (MORECROFT AND FRIIS), PHILADELPHIA, PA., 
OcTOBER 10, 1919. 


John B. Taylor: Referring to “The Arrangement of Atoms 
in Metals. I do not know how the-author bridged the gap 
between quartz and those things which we know are regular 
crystals built by regular structure, and common carbon metals 
of electrical engineering, such as copper, iron, etc. There are 
crystals in iron, and if it is polished a little it will show the 
crystals at 1/100 diameters, etc. This is true of the other 
metals. We also have a copper wire soft drawn without much 
crystal structure, and so I think the author might leave a 
little clearer idea in our minds regarding these things, and 
perhaps some others, if he went over once this gap between 
the regular structure metals, of which the bona fide crystals 
are the best examples, and a metal which is annealed and 
worked with its own crystal structure. I would like to ask 
if Dr. Hull has any insight into the arrangement of the atoms 
or whether there is anything you might call arrangement. 

Referring to the paper on “Piezo Electric Effect’’, I would 
ask if we can be given more numerical information, that is, 
what are the limits in pressure—the chemical pressure and 
electrical pressure. Can we supply several hundred thousand 
volts to one of these crystals and break it up by mechanical 
force? In general, how far can we go, and what other metals, 
other than the Rochelle salt may be available for this work? 
Quartz has been mentioned, but apparently it has some ad- 
vantages and disadvantages over the Rochelle salt. 

Has Dr. Hull, in examining the structure of these metals, 
examined them under conditions of stress? For instance, if 
he takes the structure of Rochelle salt and stresses it by mechan- 
ical means, which is the same in this case, does he find a dif- 
_ ferent arrangement by the atoms moving up, which can be 
shown on the photographic film? 

A. W. Hull: I will answer Mr. Taylor’s question about 
the relation between metals and substances commonly known 
as crystalline. In the materials we have investigated so far, 
the only substance that is not almost completely crystalline 
is glass. Metals, even ductile metals like copper, seem to be 
perfectly crystalline. There are cases in which alloying 
interferes with the perfection of crystal structure. Those 
have not yet been examined. Except for that, metals are 
fully as well crystalized and as perfectly crystalline as so- 
called crystalline substances like quartz. Metals may, how- 
ever, be distorted by gliding. In the case of quartz, as in rock. 
salt, which I specially mentioned, such gliding is impossible. 
It always results in cleavage. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA 1487 


John B. Taylor: The structure of metals permits no 
cleavage plane? 

A.W.Hull: Yes, they havea cleavage plane, but the metals 
cleave much less easily. The planes are able to glide over 
each other. 

John B. Taylor: After the gliding, the arrangement of the 
atoms still remains the same? 

A. W. Hull: They still remain in close contact and the 
crystal is fairly perfect. 

In answer to the second question, very little work has been 
done in that direction and I have nothing to offer in connection 
with metals under stress. 

A. M. Nicolson: As regards sound emitters of quartz 
and Rochelle salt, if due consideration is made of the differing 
modes of vibration and forms of housing, a rough comparison 
would indicate that Rochelle salt crystals operate more effec- 
tively at 500 volts than crystals of quartz at 10,000 volts. 

If high alternating potentials be applied to a Rochelle salt 
crystal it will eventually become warm by dielectric hysteresis, 
or otherwise, and cease temporarily to exhibit the piezo-electric 
effect. It may be operated continuously, however, with a 
total energy dissipation, of about one-half watt. This repre- 
sents a current of a few milliamperes through a crystal of 
average capacity of 1000 micro-microfarads. 

John B. Taylor: You speak of it as capacity rather than 
resistance. 

A. M. Nicolson: The direct-current resistance of the 
crystal is very high, in fact, hundreds of megohms when desic- 
cated. Energy dissipated in the crystal dielectric is principally 
due to hysteresis and mechanical friction. This is represented 
electrically as alternating-current resistance, expressible either 
as shunt or equivalent series resistance. The magnitudes are 
respectively of the order of 300,000 ohms and 100,000 ohms. 

E. A. Eckhardt: Are clear crystals better than cloudy 
crystals? 

A. M. N'colson: Clear or slowly grown crystals do not 
generally display the composite structure, or hour-glass mark- 
ing, which we have made use of. The cloudiness develops on 
the surfaces during desiccation, otherwise the composite crystal 
should be quite clear throughout, except where the polar planes 
of cleavage definitely articulate the crystal into its composite 
nature. We have found that crystals having a development 
of this composite structure, with its corresponding orthogonal 
electric poles, give piezo-electric effects which exceed the 
effects with the slowly grown crystals offering the usual parallel 
electric poles and corresponding straight electric field. It 
should be said, however, that advantage was taken of the fact 
that the composite crystal could be obtained by rapid growth, 
while the so-called clear crystals are difficult to develop and 
entail several weeks’ growth under thermostatic control. But 


1488 PIEZO ELECTRIC EFFECT [October 10 


such carefully grown crystals as we were able to develop do 
not seem to offer the same electrical and mechanical qualities 
which are readily obtainable in the composite type of crystal. 

J.P. Wintringham: It might be well to give a few minutes 
to the essential crystallographic elements. Crystals are 
divided into classes by the more or less. regularity and sym- 
metry of their geometrical forms. All other qualities, mechan- 
ical, optical, electric, etc., are governed by the degree of 
symmetry or regularity. There are only three unit funda- 
mental forms, the cube whose symbol is 100, and its faces are 
called the faces of a cube or if taken in pairs pinacoids. The 
three figures refer to the three geometric axes and the one 
permuted through the three places 100, 010 and 001 indicates 


three of the faces, minus one gives the other three faces 100, 


010 and 001 or total six of the cube. 

The second form is the dodecahedron (110) with 12 sides 
as the permutation of the symbol shows. Its faces taken in 
sets parallel to one axis are called prisms of which the most 
important is the vertical prism. 

The third form is the octahedron (111) with eight permuta- 
tions, one for each side. To the unit fundamental forms may 
be added four more when some other figure is taken in place 
of the one. All other of the 1000 or so forms are made by 
combinations of two or more fundamental forms, or and this 
is the important point in this connection, part of the faces of 
a fundamental form may not appear and we may have only 
half or a quarter of them 14(100), 44(110) &c., the brackets 
implying a full set of faces. 

It is evident that you cannot make a complete figure with 
only half of the faces of a cube but the octahedron works out 
all right. 

It may be described as a four sided pyramid on top with an 
inverted four sided pyramid below base to base. The vertical 
or c axis goes from the top apex to the bottom one. Two 
opposite top faces may be extended together with the two al- 
ternate lower faces to make a figure with only four faces, the 
tetrahedron. The c vertical axis remaining in its place goes 
from the middle of the top edge to the middle of the edge below. 
“It is evident that a great deal of the former symmetry has 
disappeared. This is just the asymmetry that is to be noted 
in Mr. Nicolson’s Rochelle salt crystals. It may be said tobe 
made up of three pair of pinacoid (or cube) faces with a number 
of vertical prism faces. None of these is significant. What 
is significant is a small face just bevelling the top front edge 
called 0 =111 which should appear on the left or another 
v = 211 which would appear on the right. They are the faces 
of a tetrahedrons or bisphenoids half forms. é 

I have only found them in his two drawings, Fig. 4, in the top 
plan the long and narrow faces that are not cut by a and 6 axes, 


1919] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA 1489 


= the lower drawing the c axis seems to go through-one of 
em. 

Crystals are divided into 32 classes of which 20 might show 
piezo-electric effect. 

A. W. Hull: I anticipate it would be perfectly easy to 
show the results of stress. The relative displacement of atoms 
will be accurately registered, but as they are exceedingly small 
it would require very fine measurements to show them. 

Irving Langmuir: From the outside dimensions of the 
change of shape, etc., of crystals under the influence of an 
electrical field or mechanical stress, you could not calculate 
the changes in the orbs, the arrangement of the atoms must 
still be the same, and even without distortion you could cal- 
culate them? What about the changes in the distance be- 
tween the atoms? 

J. E. Schrader: Dr. Hull states he~has not made any 
experiments on metals under stress, containing crystals such 
as mica or quartz. Cannot we get some -information about 
polarization and absorption? 

A. W. Hull: I would like to qualify somewhat the answer 
I gave to that problem. I have not the slightest doubt but 
that we can get excellent information regarding strains from 
X-ray analysis. The strains we actually produce are of such 
magnitude that we can measure them mechanically on the 
outside of the crystal, and the ease of measuring them inside 
is greater. By means of the photographs I showed, it is easy 
to measure the distance between atoms to one part in fifty 
thousand. 

The measurement of elastic coefficients, temperature co- 
efficients of expansion, and densities are extremely easy by this 
method. -The relative ease of the measurement of density 
in a substance by X-rays as compared with the ordinary 
method is so remarkable that it is worthy of attention. Den- 
sity measurements to one-tenth of a per cent can be made in 
about four hours,—that does not mean four hours of personal 
work—the tube runs by itself and the analysis requires less 
than an hour. 

D. MacL. Therrell (by letter): Simplified and reduced 
to its lowest terms the paper by Morecroft and Friis covers the 
use of the vacuum tube, pliotron, or audion for the purpose of 
generating an alternating current from a variable direct current. 

Some years ago, while conducting a series of experiments 
in an effort to improve theconstants of the telephone trans- 
mitter circuit, and avoid the evils of core saturation and 
transformer or induction coil losses, I discovered a means for 
deriving an alternating current from a direct variable current, 
which is identical with the use of the pliotron vacuum tube or 
audion, as described by Messrs. Morecroft and Friis. 

By bridging a low resistance coil of high inductance across 
the terminals of the variable resistance element, or transmitter 


1490 PIEZO ELECTRIC EFFECT [October 10 


electrodes, and placing the load, or primary winding of the 
induction coil, in series with a condenser of suitable capacity 
in shunt around these points, or terminals, whose potential 
varied as a function of the resistance of the transmitter -elec- 
trodes; I found that an alternating current corresponding 
exactly with the impressed voice component of the variable 
direct current was generated in the derived or shunt circuit 
through the primary coil by the charging and discharging of 
the condenser in circuit. 

The discovery was later used and disclosed by me for the 
purpose of generating alternating currents in the primary or 


= 


Fie. 1—THerRrReELL “AuTostaTIC GENERATOR” 


primaries of a transmitter circuit so that resonance or partial 
resonance might be obtained for the essential or desired fre- 
quencies to be transmitted. 

Both the discovery, of what I term the “Auto Static Genera- 
tor,’ and this particular application which permits of tuning 
for the sinusoidal component of the variable direct current 
was a distinct and novel step in the art. 

The importance of this device was clearly foreseen and 
fundamentally covered and claimed in U. S. patents issued to 
the writer for the ‘Art of Telephony.” 

This circuit arrangement was also described by me in an 
article in the Electrical World, page 1344, June 30, 1906. It 
was also described at length in a serial article by J. J. Goodwin, 
covering my discoveries, in the American Telephone Journal, 
page 67, August 4, 1906. 

In the same issue the Editor, Franklin H. Reed, commented 
- editorially in part as follows: ‘‘The device by which the 
primary current is made alternating in character in order that 
the required condition of resonance may be obtained, repre- 
sents a distinct and novel step in the art.” 

In the patents above referred to the circuit coupling or auto 
static generator is shown under three equivalents as indicated . 


a ae 


“wee 


1919] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA 1491 


at (A) (B) and (C) of Fig. 1, herewith, which it will be seen is 
identical with the vacuum tube or audion arrangement of 
Messrs. Morecroft and Friis as described in connection with 
Fig. 1 of their paper. 

A simplified but exact equivalent of Fig. 1, is herewith shown 
as Fig. 2, in the usual symbols. This circuit is now seen to 
be identical with the “Auto Static Generator’ arrangement 
disclosed by me in 1904, as will be most apparent to any one 
comparing the figures herewith. 

The filament and plate in Fig. 2 are equivalent to the 
microphone in Fig. 1. The alternating-current generator and the 
grid are equivalent to the acoustical means for varying the 
resistance of the microphone in Fig.1. The rest of the circuit is 
identical in every element and function and detail. 

In this connection it is also pointed out that my ‘Auto 
Static Generator” circuit is used in the Goldschmidt alternator 


S 


Output 
Transformer 
or Load 


Fia. 2—Aupion ADAPTED TO THERRELL ‘‘AUTOSTATIC GENERATOR” 


for wireless and radio telephony as recently disclosed in 
“The Principles Underlying Radio Communication, issued 
by the Bureau of Standards, pamphlet No. 40, page 162. 

Among the claims granted to me on the Auto Static” de- 
vice, in the patents above mentioned are the following: 

“The method of producing an alternating current in the primary coil 
which consists in placing the primary coil and a capacity in a derived 
or shunt circuit between points whose potential varies as a function of 
the transmitter diaphragm, whereby an alternating current 1s caused to 


flow through the said primary coil due to charging and discharging of 
the said capacity as the potential varies across the terminals of the said 


derived shunt circuit.” 


Likewise the apparatus case covers: 

“Means for generating alternating currents in a circuit derived from 
the transmitter circuit and containing the primary coils of a plurality 
of transformers.” 

Also the generic claim for: 

‘Means for generating alternating currents inabranch of the transmitter 
circuit containing the primary coil. 

Likewise the following generic claim covering the tuning of 
the transmitter or primary circuit for any frequency tobe 
transmitted: 

“The step in the art of Electrical transmission and reproduction of 
sound, which consists in making the terminal transmitter circuit, or 
cireuits, wholly or partially resonant for the essential frequencies to be 
transmitted, thereby increasing the efficiency of transformation and 
the energy transferred to the secondary circuit. 


~ 


1492 PIEZO ELECTRIC EFFECT { October 10 


When it is considered that the vacuum tube, with its input 
excitation of any kind, is equivalent to the ordinary telephonic 
transmitter, the scope of these claims is readily obvious and is 
clearly seén to cover broadly every use of the Audion, Pliotron 
or vacuum tube for the purpose of generating an alternating 
current or of preventing a direct current from circulating 
through the windings of the output transformer. 

Of course I am aware that the right to a patent on improve- 
ments involving the use of prior devices or inventions, does 
not necessarily carry with it the right to proceed under such 
a patent free from domination thereof by patents on the prior 
devices or inventions. 

I am, therefore, now merely calling attention, in the in- 
terest of historical accuracy, to the fact that the use of the 
vacuum tube, pliotron, or audion, or other device, for the 
purpose of deriving, or generating, an alternating current from 
a variable direct current, or its equivalent, in telephony, 
wireless telephony and telegraphy, is an abridgement of and 
an infringement upon my rights as covered by the generic 
patents above cited; and this, statement is made without 
prejudice to any of may statutory rights involved. 

John H.Morecroft: The comments of Mr. Therrell on 
our paper on vacuum tubes adds nothing to the theory or ex- 
planations advanced regarding the operation of the device, 
and is of interest only to those engaged in patent litigation. 

The question which Mr. Taylor asked, regarding the possible 
mechanical strains due to piezo electric forces, was not answered 
by Dr. Nicolson; I believe he has made no determination of 
this phase of the question. The piezo electric effect in quartz, 
which I have investigated to some extent, gives one a very 
vivid idea of the tremendous strains which the action may call 
into play. 

If a rectangular piece of quartz, in the form of a thin slab, 
is properly cut. from a good crystal, it may be made to actually 
pull itself into two pieces by these piezo electric forces. The 
faces of the slab should be parallel to one of the electric axes 
of the crystal, and the long edges should be perpendicular to 
the optical axis of the crystal. A typical piece, for example, 
might be one eighth inch thick, two inches long, and about one 
inch wide. ' 

Pieces of tinfoil, nearly the size of the faces of the slab, are 
then shellaced to the two faces, and allowed to dry. If this 
quartz slab is considered as a rod, its fundamental period of 
vibration (longitudinal) may be calculated to be about 50,000 
cycles per second. That is, if the slab were struck a sharp 
blow on one end it would sustain longitudinal vibrations of this 
frequency. The two pieces of tinfoil are connected to a high - 
frequency source of electric power, the frequency of which may 
be accurately adjusted; a large vacuum tube oscillator is the 
most suitable source of power. If the frequency of the alter- 


yy 


1919] DISCUSSION AT PHILADELPHIA 1493 


nating e. m.f. is now varied until it is exactly the same as the 
natural period of the slab the slab will actually pull itself 
mmto two or more pieces after the e. m. f. has been applied for 
not more than a second or so; in general the slab will break 
itself into two nearly equal pieces. 

It might well be conceived that the rupture of the quartz 
was simply a case of dielectric breakdown, due to excessive 
potential gradient through the quartz; that such is not the case 
is evident when the voltage required for rupture is considered. 
A piece one eighth inch thick may be ruptured by about three 
thousand volts; the dielectric strength of the quartz is perhaps 
ten times this amount. Moreover if the same voltage is im- 
pressed on the quartz, at afrequency differing from the critical 
one by as little as one-half per cent the slab will “stand up” 
indefinitely. 

In general this test is best carried out with the test piece 
submerged in oil, preferably a light one, such as kerosene. 
The voltage required in the test will cause corona and leakage 
if the test is carried out in air, and these two effects tend to 
heat the quartz and so reduce its dielectric strength. 

I have been successful in rupturing pieces as short as one-half 
inch, the required frequency in this case being of the order of 
200,000 cycles per second. 

When one considers the high tensile strength of a piece of 
clear quartz crystal it is evident that these piezo electric actions 
do bring into play very large mechanical strains indeed. 


Presented at a joint meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Am- 
erican Physical Society, Philadelphia, Pa., 
October 10, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E, 


A REPORT ON ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION?! 


BY 8. J. BARNETT 


ABSTRACT oF PAPER 


This report discusses briefly the chief fundamental results 

obtained from the days of Faraday to the present time in 
studying the electromotive forces ordinarily referred to the do- 
main of electromagnetic induction. 
_ Self-induction is first taken up, and the phenomena of self- 
induction are treated as essentially identical with the phenomena 
of inertia in dynamics, according to the idea of Maxwell and 
the idea originally accepted by Faraday. The only recent 
fundamental progress has been in studying the inertia of free 
electrons and other ions, and experiments on this subject are 
referred to. 

The motional electromotive force, developed when matter 
moves in a magnetic field, is next considered, and is derived 
from Ampére’s law on the electron theory. Hspecial attention 
is devoted to the motional intensity, and the resulting electric 
displacement, in insulators, of which nothing has been known 
until recent years. 

The induced electromotive force in fixed conductors and in- 
sulators arising from the motion or alteration of other systems is 
next considered, and is expressed both in terms of magnetic flux 
and in terms of the general vector potential, which refers the phe- 
nomena back to the motion of electrons without the magnetic 
field as intermediary. The relations between the induced and 
motional electromotive forces are discussed, as well as the rela- 
tion of the electric displacement produced in certain cases to the 
hypothesis of the fixed ether. 

The report closes with a treatment of unipolar induction in 
both so-called open and closed circuits, including brief de- 
scriptions of some of the principal experiments, a discussion of 
the theories involved, and their application to the unipolar 
generator. 


1. TT is unnecessary to emphasize the great importance of this 
subject alike to the physicist and to the engineer. The 
world of the physicist is rapidly becoming fundamentally an 
electrical world, in which a vast part is played by electro- 
magnetic induction; and without electromagnetic induction the 
world of the electrical engineer could scarcely be considered 
even to exist. 
The general field of electromagnetic induction has become 
very broad, and it will be necessary to restrict this discussion 


1. For references see end of paper. 
é 1495 


1496 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION (Oct. 10 


to fundamental matters, and from among them to select for 
consideration only electromotive forces and electric displace- 
ments, and these only in stationary or quasi-stationary sys- 
tems. Important related subjects such as the transfer of 
energy in the electromagnetic field according to Poynting and 
Heaviside must be excluded. Even the principle of relativity 
can scarcely be more than mentioned. 

To a very remarkable degree our knowledge of the funda- 
mental facts and principles of electromagnetic induction is due 
to Michael Faraday. Most of the progress made by others 
has consisted in increasing the precision of his measurements 
and in developing ideas which originated in less perfect form 
with him. 

2. The principal experiments of Faraday and his contem- 
poraries in the field of electromagnetic induction may con- 
veniently be grouped in four divisions, as follows: 

I. Experiments in which the agent producing the magnetic 
field remains fixed to the earth and the conductor or insulator 
under examination moves. The electric intensity and electro- 
motive force in the body due to the motion have been called 
the motional intensity and e. m. f. by Heaviside. 

II. Experiments in which the body under examination re- 
mains fixed to the earth, and the agent producing the magnetic 
field moves or its electric current changes.? The electric in- 
tensity and e.m-f. produced under these circumstances will 
be called the induced intensity and e. m. f., although these terms 
are often applied also to the motional quantities. 

According to the Einstein principle of relativity, no dis- 
crimination can be made between the motional and induced 
intensities, as only the relative motion of two bodies can be 
determined. 

III. Experiments on unipolar induction, strictly belonging 
to groups I and II, but to be considered separately for con- 
venience.? 

IV. Experiments on self-induction. 

3. The last group, on self-induction, will be considered first. 
When a steady electromotive force is applied to a circuit the 
current increases from zero until a steady value is reached 
when the counter e. m. f. of resistance just balances the applied 
e.m.f. and the electricity therefore moves uniformly. If the 
applied e. m. f. is made to disappear without otherwise altering 
the circuit the counter e. m. f. of resistance gradually reduces 
the current to zero or brings the electricity to rest. | 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1497 


Referring to the phenomenon of self-induction, Faraday 
says ““The first thought that arises in the mind is that the elec- 
tricity circulates with something like momentum or inertia in 
the wire.”” This idea, however, he soon gave up, but for in- 
adequate reasons, as shown by Maxwell, whose treatment of 
the subject is based entirely on the idea of inertia. To set 
electricity into motion an e. m.f. is required just as a force 
is required to accelerate matter; and to bring electricity in 
motion to rest an opposing e. m. f. must be applied, just as an 
opposing force is required to reduce the velocity of a moving 
body. In strictness it is quite as improper to speak of an 
“electromotive force of self-induction’’ as of a ‘force of inertia” 
in dynamics. Failure to realize this has given rise to a great 
amount of confusion in electrical literature. 

The fundamental self-induction relation in electric circuits 
is that of Faraday and Neumann: To alter the current in 
an electric circuit, and therewith the corresponding magnetic 
flux, an e. m. f. equal to the rate of increase of the flux must 
act in the circuit. 

While a vast amount of progress has been made in measuring 
the quantities involved in self-induction and in studying the 
relations of other phenomena to those of self-induction, it 
appears that the only really fundamental progress made since 
the early days has come from studying the behavior of free 
electrons and other ions accelerated by electric and mag- 
netic fields. Well-known experiments by J. J. Thomson, 
Kaufmann, Bucherer, Hupka and others have yielded import- 
ant information on the constitution of the electron and of 
matter; but it is unnecessary to do more than mention these 
experiments here. 

Along with these experiments should be mentioned the ex- 
periments suggested by Maxwell‘ on the electric displacement 
produced in conductors by their mere acceleration. If a con- 
ductor is accelerated, since some of the electrons or other ions 
are free, an electric displacement would, in general, be ex- 
pected to result. 

Such effects in electrolytes have been observed by Colley,® 
Des Coudres,* and others; and after having been looked for in 
metals by Maxwell, E. F. Nichols,? and Lebedew® have been 
observed and carefully measured in a beautiful investigation 
by Tolman and Stewart.’ The behavior of the electricity in 
a circular coil of wire which has been rotating about its axis 


1498 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION (Oct. 10 


and is quickly brought to rest as in these experiments, is very 
similar to that in a coil which has been carrying a steady current 
when the applied e.m.f. is reduced to zero without altering the 
resistance. 

4, Faraday’s experiments of group I. on conductors prove 
that when a rigid circuit moves in a fixed magnetic field there 
is produced around it an e. m. f. equal to the rate of diminution 
of magnetic flux through it, or the net rate at which it cuts 
across magnetic flux, with proper respect to signs. The two 
statements are equivalent, since tubes of magnetic induction 
are always closed. The second. form is the more funda- 
mental, as will be evident from what follows. 

Similarly, the motional e. m. f. along any part of the circuit, 
or any line in any conductor moving in a magnetic field, is 
equal to the rate at which it cuts across magnetic flux. _ 

On the electron and ionic theories of matter this is accounted 
for by the Ampérian force 

F =e [oH] (1)7° 
which acts on any electrified particle of the matter with charge 
é moving with velocity v in a field of strength H. For this 
gives a motional intensity, or force per unit charge, 

f= F/e = pH] (2) 
The integral of this intensity along any path in the conductor 
gives the result stated above. 

Every experiment made since Faraday’s time has confirmed 
this result. The most precise experiments are probably those 
which have been made in determining resistances in absolute 
measure by the method of Lorenz." 

In certain cases where different magnetic fields are superposed 
care must be taken to use for H in (2) the intensity of the field 
due to the fixed circuits or magnets with reference to which 
V is determined. An interesting illustration is that of an in- 
sulated wire inside a coaxial iron tube moving together with 
the wire across an (originally) uniform magnetic field due to 
fixed circuits or magnets. The e.m. f. developed in the wire 
is precisely the same as if the tube were absent, although the 
(resultant) field within the tube is greatly weakened by its 
presence. Since the tube moves with the wire the field due 
’ to its magnetization is not effective. 

5. If non-conducting matter also is electrically constituted 
and moves in a magnetic field, each moving electrified constitu- 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1499 


ent must, as in the case of a conductor, be acted upon by a 
force in accordance with (1), and thus by the motional intensity 
f given by (2). 

Similarly, if the ether is electrically constituted, and if it 
moves in a magnetic field, it also will be the seat of a motional 
intensity given by (2). 

The motional intensity will act to produce opposite displace- 
ments of the positive and negative constitutents of insulators 
as well as of conductors. This will, in general, give rise to an 
electric field, and the intensity E of this field will act on all 
electrical media which the field contains, whether at rest or in 
motion. 

If both the ether and the matter which it permeates move 
together, as they do on the theory of Hertz,” both intensities 
act on both substances. But if the ether remains fixed, and 
the matter which it permeates moves through it, as on the 
theory of Lorentz", the intensity f acts on the matter only, 
while the intensity E acts on both ether and matter. 

The motional intensity f, being equal to [v H], is entirely 
independent of the nature of the moving substance provided 
only it has an electric constitution. 

6. Referring to the matter of motional displacement, or 
electric displacement produced by the motional intensity, and 
to the displacement produced by the induced intensity, in 
insulators, Faraday says“, “‘I have long thought there must be 
a particular condition of such bodies corresponding to the state 
which causes currents in metals and other conductors; and 
~ considering that the bodies are insulators one would expect 
that state to be one of tension. I have by rotating non- 
conducting bodies near magnetic poles and poles near them, and 
also by causing powerful electric currents to be suddenly 
formed and to cease around and about insulators in various 
directions, endeavored to make some such state sensible, but 
have not succeeded. Nevertheless, as any such state must be 
of exceeding low intensity, because of the feeble intensity of 
the currents which are used to induce it, it may well be that the 
state may exist, and may be discoverable by some more expert 
experimentalist, though I have not been able to make it 
sensible.” 

7. An imaginary experiment on this subject and unipolar 
induction combined was described by Poincaré in 1900%. But 
the first actual experiments after Faraday appear to be those of 


1500 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


Blondlot in 1901 on air’. In 1902 I began an investigation 
which included experiments on ebonite, sulphur, and rosin, but 
the work was not completed until 1908". In the meantime 
H. A. Wilson?’ published an investigation on ebonite. 

8. The essential theory of all these experiments can be given 
very simply. Consider an insulator in the form of a hollow 
circular cylinder with dielectric constant K rotating uniformly © 
about its axis in a uniform magnetic field with intensity parallel 
to this axis. Suppose the inner_and outer surfaces of the 
cylinder covered with conducting armatures of negligible 
thickness. 

Let the number of revolutions per second be denoted by n, 
the magnetic flux across a right section of the space between the 
cylinders by ¢, the capacity of the cylindrical condenser so far 
as it depends on the field between the armatures by K C, the 
capacity dependent on the field between the outer armature 
(together with any fixed conductors attached thereto) and the 
surrounding conductors, connected by a brush to the inner 
armature, by C’. 

Let J denote the dielectric constant of that portion of the 
dielectric which moves. If the matter alone rotates while the 
ether remains fixed, J = K—1. If the ether also moves, 
J = K.. If the ether rotates alone, J = 1. It is clearly 
immaterial whether the armatures, which cut no magnetic flux, 
remain fixed or move. 

When the cylinder is set into rotation the motional intensity 
f and motional e.m.f. Y = n ¢ will act radially, let us say 
outwardly for definiteness, on the portion of the dielectric . 
which moves. The electric separation produced in this part of 
the dielectric will give rise to an electric field whose intensity 
will be directed radially inward within the insulating cylinder 
and in which there will be a potential difference V directed from 
the outer armature to the inner armature, and from the outer 
armature to the surrounding conductors. 

The total charge on the outer conductor and its connections, 
if any, will be zero, since it is completely insulated from the 
inner conductor and its connections. This charge consists of 
three parts superposed: 


1. Achargeg: =—ngoJC tals) 
on the inner surface; . 
2. Achargeq = KCV . (4) 


on the inner surface; 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1501 


3. A charge q; = C’ V (5) 


ee the outer surface and any conductors connected therewith. 
ince . 


Qi + q2 + Q3 = 0, we get, if qo + qs = qs, 
ga =(KC+ 0) VeneJIC=-Qq (6) 

In Wilson’s experiments and my own, hollow insulating 
cylinders were used, and the experimental processes (consider- 
ably different in the two investigations) were equivalent to 
measuring qg., n, g, and C and therefrom calculating J, which 
was found equal to K — 1 within the limits of the experimental 
error. 

In Blondlot’s experiments a parallel plate condenser (a 
special case of a part of a hollow cylinder) was used, and a swift 
stream of air was sent between the plates while they were con- 
nected together by a wire at rest, thus making V zero and 
leaving the motional e. m.f. Y to act alone. The connection 
between the plates was broken when the velocity of the air 
stream was a maximum, and the quantity q, directly measured. 
It was found to be zero, thus showing that J = K — 1, since 
K for air and ether together is practically unity. 

All these investigations thus confirm the theory of Lorentz, 
according to which the ether is at rest. The results would be 
identical if there were no ether. 

9. The field inside the rotating cylinder is of great interest, 
but can be discussed here for a few cases only. The solid 
cylinder rotating about its axis and the parallel plate moving 
parallel to one surface are particular cases of the hollow 
cylinder. 

(1) First suppose the ether to be at rest and suppose the 
thin armatures either not existent or else disconnected from all 
other conductors. 

In this case the total electric displacement D at all points of 


a cylinder of any radius r >; (radius of inner surface) <fe 


(radius of outer surface) coaxial with the surface of the insula- 
ting cylinder is 


Oe i ft KE} 


or 
4a 


ll 


i, 
4, (KE+ (K-11) Hr} (7) 


1502 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


where w = 277. Hence 


ee ae ee Ee wHr (8) 


There is no intensity of either kind inside the inner cylinder or 
outside the outer cylinder. 
(2) Next suppose the armatures present and connected by 


awireatrest. This connection reduces the voltage 1) E dr to O, 


but the field intensity H does not vanish except over one 
cylinder of radius 7) to be determined. If it did, the charge on 
the outer armature would be greater than the opposite charge 
on the inner, and the insulator itself would be internally 
charged. For f increases proportionally with 7, and D would 
now therefore increase in the same way. The voltage through 
the insulator being zero, the direction of the field intensity EF, 
always radial, changes in sign at the cylinder of radius rp. 
Within this cylinder E has the same direction as f, so as to 
increase the total displacement; while outside this cylinder it 
has the opposite direction, so as to decrease the displacement 
which would exist were f alone acting. In this way the electric 
flux across all cylinders which can be drawn between the 
armatures is kept the same and equal to that across the cylinder 
of radius 79. At the cylinder of radius r the field intensity is 


K-—-1 wH 


= — K “ (70? re ed (9) 


while 7 is given by the expression!® 


( (pee? SS Tis “ 
to 
be Nah ) 
(3) If the wire moves with the armatures a field intensity 
due to the potential difference V from the outer to the inner 


armature equal to thee. m.f.n ¢ = se (r.? — r,?) developed 


in the wire will be superposed on the intensity given by (9), 
with the result that the displacement within the rotating con- 
denser will be exactly the same as if it contained ether only, 
at rest, and were charged to the potential difference V, 

(4)» If the ether moves with the matter in case (1), we 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1503 


must substitute K for K — 1, and we get in place of (7) and (8) 
the relations 


ONS pe ehick E) (10) 


and H=-f=—owHr (11) 


Neither matter nor ether is displaced, either within or without 
the cylinder. 

(5) If the ether moves with the matter in case (2), equa- 
tion (9) becomes 
w H 


Fg rcrs 


(ro? — 1°) (12) 


while 7) remains unchanged. 

(6)" If the wire moves with the ether and the matter of case 
(4) [or if the ether moves with the matter and the wire of 
case (3)], there is no displacement anywhere, exactly as in 
case (4), where the wire was absent". 

10. Inthe second group of experiments Faraday found that 
if a conducting circuit was kept fixed and the magnetic flux 
through it altered in any way by the motion of adjacent circuits 
or magnets, an e. m.f. was developed around it equal to the 
rate of decrease of magnetic flux through it, precisely as in the 
experiments of the first group for the same relative motion of 
the material systems. In this case the tubes of magnetic 
induction, which are always closed, must be conceived to move 
across the circuit, and the intensity induced therein at any 
point may be conceived as given by the expression 


E = [H0] (13) 


where v is the velocity of the tubes. The electromotive force 
around the circuit is the line integral of this expression. 

Furthermore, if the conducting circuit is kept fixed, as before, 
and the magnetic flux through it changed in any way by the 
alteration of adjacent magnets or circuits, or currents in these 
circuits, an e. m. f. is developed and is equal, again, to the rate 
of decrease of magnetic flux through it. In this case also we 
may conceive the (closed) tubes of magnetic induction to move 
across the circuit, producing therein at any point an intensity 
given by (13). 

If the circuit is not conducting, but is merely a path drawn in 


1504 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


an insulator or in the free ether, the electromotive force 
around it and the electric intensity at any point of it are given 
by the same expressions as before. The displacement, the 
effect of the intensity, of course differs with the conditions. 

There is never any essential difficulty in determining the 
induced e.m.f., or line integral of the induced intensity, 
around a complete circuit from the Faraday-Neumann law; 
but the application of equation (13) to the determination of 
the intensity at a point is often impossible. For, except in 
very special cases, we do not know the velocities of the tubes 
of induction. Indeed, in certain cases the very conception of 
the motion of tubes of induction appears to many to be without 
meaning. 

Consistently with experiment, however, the theory has been 
put in such a form by Maxwell, Clausius, and Lorentz, as to 
give for the induced intensity at a point, an expression which 
depends only on the motion of the electrons which produce the 
magnetic field and the time. 

If e, denotes the (fixed) charge of a certain electron, 1; .its 
distance from the point P at which the induced intensity is to 
be determined, and v, its velocity, then at the time t the vector 
potential at P due to this electron is by definition, 


4A, 2 
Ty 
the (changing) quantities v,; and 7, being the velocity and 
distance at a time earlier than the time ¢ by the interval 
required for an electric wave to travel from the electron to P. 
The vector potential A at P due to all the moving electrons is 


the vector sum of all the minute vector potentials A, = Bs 


Ty 


e 
A= -—2™ ete. Thatis A = vector >» Ai = vector yt 
a 


In terms of this vector potential A the expression for the in- 
duced intensity is simply 


dA 


siete he 


and the electromotive force around the circuit is the line 
integral of this expression; Even in cases where it is not pos- 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1505 


sible to determine the velocities of the electrons and thus 
calculate A, it is possible to determine whether A, and thus also 


dA : bade ; oF 
ikea changes when certain variations in conditions occur, 


and thus to obtain useful information with respect to HL. 

11. In many cases the magnetic field in which a body is 
moving is changing with the time, and we have the motional 
and induced intensities superposed. Similarly, they are super- 
posed when the body under experimentation and the agent 
producing the field are both in motion. 

If the system referred to as fixed is, instead of being fixed to 
the earth, fixed to a ship or car in uniform motion, there is no 
difference in observed results, according to experiments hitherto 
made. It is understood that the observer and instruments 
are on board, though this is often a matter of no consequence. 

It will be instructive to consider some simple experiments, 
in part made familiar long ago by Faraday, with a circular 
cylindrical magnet A and an adjacent coaxial circular coil of 
wire B with a remote galvanometer connected into the circuit 
by long twisted leads. 

(1) If A is fixed to the earth and B moves along the axis, 
there will be a motional e.m.f. in B and a certain electric 
charge q will traverse the galvanometer for a given change of 
magnetic flux through B.. (2) If now B is fixed to the earth, 
and A is displaced, the relative motion of A and B being the 
same as before, there will be an induced e. m. f. in B exactly 
equal to the motional e. m.f. in the previous case, and the 
same charge q will traverse the galvanometer. 

It is of no consequence whether the galvanometer is attached 
to-A, or to B, or to the earth. The indications will be the 
same, and will appear the same to observers on A, or in B, or 
on the earth. | 

Suppose now that the region in which the experiments are 
performed is permeated by the ether, and for simplicity sup- 
pose this fixed relatively to the earth. 

When experiment (1) is performed, the only electric intensity 
and displacement produced will be the motional intensity and 
displacement in the coil. 

When (2) is performed, there will be the same displacement 
in the coil, due to an induced intensity equal to the previous 
motional intensity; and at the same time the field about the 


1506 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


coil and magnet will be filled with circular lines of induced 
intensity all coaxial with the magnet and due to the motion 
of its tubes of magnetic induction. This induced intensity 
will produce electric displacement in the ether, the lines of 
displacement also being coaxial with the magnet. 

The galvanometer shows no difference between the two 
cases, but the difference really exists. 

If there is no ether, no electric displacement, aside from the 
current in the coil, will occur in either case. 

If an experiment takes place in which relative motion between 
A and B occurs in an isolated region, and observers are placed 
on A and B, each observer is likely to assume that he is fixed 
and that the other is moving. The observer on A will conclude 
that there is a-motional e. m. f. in B; while the observer on B 
will observe the same e. m. f. but will call it znduced. A third 
observer, fixed to neither A nor B, will consider the e. m. f. 
to be partly induced and partly motional. 

12. Faraday, as we have seen, attempted to study the dis- 
placement produced in insulators by the induced intensity, 
but without success. Except for a qualitative experiment of 
Hertz’s” made with high-frequency oscillations and lying 
outside the scope of this discussion, no successful experiments 
on the displacement in material media appear to have been 
made. Kuehne” has, however, shown that a finite electrified 
body in a region traversed by moving tubes of magnetic in- 
duction is acted upon by a force consistent with equation (13). 

13. Recently, in an investigation presented to the Physical 
Society, I tried to find out whether, in a certain special case, 
the induced intensity produces electric displacement in the 
ether.** But I expressed to the society an uncertainty which 
has persisted and grown, as to the validity of one of the 
assumptions underlying the method. The experiment will be 
briefly considered. 

14. Suppose an air condenser, with horizontal plates A B, 
short-circuited by a wire C and placed in a uniform magnetic 
field whose lines of induction are parallel to the plates. Sup- 
pose that the condenser is screened (an absolutely essential 
precaution) by being placed symmetrically within a metallic 
box whose faces are parallel and perpendicular to the plates, 
and that the upper plate is connected to the top of the box by 
a wire F. 

If the box and condenser move together in the magnetic 
field parallel to the plates and perpendicular to the lines of 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1507 


induction, the plates will become charged, but the charge on 
the lower face of each plate will be equal and opposite to the 
charge on the upper face of the same plate. If during the 
motion the lower plate is removed and tested for total charge, 
it will thus be found uncharged. 

15. If the box and condenser remain fixed and the magnet is 
moved, the charges will be exactly as before on the hypothesis 
that there is no ether. If the ether exists, however, there 
will be no electric displacement anywhere within the box, and 
the plates will be without charge on either side. The test of 
the lower plate for total charge will thus give the same result 
as before, and the experiment will not discriminate between the 
two hypotheses. 

16. Imagine the magnetic field to be sharply divided into 
two parts by the plane passing through the upper surface of 
the lower plate B, the complete field throughout the region 
occupied by the box remaining uniform, but the tubes of in- 
duction of the lower part remaining fixed like the condenser, 
while the tubes of the upper part move when the magnet moves. 
In the attempt to accomplish this end I used two similar mag- 
nets, symmetrically placed with respect to the plate B, the 
lower one fixed to the condenser. 

If this arrangement secures the end desired, and the con- 
denser remains fixed while the upper magnet moves, the result 
will be different according to the hypothesis made with regard 
to the ether. ; : 

If there is no ether the upper surface of the lower plate of 
the condenser will become charged, there being now no in- 
tensity or displacement beneath the lower plate. If the 
ether exists, the plate will be uncharged. 

Experiments made in this way have shown that the lower 
plate of the condenser does not become charged when the upper 
magnet moves. 

If, however, the assumption made above with reference to 
the division of the magnetic field and the application of equation 
(13) under these circumstances are not justified, and the prin- 
ciple of superposition holds in such a way that the two magnets 
independently produce their individual effects, the lower 
magnet will produce no effect (at the critical time) and the 
upper magnet will act exactly like the single magnet of Sections 
14 and 15 (but with a non-uniform field, which does not affect 

the theory essentially), producing no (total) charge on the 


1508 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


lower plate on either hypothesis. This is the result to be ex- 
pected from the application of equation (14). In this case 
the experiments simply confirm Section 15.”° 

17. We come now to the subject of unipolar induction.”* In 
one of Faraday’s experiments a symmetrical magnet rotating 
uniformly about its axis was touched by a wire A C B, including 
the coil of a galvanometer, at two points A and B, one near 
the axis at one end, the other on the cylindrical surface near 
the center. An e.m.f. was developed in the circuit equal 
to that which would be developed if the magnet remained fixed 
and the conductor A C B moved, the relative motion being 
the same as before. 

In another experiment a copper disk was mounted coaxially 
close to one end of the magnet and a galvanometer C con- 
nected to two points A and B near the center and edge of the 
disk. When the disk rotated, an e. m. f. equal to that which 
would be produced by the same relative motion of A C B, 
was developed as before, whether the magnet rotated or not. 
But no current traversed the galvanometer when the disk 
remained fixed. 

Similar results are obtained when the magnet is replaced by 
an electromagnet or by an electric coil wound on a non-mag- 
netic core. 

18. Faraday considered his experiments to prove that the 
tubes of magnetic induction remain fixed and that the magnet 
and disk’ move through them, the e.m.f. thus being a pure 
motional e.m.f. with the disk or the magnet itself as its seat. 

It was pointed out by Tolver Preston,”’ however, that the 
results are equally well explained by the assumption that the 
tubes of magnetic induction share the rotary motion of the 
magnet and produce an induced e. m.f. by cutting the con- 
ductor A C B. 

19. Faraday’s experiments have been repeated with various 
modifications a great many times, but the problem of the seat 
of the e.m.f. was brought no nearer to a solution until the ex- 
periments of E. Lecher were published” in 1895. Lecher made 
three beautiful experiments, two of which, at least, are quite 
difficult to explain except on the assumption that the tubes 
of magnetic induction remain fixed, or that the seat of the 
e. m. f, is in the moving part of the circuit. . 

In one of these experiments, for which alone we have space, 
two similar electromagnets were mounted coaxially and near 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1509 


together, with the current in both coils in the same direction. 
A galvanometer was connected in the usual way to two points 
on one of the magnets. It was found that the current de- 
pended entirely on the motion of this magnet, being the same 
whether the other magnet rotated in either direction or re- 
mained at rest. On the assumption that the seat of the e. m. f. 
is the moving magnet the explanation of this result is quite 
obvious. Improbable assumptions are necessary to explain 
it on the other hypothesis. By making sufficient assumptions 
however, this is possible; and Lecher did not consider his ex- 
periments entirely conclusive. 

20. Many students of physics have thought that this problem 
could be solved by experiments on so-called open circuits— 
experiments in which static charges, or forces on bodies with 
such charges, would be looked for instead of permanent gal- 
vanometer currents. The list includes Weber, Tolver Preston, 
Hertz, Lodge, Lecher, and others. But the theories on which 
s.ch experiments and proposed experiments have been based 
appear to be fallacious. 

21. As a particular case, consider a long cylindrical air 
condenser placed in a uniform magnetic field with lines of in- 
duction parallel to its axis and short-circuited by disks closing 
the ends. If this condenser were rotated about its axis it 
would become charged by the motional e.m.f. in the disks, 
the charge of the inner armature, the one assumed to be 
tested, being equal to this e. m. f. multiplied by the capacity. 

If, however, the condenser and wire remain fixed, and the 
agent producing the magnetic field rotates about the axis, 
the relative motion being the same as before, the result to be 
expected depends on the hypothesis made with respect to the 
ether. 

First suppose that the ether does not exist. If the tubes of 
induction do not move, the condenser will remain uncharged. 
If the tubes of induction move with the agent, an e. m. f. will 
be induced in the disks producing a potential difference in the 
opposite direction through the condenser and charging it as 
when the condenser moved. 

If, on the other hand, the ether exists, there will again be 
no charge in case the tubes of induction remain fixed. If the 
tubes of induction move, however, there will be superposed on 
the charge due to the potential difference developed in the 
corresponding case for no ether an equal and opposite charge 


1510 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION [Oct. 10 


due to thee.m. f. induced in the ether between the arm- 
atures. There will, as before, be no change on the inner 
surface of the inner armature. Thus it will remain uncharged, 
just as if the tubes of induction had remained fixed. 

Thus if the armature should, become charged in such an 
experiment it would prove that the ether as an electrical 
medium does not exist, and that the tubes of induction move. 

But if the armature should not become charged, the ex- 
periment would prove only that either (1) the ether does not 
exist and the tubes of induction do not move, or (2) the ether 
exists. 

22. In 1912 I completed an extended series of experiments 
of this kind, not with the hope (which I originally had) of 
solving the problem of unipolar induction, but to get what 
information they might yield on the relations between electro- 
magnetic induction and relative motion.” 

The experiments show that the condenser does not become 
charged, the experimental error being a small fraction of the 
charge the condenser would receive if it rotated while the 
agent producing the field remained fixed. 

This is the first case in electromagnetic induction in which 
it has been proved that the observed effect does not depend 
entirely on the relativity of the motion of the essential material 
systems involved. 

23. If the condenser and short-circuiting disks are made to 
rotate together with the agent producing the field, there will 
be superposed on the (zero) charge of the condenser in my 
experiments a charge equal to that it would take if the agent 
producing the field remained fixed and the condenser rotated. 
Rotating the agent alone produces no charge; rotating the 
condenser and disks alone produces a charge. When both are 
rotated together the effects must be superposed. 

This corollary of my experiments has been confirmed in each 
of two recent investigations; one by Kennard,** who had done 
earlier work in this field; and one by Pegram.*! 

In their experiments the apparatus was essentially similar 
to my own, but the condenser and coil were both made to rotate. 
The condenser was found to become charged in accordance 
with the theory. 

In this last rotation experiment we have a positive effect of 
- electromagnetic induction without any relative motion be- 
tween the essential material parts of the system. In my 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 1511 


own rotation experiments we have a zero effect with a positive 
relative motion. Neither group of experiments, however, 
is inconsistent with the principle of relativity of Einstein, 
which relates to translatory motion only, or with the theories 
of Maxwell and Lorentz. 

These experiments do not seem to me to solve the old prob- 
lem of unipolar induction. As shown above (Section 21) they 
prove either (1) that the ether does not exist and that the 
tubes of induction do not move, or (2) that the ether exists. 
If we had evidence that the ether does not exist, the ex- 
periments would prove that the tubes of induction remain 
fixed. 

24. The simplest assumption which will account for all the 
unipolar phenomena is Faraday’s assumption that the tubes 
of induction are fixed and that the e. m. f. is a pure motional 
e. m. f. in the moving conductors. The electron theory, more- 
over, supports this assumption in the simplest case to which 
it can be applied,*! viz. that of a thin solenoid carrying a direct 
current and rotating about its axis. When the solenoid is 
rotated there is simply superposed on the conduction current 
density at any point of the solenoid a convection current 
density of identical nature and zero magnitude, since the 
positive and negative charges per unit volume of the conductor 
are equal. And this could not, apparently, affect in any way 
the state of the magnetic field. 

For practical purposes, however, it is of no consequence which 
assumption is made. On the simpler hypothesis, the calcula- 
tion of the e. m. f. may be made from equation (2); on the other, 
from equation (13); and on either hypothesis, or any combina- 
tion of the two, it may be calculated from the rate of change of 
flux through the circuit from the brush A in contact with the 
cylindrical surface of the magnet, through the galvanometer 
to the brush B in contact with the center of the end surface of 
the magnet, from B to a point C fixed on the magnet in the 
same transverse circle with A, and from C along the arc of the 
circle to the brush A. With. the uniform growth of the arc 
A C, which contributes nothing to the e. m. f. and may encircle 
- the cylinder any number of times, the flux through the circuit 
changes at the same uniform rate on any hypothesis. 

25. This arrangement, essentially the unipolar or homopolar 
generator, in which the rotation takes place about the axis 
of a symmetrical field and one part of the system cuts the flux 


1512 BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION (Oct. 10 


uniformly and always in the same direction, is clearly the only 
one in which a steady direct current can be electromagnetically 
produced by rotation without commutation. With rotation 
about any other axis the e.m.f. will fluctuate or alternate 
periodically. 


Department of Terrestrial Magnetism 
Carnegie Institution of Washington. 


FOOTNOTES 


1. For recent general discussions of electromotive forces of induction 
see F. Emde, Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau 26, 1908, pp. 997, 1023, 
1074, 1119, and 27, 1909, p. 783; also de Baillehache, Bull. Soc. Int. des 
flectriciens 10, 1910, pp. 89, 288. 

2. Fora brief account of the work of some of the early investigators 
see Brillouin, Propagation de I’ Flectricité, pp. 159-167, 1904. ; 

3. Much of the work prior to 1895 is described by E. Lecher, Wied. 
Ann. 54, 1895, p. 276. 

Treatise, §§576, 577. 

Wied. Ann. 17, 1882, p. 55. 

Wied. Ann. 49, 1893, p. 284; 57, 1896, p. 232. 
Phys. Zeit. 7, 1906, p. 640. 

Ann. d. Phys. 39, 1912, p. 840. 

Phys. Rev., 8, 1916, p. 97; 9, 1917, p. 164. 

10. The expression [v H] signifies the vector product of the vectors v 
and H. Its magnitude is equal to the product » H sin 0, when # (< 180°) 
is the angle between the directions of the two vectors; and its direction 
is the direction in which a right handed screw would be translated if it 
were rotated through the angle @ from a position in which the slot in its 
head has the direction of v to that in which it has the direction of H. It 
is thus perpendicular to both v and H. 

11. Pogg. Ann. 149, 18738, p. 251. The most recent and precise work 
on this subject is that of F. KE. Smith, Roy. Soc. Phil. Trans. A. 214, 1914, 
p.27. For some recent experiments on the motional e. m. f. in conductors, 
consistent, like all others, with equation (2), see C. Hering, Trans. 

A. I. E. E. 27, 1908, p. 1841; and A. Blondel, C. R. 159, 1914, p. 674. 

12. Electric Waves, p. 241 (Wied. Ann. 41, 1890, p. 369). See 
further section 9, (4), (5) and (6). The existence of H = —f, evidently 
necessary, since f diverges, to keep D (=0 in equation (11) ) from di- 
vergence, and the insulator thus free irom internal charge, appears im- 

possible to account for and thus evidence against justification of the 
assumption that the ether alone, (K=1) or the ether and matter to- 
gether, (K>1) can move. It is thus evidence against the validity of 
-Hertz’s theory. ok 

13. Archives Neerlandaises 25, 1892, p. 363. 

14. Exp. Res. § 1728. 

15. L’ #elairage Flectrique 23, 1900, p. 41. 

16. J. de Phys., Jan. 1902. 

17. Phys. Rev. 27, 1908, p. 425. . 

18. Roy. Soc. Phil. Trans. A., Sept., 1904. 


SO 08 Sou 


1919] BARNETT: ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 15138 


19. Barnett, 1. ¢., pp. 431-433. 

20. Attention was first called in print to this result by E. H. Kennard 
(Phys. Zeit., 13, 1912, p. 1156), though I had previously made use of it. 

21. The capacity of the wire is here neglected. The wire itself, of 
course, becomes charged and there is displacement in the dielectric about 
ats 

22. Electric Waves, p. 95. 

23. Phil. Mag., Apr. 1910. 

24. Phys. Rev. 12, 1918, p. 95. 

25. As another illustration of the great difficulty involved in getting 
information about the ether from experiments in electromagnetic induc- 
tion it is instructive to consider the following: A long circular solenoid 
with an iron core is traversed by an alternating current, so that tubes of 
magnetic induction periodically move into and out from the core, pro- 
ducing circular lines of electric intensity centered on the axis. A long 
narrow, and thin air condenser is mounted near the solenoid with its 
greatest length and the planes of its armatures parallel to the axis. The 
armatures are connected by a wire which includes a detecting instrument. 
If there is no ether, the condenser receives alternating charges on the 
inner surfaces of its armatures; if the ether exists, the condenser receives 
the same charges, but on the outer surfaces of the armatures, the de- 
tecting instrument thus indicates the same current on both hypotheses. 
Essentially the same difficulty would arise in an experiment similar to 
that of Section 15, but made without an electric screen. 

26. In addition to Lecher, |. c., see Barnett, Phys. Rev. 35, 1912, p. 
323; G. W. O. Howe, Electrician 76, 1915, pp. 169, 210, 323, 355; and 
Pegram, Phys. Rev. 10, 1917, p. 591. 

27. Phil. Mag. 19, 1885, pp. 131 and 215. 

28.° Lecher, l. ¢. 

29. Phys. Rev. 35,1912, p. 323. 

30. Phil. Mag., Feb. 1917. 

Py iPesram, I-.¢. 


. 
z r] 
\ a 
4 
met, 
Ny ‘ig 
a 
f 
n 
ae, 
~ 
Ne pe ae ee 
or. A 
¥ 
Po 
L- « 


soe A 
-. oh ak eh = eae en Enea 
8 =U Sa 


Presented at the 355th meeting of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
November 14, 1910 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E. 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF 
SINGLE-SHAFT STEAM TURBINES 


BY J. F. JOHNSON 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

This paper will be restricted to a discussion of some of the 
factors which influence limits as applying particularly to tur- 
bines of the reaction type. With the employment of high 
vacua the limit of power will be determined largely by the area 
obtainable through the last stage. 

Limiting factors include: 

1. Chosen-maximum values of steam speed through the 
blades in order to keep the leaving losses within permissible 
limits. For highest efficiency the steam speed should be about 
25 per cent greater than the blade speed, but in the last stages it is 
sometimes made 100 per cent greater as a compromise between 
efficiency and cost. Similarly the outlet angle of the blades is 
increased from 20 deg. to 35 deg. 

2. Physical characteristics of materials employed and chosen 
limits to which these may be safely stressed. By varying the 
form of rotor construction stresses in it may usually be kept 
within necessary limits up to the point at which limiting stresses 
in the blades or blade fastenings are reached. For any given ro- 
tative speed and blade angle the steam capacity is directly pro- 
portional to the stress at the base of the blades regardless of 
the diameter and blade height. 

3. Capacity limits of manufacturing facilities, increased 
bracing and clearances necessary to insure requisite rigidity and 
reliability, and capacity loss due to outages for inspection and 
repair, 

Pie. 6 shows maximum capacity at various speeds which are 
physically possible without exceeding present limits of stresses. 
It is valuable chiefly as showing the physical relation between 
speed and capacity with given limiting stress values. 


HE recent rapid development of steam turbine-driven 
electric power-generating units of large capacity has 
prompted your Society to undertake a study of the present 
limits of speed and power for such units. This paper will be 
restricted to a discussion of some of the factors which deter- 
mine or influence such limits as applying particularly to tur- 
bines of the reaction type. 

With the employment of high vacua, such as is the present 
universal practise, the limit of power of a turbine operating at 
a given speed will be determined largely by the area obtainable 

through the last stage for the final expansion and ae of 
1515 


1516 JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


the steam prior to its entering the condenser. The significance 
of this will be apparent when attention is called to the fact 
that whereas a pound of steam, when entering the first stage, 
has a volume of less than 21% cu. ft., when passing through the 
last stage it has a volume of approximately 395 cu. ft. when 
expanded to 281% in. vacuum, and 585 cu. ft. when expanded to 
29 in.; a ratio in the latter case of 1 to 234. 

Consequently, in any discussion of limits of power, it will 
be necessary to assume conditions of pressure and superheat 
of the steam entering the turbine, the vacuum to which 
the steam is to be expanded in the blading, and the efficiency 
or rate of steam flow per unit of power. For these conditions 
250 lb. gage pressure with 200 deg. fahr. superheat and 29-in. 
vacuum referred to a barometer of 30 in., and efficiencies as are 
commonly obtainable with them, will be used. 

Limiting factors may be divided into three classes: First; 
Theoretical, including limiting steam velocities and effect on 
efficiency of velocity remaining in steam after leaving the last 
stage, and the area through the blades as affected by blade 
angle. Second; Physical, including methods of construction, 
materials, stresses, factor of safety against rupture, reliability 
factor, and limitations of transportation facilities. Third; 
Economic, including limits beyond which it may be physically 
possible, but economically inadvisable, to go, such as effect of 
size of structure or of character of materials employed on cost, 
and time required to make inspection and repairs. 


THEORETICAL LIMITS 


In this class there are but few limitations as affecting capacity 
at a given speed because with materials of infinite strength and 
rigidity available it would be possible to build units of infinite 
capacity; but for a given diameter and’blade height the capac- 
ity will be limited by chosen maximum values of steam speed 
through the blades, in order to keep the leaving losses, or 
available energy in the steam discharged to the condenser, 
within permissible limits. Throughout the entire turbine, with 
the exception of the last few stages, steam speeds only about 
25 per cent in excess of the corresponding blade speeds are 
employed in order to secure maximum efficiency. In the latter 
stages, however, the volumes become so great that acompro- 
mise between maximum theoretical efficiency and physical 

dimensions becomes advisable by increasing the steam speed 


1919] JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES 1517 


sometimes to approximately 100 per cent in excess of the blade 
speed. The steam after being discharged from the last stage, 
therefore, still contains a small portion of available energy the 
recovery of which would involve disproportionate expense. 

For example, if the pressure drop in the last stage is such as 
to render available for work thirty heat units which will 
produce an equivalent velocity of 1225 ft. per sec., and if the 
blade speed is such that the steam after leaving it still has a 
velocity of 600 ft. per sec., which is the equivalent of 7.2 B. t. u., 
this 7.2 B. t. u. will be totally lost, whereas probably 80 per cent 
of it, (or 6 B. t. u.), might be recovered were it practicable to 
use an additional stage of proper proportions. This would 
improve the total efficiency of the turbine approximately 114 


qe 
218 
© oy 
S 
ShoolS S 
A B Cc D 
Fig. 1 


per cent. Higher blade speeds will tend to improve the effi- 
ciency by reducing leaving losses, but generally not as effec- 
tively as would larger blade areas with lower steam velocities 
and correspondingly increased number of stages. 

Having fixed the height of a row of blades, the area of the 
steam space is dependent upon the angle formed between the 
center line of the row of blades and the outlet portion of the 
blade. The smaller this angle is the smaller will be the area 
and vice versa. On the other hand the smaller this angle the 
higher the efficiency because of the lesser absolute velocity left 
in the steam discharged to the condenser. 

In Fig. 14 is shown a relation between steam speed and blade 
speed to give highest efficiency. The blade speed is 600 ft. per 


— 


1518 JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


sec., steam speed 638 ft. per sec., blade angle 20 deg. and steam, 
speed after leaving blades, 218 ft. per sec. in direction at right 
angles to direction of rotation. Fig. 18 shows a similar condi- 
tion giving maximum obtainable efficiency employing a 35 
deg. blade angle and Fig. 1c a condition in which the steam 
speed is 100 per cent greater than the blade speed. 

The leaving losses are, in Fig. 1A, 218 ft. per sec., Fig. 1B, 420 
ft. per sec., and Fig. 1c, 785 ft. per sec., which is the equivalent 
Of 0:95):3.5,-and2.3)B. t2 & ienibeuivelys 

The steam area is ordinarily expressed as a ratio of the pel 
pendicular distance between blades, to the pitch of the blades, 
as a/b (see Fig. 1p). Highest actual efficiency is obtained by 
keeping this ratio between 0.25 and 0.3, and this is done in all 
stages except the last few in high vacuum machines where it is 
increased to a maximum of 0.5, the equivalent angle being 
about 35 deg. which includes proper allowance for blade thick- 
ness; this ratio having been determined upon as a proper 
compromise between cost of increased blade height and loss of 
efficiency due to increased terminal loss. 

Some European manufacturers have employed ratios as 
large as 0.65 and 0.7. 


PHYSICAL LIMITS 


Chief among the physical factors limiting turbine capacity 
are the physical characteristics of the material employed and 
the chosen limits to which these materials may be safely 
stressed, bearing in mind that either uniformity of quality, or 
factor of safety sufficient to cover all possible variations, 
together with inaccuracies in calculation and irregularities of 
operation, must be provided for. While alloy steels possessing 
exceptionally high physical characteristics are procurable, their 
high qualities depend on relatively sensitive metallurgical 
processes which in the opinion of some engineers cannot as yet 
be carried out by regular workmen as a manufacturing process 
with a sufficient degree of reliability to justify their use, and 
that until this can be done, conservatism demands adherence 
to the lower strength, lesser sensitive materials. Such materials 
may, with suitable forms of construction, be safely stressed 
under the maximum test condition to within a few thousand 
pounds of their true elastic limits. 

When the construction of the rotor is not limited to any one 
special form, the design may be varied so as to take full advan- 


1919] JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES 1519 


tage of the low speeds in the high and intermediate stages, 
(where low speeds must be used in order to secure high effi- 
ciency), by employing a drum the thickness of which may be 
varied to keep the stresses within desired limits ; while in low 
pressure stages where the stresses are highest, either disks 
carried on a shaft, or solid disks suitably held together, may be 
employed. With the solid disk construction the stresses may 
be kept within any reasonable limits up to speeds at which the 
design becomes too massive and expensive. 

The steel regularly used by the Westinghouse company for 
turbine rotors conforms to the following characteristic specifi- 
cations: 

Test rings taken as close as possible to the point of maximum 
stress must show the following characteristics with standard 
two-in. specimens: 


k 12 Ft. 2 Es “ 
| 
| 


& 
A= 
a 
2 

d 
a 


Tensile strength 65,000 to 70,000 lb. per sq. in. 

True elastic limit 22,000 to 25,000 lb. per sq. in. 

Elongation 15 per cent to 18 per cent. 

Reduction of area 20 per cent to 25 per cent. 

The steel must be of best quality, having approximately 0.25 
per cent carbon, 0.50 to 0.60 per cent manganese, 0.25 per cent 
silicon, and not over 0.025 per cent sulphur or of phosphorus. 

The material is obtained ordinarily in the form of castings, 
though occasionally as forgings. The specifications in either 
case are the same. Especially in the larger sizes the forgings 
_ have been difficult to obtain, excessively expensive, and no 
more uniform or reliable in quality than the castings. 

Fig. 2 shows the form of casting for a rotor end. Tt is cast 
vertically with the small end down, and after casting, is allowed 
to cool very slowly in the sand. After removal, the entire 


1520 JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


upper portion which constitutes the riser, is cut off and the 
casting then thoroughly annealed by being heated slowly and 
evenly to a temperature of about 1650 deg. fahr. and allowed 
to cool very slowly. It is then rough machined to within 
about 14 in. of finished surface, after which it is put in a furnace 
and heated to about 1100 deg. fahr. and allowed to cool slowly 
to remove any possible internal stresses set up by reason of the 
metal removed in machining. It is then finish machined and 
given no further treatment of any kind. 

The limit of stress to which-this material is subjected is 
20,000 lb. per sq. in. when operating at a speed 20 per cent in 
excess of the normal operating speed. The stress at normal 


20,000 
(1.20) 
cent of the minimum allowable true elastic limit, about 46 per 
cent of the yield point and 211% per cent of the minimum ulti- 
mate strength. It is not generally appreciated that should the 
stress, by reason of defect or excessive overspeed, exceed the 
true elastic limit, no injury will result other than a slight per- 
manent stretch, together with such blade damage as may 
result therefrom. In an extreme case of overspeed the rotor 
drum or solid disk will stretch sufficiently to cause blading to 
rub to such an extent as to practically insure entirely destroy- 
ing it, and thus prevent further overspeed, before the ultimate 
strength and elongation of the material is reached. 

If the rotor design can be so modified as to always keep the 
stresses within necessary limits, then the stress at the base of 
the blades, or in blade fastenings, determines the maximum 
capacity obtainable with a given speed. 

There exists two interesting relations between the stress at 
the base of blades, steam passage area through the blades, and 
rotative speed. For any given rotative speed and blade angle, 
the steam capacity or steam area through the blades is directly 
proportional to the stress at the base of the blades, regardless of 
the diameter and blade height selected. This stress can only be 
modified by unevenly varying the cross sectional area of the 
blades, such for example, as thickening the blade near the base. 
Also for any given stress the area through the blades will vary 
inversely as the square of the speed, i. e., if at a speed of 1800 
rev. per min. a given stress and area are obtained, then at 900 
rev. per min. the area will be increased four times if the stress 
is kept constant. 


speed is therefore = 13,900 lb. This stress is 63 per 


1919] JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES 1521 


These relations will be readily seen from the following for- 
mulas: 
Area through blades = 7 X MD x HXR. 


If R constant = Constant x MD x H 


W VY? 


And stress at base of blades sa eras 


ll 


2 


0.284 x H x ( rev. per min. X uP) 
229 
25 Veh gies Re | ms BF ie EES he 


MD 
32.16 X 4 


_ 0.284 x 24 x MD X H * (rev. per min.)? 
= 32.16 X (229)? 


If rev. per min. is constant = constant x MD x H. 
Where H = Blade height in inches. 
M D = Mean diameter of blades in inches. 
R = Ratio of area through blades to total annular 
area occupied by blades. 
0.284 = Weight of blade material in lb. per cu. in. 


The area and stress are therefore each equal to a constant 
times the product of mean diameter and blade height, and 
when the stress is constant this product will vary inversely as 
the square of the rev. per min. 

The ratio of blade height to rotor diameter is, therefore, not 
a factor in determining physical limit of capacity, but only in 
determining efficiency, cost, and to some extent, reliability of 
the turbine. =a 
_ Blading used in impulse stages and in low pressure reaction 
stages in which stresses exceed 15,000 lb. per sq. in. at 20 per 
cent overspeed is made of a 5 per cent electric furnace nickel 
steel in which the carbon sulphur and phosphorus are kept 
very low. It is really a nickel iron having a very fine close 


structure. 
Its physical and chemical characteristics are as follows: 


Mensile strene thy ta azcis arash fea). 65,000 lb. per sq. in. minimum 
Eruerelasti cali tri ty oc noreau-copkew) ae 35,000 1b per sq. in. minimum 
LOMPAGONL WEA ey os agrees, co cheep. 30 per cent mininum 


Reduction of area.................60 per cent minimum 


1522 JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


Carbon; notrovierssscees eee oe 0.08 per cent 

Silicon, Not OVvert...-.m eis dee ae OL OSpericemt 
Phosphorus, not over..............0.025 per cent 
Sulphur, not over.................0.04 per cent 
Manganese: 3 62th. ee ale tater 0.40 to 0.50 per cent 
Nickel 2:3. sa ot voter see eee 4.5 to 5.5 per cent 


This material is annealed by heating to 1425 deg. fahr. and 
cooled in open air after rolling into sections required for forming 
into various blade shapes, and is given no further heat treat- 
ment. 

The maximum stress at 20 per cent overspeed to which this 
material is subjected is 25,000 lb. The corresponding stress at 
normal speed is, therefore, 17,350 lb., this being 49 per cent of 


Ss 

N 

SSN 
Ly 


YA 
(4 
SSUSEENUSSO SNES 


fea Saye 
mga” — 


Fira. 5 


the true elastic limit, and 2614 per cent of minimum ultimate 
strength. 


Copper Bi oe ea le ceded ee, BPN aA 97 to 98 per cent 
LTRs Sok SR eae aR aa 2 to 8 per cent 
PHOSPhOrusee ye: cea eee . 0.03 to 0.07 per cent 


Satisfactory methods of blade fastening involve no problems 
unless allowable stresses in the blades are very materially 
higher than those in the blade carrying element. 

Fig. 3 shows a method used where the stress at the base of 
the blade does not exceed 17,500 Ib., and Fig. 4 where stresses 
between 17,500 Ib. and 25,000 lb. are involved. At 25,000 lb. 


PLATE LXXIV. 


XXXVI, 1919 


VOL 


3. 


EITG: 


[JOHNSON] 


1919] JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES 1523 


stress at the base of the blade the tensile stress in reduced 
section of base is 11,800 lb., and the shearing stress in the blade 
and blade carrying element is 10,000 lb. The compoundside 
wedges are employed to insure an absolutely tight fit of the 
blade in the groove so as to protect the reduced section of the 
blade against any stresses other than direct tension. 

Increased capacity without decrease of rotative speed or in- 
crease of stresses may be obtained by employing multiple low 
pressure stages. This well known and popular expedient pos- 
sesses the merit of permitting high-vacuum turbines to be built 

t speeds and capacities up to approximately the present limits 
of generator construction, without exceeding moderate diameters 
blade lengths, and stresses. 


160,000 = 
| | 
at. 
120,000 Heese. <4} 1) 
= a] 
2 
© 80,000 
Oo 
z 5 om 
40,000 te | 
‘ 
ee 
0 
600 1000 1400 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400 


REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 


Fic. 6—Limits or Capacity or STEAM TURBINES wiITH DovuBLE-FLOW 
Low-PRESSURE STAGES 


Having steel blades of uniform cross-section stressed to 25,000 lb. per sq. in, at base 
of blades at 20 per cent overspeed and maximum efficiency at 80 per cent of rating—250 
lb. steam pressure—200 deg. superheat—29-in. vacuum referred to a 30-in. barometer— 
with steam velocity through blades of 1225 ft. per sec. at a volume of 585 cu. ft. per lb. 


Fig. 5 shows a cross sectional view of a turbine typical of this 
type. 

Fig. 6 is a curve showing approximate maximum capacities 
at various speeds which are physically possible, employing 
double flow construction without exceeding the limits of stresses 
previously given. For equal capacities employing single flow 
construction the stresses would have to be doubled. The points 
marked (x) at 3600, 1800 and 1500 rev. per min. represent capaci- 
ties which have already been built. . This curve must not be in- 
terpreted as indicating suggested practicable present or ultimate 
limiting capacities of turbines, but merely as showing a physical 
relation between speed and capacity with given limiting stress 


values and operating conditions. 


1524 JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


An important limit of size and capacity now being approached 
is that imposed by transportation facilities. Stationary ele- 
ments may be readily sectionalized as required and assembled 
after shipment. Ways may be devised also for partial dismant- 
ling of rotor elements, although diameter will be one of the lim- 
iting factors, and this cannot be reduced beyond the point of 
omission of blading. The low-pressure rotors of the 30,000-kw. 
Interborough Rapid Transit Company turbines were shipped 
with the last stage blade carrying elements removed. 

While the physical dimensions and capacities of turbines are 
being constantly increased it is essential that the reliability fac- 
tor be not decreased. The employment of special materials and 
higher stresses does not usually permit increased capacity or 
efficiency without a corresponding increase in weight and cost, 
unless reliability be compromised. 

If, having given a satisfactory reliable design of a given capac- 
ity employing low stresses, it is proposed to transform it by mod- 
ification of design and substitution of higher stresses into a unit 
of larger capacity, greater blade lengths and probably greater 
blade weights, operating at higher speeds, and involving higher 
centrifugal forces will be necessary, in order to secure the re- 
quired area. The rotor structure may possibly be shortened 
somewhat, but unless its total weight is increased nearly in pro- 
portion to the increase in stored energy in the individual blade; 
the unbalanced effect or disturbance caused by one or more 
blades breaking (which must be recognized as an inevitable oc- 
currence in any turbine) will be greater, imposing higher stresses 
in the rotor shaft, bearings, and bearing supports; and a greater 
factor of strength will be required to withstand these stresses. 
The greater blade weight and higher speed will also require in- 
creasing the mass of the casing in order to prevent the blades 
from permanently injuring and possibly breaking through it if 
they should fail. The endurance factor of a turbine when oper- 
ating under imperfect or abnormal conditions will be higher in 
proportion to the ratio of stator mass to rotor mass, and of rotor 
mass to blade mass. The incorporation in the design of a tur- 
bine of features which increase the endurance factor will appre- 
ciably increase its cost but will also (to a very much greater ex- 
tent) increase its value to the user. . 


ECONOMIC LIMITS 


In the study of economic limits of turbines of large capacity, 
consideration must be given to the fact that as yet such units 


one 


oy 


1919] JOHNSON: STEAM TURBINES 1525 


are not required in sufficient quantity to warrant equipping and 
operating shops for their exclusive manufacture, and that they 
must, therefore, be produced by largely the same processes and 
equipment as are used for smaller sizes which are built in greater 
quantities. 

As sizes becomes larger, a greater proportion of special equip- 
ment and processes becomes necessary, resulting in increased rates 
of cost unless accompanied by very material increase in quantity 
of production. Under present conditions this economic limit 
of capacity agrees closely with the physical limit of 1500 rev. 
per min. units. 

In the larger low-speed structures the physical proportions 
become such that using ordinary steel and cast iron, to which 
we are limited by the metallurgical art, the distortions due to 
temperature changes and elastic properties of the materials are 
such that increased clearances and bracing have to be employed, 
in order to maintain equal reliability and rigidity to a degree 
which causes the cost per kilowatt for a given efficiency to 
increase with increasing capacity. Further development of 
the allied arts and increased demand for larger units wil 
tend to reduce the influence of this limitation factor. 

Another factor tending to limit capacity of single units is the 
generating capacity loss resulting from suspension of service for 
inspection or repairs. For example, if a 30,000-kw. unit must 
be kept out of service ten days for a certain inspection or repair, 
a 60,000-kw. unit would have to be kept out probably fourteen 
days for a similar purpose because of the greater time required 
to handle the larger structure. Therefore, if two 30,000-kw. 
units were used and each held out of service ten days, the outage 
loss would be only five-sevenths as great as if a.single 60,000-kw. 
unit were kept out fourteen days. 

In order to avoid the limitations or undesirable characteristics 
just referred to, a number of turbine units of capacities varying 
from 30,000 to 60,000 kw. have been built in which the turbines 
have been divided into two or three separate compounded ele- 
ments, each driving its own generator, and each capable of 
operating alone on high pressure steam in emergencies. 

It is believed that units of this type will continue to be em- 
ployed for the larger capacities because of the advantages 
not obtainable in single cylinder types, which will justify their 
somewhat greater cost. 


Presented at the 355th meeting of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
November 14, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E. 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE 
SHAFT CURTIS STEAM TURBINES 
a e 
BY ESKIL BERG 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

This paper starts by showing that the limit of a single-unit 
turbo generator does not lie in the generator but is confined to 
the steam turbine, and that the last wheel of the turbine is the 
limiting feature. 

The author therefore takes the last wheel of an 1800-rev. per 
min. turbine, giving dimension stresses, kind of material used 
etc., and then designs two turbines, one having 23 stages and the 
other 13 stages, both machines using this last wheel, and shows 
that a turbine can be built having its most economical point at 
21,000 kw., under steam conditions given in the paper. 

Under this condition the last stage absorbs 11.5 per cent of the 
total adiabatic available energy, and the wheel efficiency is 
66.25 per cent. As the load increases, the work done in this 
stage also increases, so that at 36,000 kw. the energy is prac- 
tically doubled, but with a sacrifice in efficiency of about 18 per 
eee which naturally lowers the efficiency of the turbine as a 
whole. 

A 5000-kw., five-stage, 3600-rev. per min. turbine load curve 
is also given and discussed, and the author claims that if the 
construction could be made similar to the large turbine, keeping 
the same stresses and number of stages, a turbine of this capac- 
ity could be built as efficient as the larger machine at 20,000-kw. 


HE purpose of -this paper is to discuss the limitations of 
the types of turbines used in the more important work 
now done by the General Electric Company, and to show the 
relative results which can be accomplished with such designs 
under different conditions of load. Different mechanical 
arrangements will make practicable different characteristics, 
and the conditions shown only apply to machines of these 
particular designs. The design of turbines must be governed 
by many compromises and it would not be possible to give a 
correct idea as to the whole range of possibilities. 

For purposes of illustration, two machines have been selected, 
one representative of the largest size built for 1800 rev. per min. 
and one of the largest size now built for 3600 rev. per min. 
The figures given relate to the turbine alone, and do not include 


generators. The generators used with such turbines might be 


1527 


1528 BERG: STEAM TURBINES iNov. 14 


designed for various power factors or overload capacities, and 
would thus be of different efficiencies. 

The turbines in question are both of the single-flow type and 
may be considered representative of capacity limitations of 
that type, since their construction is that which is adapted to 
the highest capacity. The single-unit turbine and generator is 
naturally preferakle over the tandem and compound type on 
account of simplicity, lightness, and efficiency. There are 
however certain definite limitations in the size for a given 
speed that these units can be built with material available at 
the present time. The limitation in the size of a unit for a 
given speed does not depend upon the generator, but is entirely 
dependent upon the turbine. 

Fig. 1 shows the load curve of the large 1800-rev. per min. 
machine above mentioned, which is designed to operate with 


S 118 

5 

RR 1.16 
Ey Load Curve 2/000 Kilowatt Turbine 
S & 1/4 Steam Condition 250 Pounds Dry Steam 284 Inch Vacuurn 
as he 

$8 170 
3 S 1.08 23 Stage Turbine 

88 1.06 

as 1.04 13 Stage Turbine 

Of 

pe 

BS s02 

S.A b 

RS 7.00) 


10000 15000 30000 35000 


20000 25000 
kilowatt Load 


EEG 


250 lb. steam pressure, 28.5 inches of vacuum, and dry steam. 
This turbine has 23 stages, all wheels being of the single-bucket 
type. The first stage wheel has a pitch diameter of 35 inches, 
which increases with each successive stage until the last wheel, 
which has a pitch diameter of 88 inches. This curve shows 
that for 1800 rev. per min., a turbine can be designed for a 
vacuum of 28.5 inches, giving its best. efficiency at 21,000 kw., 
this point being marked on the curve by 1, and the water rate _ 
at other points being given in proportion to this point. This 
curve also shows that with a sacrifice of 5 per cent in efficiency, 
an output of 36,000 kw., can be delivered to the turbine shaft. 
Above a load of 21,000 kw., live steam is bypassed to the eighth 
stage shell, the effect of which is shown by the break in the 
curve. 


The dotted line gives the load curve of a similar turbine in 


1919] BERG: STEAM TURBINES 1529 


which the first eleven stages are replaced by one two-bucket 
stage. This turbine is designed with multiple valve steam 
admission. Such a modification may be desirable for the pur- 
pose of simplification, or where better efficiency at very light 
loads is important, as in the case of propulsion of warships. 

Fig. 2 gives the vacuum curve of the 1800-rev. per min., 
23-stage machine at 21,000-kw. and 36,000-kw. load on the 
turbine shaft. It will be noticed that the improvement in 
economy at a load of 21,000 kw., is 2.5 per cent between 28.5 
and 29 in., whereas with a load of 36,000 kw., due to congestion 
of the steam passages, the gain is only 0.55 per cent. 

Many large size turbines are now designed for a vacuum of 


eur curve 21000 Ki tt | 
1600 R.P.M.Turbinel | | |} 


Ce Soe eee ed 
275 28 26.5 29 
Vacuum Inches 
Fie. 2 


29 in. The volume of one pound of steam at this vacuum is 
652 cu. ft., almost 50 per cent greater than at 28.5 in., and 
about twice as much as at 28 in., which calls for a corresponding 
increase in the area of the steam passage in the last stage wheel. 
If this area is made too small, the steam when leaving the last 
row of buckets must have a high velocity, which gives a large 
loss of energy, this loss being in proportion to the square of the 
velocity. It is therefore important that this area be made as 
large as possible, and that the exit angle of the blades be made 
small enough to give good extraction. 

Efficient action can only be accomplished by using a bucket 
speed that bears a proper relation to the steam velocity. Con- 
sequently to get the largest capacity we must not only use long 


1530 


buckets, but must move them at a very high speed. 


BERG: STEAM TURBINES 


[Nov. 14 


In order 


to obtain good bucket action, the buckets should not be more 


than about one fourth as long as the 
pitch diameter of the wheel. If they 
are made longer than this, poor bucket 
action with consequent loss in efficiency 
will result, due to the great difference 
in peripheral speed between the base 
and the tip of the bucket,.the design 
being made correct for the middle point 
or pitch line. The flare also becomes 
excessive, so that the space between 
the buckets at the tip will be so large 
that steam can flow between the buckets 
without doing any work. 

The use of a high steam speed in 
this last stage naturally implies that a 
relatively large proportion of the total 
steam energy must be utilized there, 
and such concentration of work into a 
single stage is not without its disad- 
vantages, since even if the best rela- 
tion of velocities is maintained, such 
a stage doing a large amount of 
work is naturally less efficient than 
a stage of similar character doing less 
work. 

Since for the reasons given above, the 
design of the last stage in such a turbine 
constitutes the most important limita- 
tion, we will consider some details of 
the design used in this case. Fig. 3 
represents the last wheel of the large 
23-stage 1800-rev. per min., turbine 
which has been mentioned. This tur- 
bine is designed to operate at 250 lb. 
steam pressure, 28.5-in. vacuum, and 
dry steam. The pitch diameter of the 
wheel is 88 in., length of buckets 22 in. 
and bucket angles 60 deg. entrance and 


FOOT OF BUCKET 
STRESS 20100 


LE. 


PPPLL 


LLLLL 2 


SSPPEPISIED 


WEB STRESS 22950 


Lp 


HUB STRESS 234350 


HiGgss 


40 deg. exit. The wheel is subject to the following stresses at 


normal speed: 


1919] BERG: STEAM TURBINES 1531 


Stresses in hub, 28,450 lb. per sq. in. 
Stresses in web, 22,950 Ib. per sq. in. 
Stresses in bucket, 20,100 Ib. per sq. in. 

Elastic limit, (limit of proportionality) of material, 55,000 
lb. per sq. in. The material of the wheel and bucket is 
quenched and tempered 3 per cent nickel steel. 

The wheel is stiff enough to avoid vibration effects, and in 
the absence of such effects the centrifugal strains afford ample 
factors of safety, even if we assume considerable irregularities 
and imperfections of metal structure. 


CAUSE OF WHEEL BREAKAGES 


In some of the first large machines of the type here discussed, 
very serious trouble has developed through the formation of 
cracks in the forged wheels. Such cracks have caused wheels 
to break in three important installations. The cracks which 
have formed in these wheels have started at holes in the wheel 
provided either for balancing steam pressures on the two sides 
of the wheel, or for the attachment of balance weights. The 
occurrence of these accidents naturally gave rise to much alarm, 
uncertainty, and difference of opinion as to the cause of the 
trouble. Calculation showed that the wheels which broke 
were less stressed than many which were made from. weaker 
metal and had operated for long periods of time. Holes in a 
centrifugally stressed wheel greatly increase the fibre stress in 
the vicinity of the hole itself, but such conditions had not 
caused the formation of cracks in large numbers of wheels in 
which such localized high stresses existed. Many evidences 
have now shown that the trouble with these wheels has not 
resulted from stresses in excess of those which had been pre- 
viously found to be practicable, but has been caused by flutter- 
ing and vibrations of the wheels, which had become possible 
through the lightness and thinness of their construction. Such 
vibration gives a periodic character to the stresses normally 
imposed and so gives rise to the formation of fatigue cracks. 

In machines of this type relatively light and narrow buckets 
have been used, and the wheels have been proportioned with a 
view to ample centrifugal strength, but with maximum economy 
of space and weight, consequently these wheels have had much 
less lateral stiffness than wheels used in turbines of previous 
types. To overcome such troubles as have developed, it is 
simply necessary to make the wheels stiffer and to put in holes 


1532 BERG: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


in parts of the wheel near the hub where a suitable reinforce- 
ment of thickness can be provided which both stiffens the 
wheel and reduces stresses near the holes. Very slight changes 
of this kind make a great difference in the vibrating charac- 
teristics of such wheels, and the proportions used are such that 
they can easily be brought to the same standards of safety in 
these respects as have long prevailed in wheels of heavier 
construction in machines having less numbers of stages. 
Experience has shown that in the absence of a tendency to 
form fatigue cracks through vibration, overspeed in such tur- 
bine wheels involves relatively little danger as compared with 
other types of high-speed machinery. Experimentally and in 


70 roy and Efficiency Curve Last Sta 
21000 Kw. 1800 R.P. M. Turbine 


N 
nS 


® 


~ ~ NS 

co) Ss 

Percent Efficiency 
an 
S) 


x 


N 


> ~ 
is) 


Percent of Adiabatic Available Energy 


Re WO 


20000 22000 24000 26000 28000 30000 32000 34000 36000 
Shatt Kw. Load 


Fie. 4 


actual service, wheels have been stretched to a considerable 
degree of enlargement without the formation of any cracks, and 
such stretching is a normal condition if the cracks do not exist. 

It has been discovered that such fluttering or vibration of 
the web of wheels has not only been responsible for the forma- 
tion of fatigue cracks in the wheels themselves, but has also 
caused loosening and breakage of buckets. The cure for these 
difficulties is to use stiffer wheels, and such wheels can carry 
stiffer buckets, so that the whole structure is incapable of 
vibration of any amplitude through such forces and periods as 
arise from the conditions of operation. 

Fig. 4 gives the energy and efficiency curves of this last 
stage. It will be noticed that at the most efficient point, 


1919] BERG: STEAM TURBINES 1533 


(21,000 kw.), this stage absorbs 11.5 per cent of the total 
adiabatic available energy, and that the wheel efficiency is 
66.25 per cent. The energy represented by the exhaust 
velocity which is all wasted in the condenser is 1.5 per cent of 
the total energy. As the load increases on the turbine shaft, 
the energy in this stage also increases, decreasing its efficiency 
until at 36,000 kw. the energy in the last stage is 20.9 per 
cent of the total energy. The wheel efficiency however has 
been reduced to 54.2 per cent and the energy represented 
by the exhaust velocity has been increased to 6.4 per cent. 
This great amount of work in the last stage at such poor 
efficiency naturally lowers the efficiency of the whole tur- 
bine, and in this case the efficiency at 36,000 kw. is 5 per cent 
lower than at 21,000 kw. 


PEE a 
144 Leakage and Rotation Losses 
HEH 


| | | 2/000 Hw. 1800 RPM. Turbine 
st 


Percent of Input 
S 2 ™“ ~ 


S 


x a 
Sliee8 ens es ose sakes eeaseee 
4 = Z 
Le ecd Pochingtoss_| | | | TT TT Ty 
7 yr ee 
477 LLL |Last Blade Leakage Loss ||) fr 


ae ‘ae ae a LS Fa A A TR OS 

ojala sha shasta pel aiofeiejolel alee see pala pe 

20000 22000 24000. 26000 28000 30000 32000 34000 36000 
Shatt Hw. Load 


Fig. 5 


Fig. 5 shows leakage and rotation losses of the same turbine 
in per cent of input. : 

From the above it will be seen that for 1800 rev. per min., a 
turbine can be designed efficiently for 21,000 kw. which, with 
a sacrifice of efficiency can deliver 36,000 kw. 

Fig. 6 gives a load curve of the smaller 3600-rev. per min. 
turbine. The water rates are here given in reference to that of 
the larger machine, the load of 5000 kw. corresponding to that 
of 20,000 kw. on the 1800-rev. per min. turbine. This turbine 
has only five stages, one two-bucket wheel in the first stage, 
the other four stages having single-bucket wheels. The first 
wheel has a pitch diameter of 35.5 in., and the remaining four 
wheels a pitch diameter of 51 in. The bucket height of the 
last wheel is 9.125 in., the turbine being designed for a maxi- 

mum of 6250 kw, 


1534 BERG: STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


The reason for such a discrepancy in the number of stages 
calls for explanation. As the output of a turbine, keeping 
approximately the same stresses, goes up inversely as the 
square of the rev. per min., if the same number of stages could 
be used and clearance and all dimensions proportionately 
reduced, a 5000-kw. machine at 3600 rev. per min. could be 
made nearly as efficient as a 20,000-kw. machine at 1800 rev. 
per min., and developments of smaller multi-stage machines 
at our Lynn Works have already been made which approximate 
such possibilities. Constructions however which are practic- 
able on a large scale are not practicable on a small scale, and 
consequently there are difficulties in getting the space economy 
in small high-speed machines which would be necessary for 
accomplishing the result stated. One of the difficulties has 
lain in the construction of diaphragms, the casting in of nozzle 


Load Curve 5000 kw. 3600 R. P.M Turbine 
Water Rates are Given in Per cert of ful/ 
Load 5000 Kw. Load Corresponding to 
20000 Kw. on the 1/800 RPM. Turbine 


kilowatt Load 


Fig. 6 


partitions being easy in a large diaphragm and very difficult on 
a small one. We are working upon types of diaphragms and 
other parts which may make possible the development of 
multi-stage high speed machines which afford improved degrees 
of economy. 

If a 10,000-kw. turbine is designed for 1800 rev. per min., 
the only change necessary would be to make the nozzle and 
bucket heights about half the height of those in the 20,000-kw. 
unit. This reduction in height of buckets and nozzles would 
affect the weight, size, and cost of the turbine very little as 
compared with the 20,000 kw. unit. In regard to economy, 
the lower bucket heights would reduce the rotation loss some- 
what but far from 50 per cent. The diaphragm packing loss, 
head packing losses, and bearing losses would be practically 
the same as on the 20,000-kw. unit, so that while a turbine 
designed for 10,000 kw. would be more economical than the 


7 


1919] BERG: STEAM TURBINES 1535 


large turbine running at half load, the difference would be small, 
being only about 6 per cent. 

-It will be seen from this paper that for a given speed there is 
one particular size of turbine which can be designed to be most 
economical as to steam consumption, weight, space, and price 
per kilowatt. Even if a size smaller than this is required, it 
would in many instances pay for the central station to install 
the larger unit, even though it would have to run at reduced 
load for some time before the station load increased sufficiently 
to utilize the full capacity. 


Presented at the 355th meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, No- 
vember 14, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A.I.E.E. 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND OUTPUT OF SINGLE: 
SHAFT TURBO GENERATORS 


BY F. D. NEWBURY 


: ABSTRACT OF PAPER 

Output is determined broadly by rotor or stator dimensions. 
With speeds of 1200 rey. per min. and lower, the stator is the lim- 
iting member, while with higher speeds, the rotor is the limiting 
member. 

The most effective rotor diameter is not necessarily the largest 
diameter. To obtain maximum output at a given speed the rotor 
proportions must be chosen to properly balance mechanical stres- 
ses, rotor ampere turns and flux. American design practise has 
erleibed 400 ft. per sec. as an upper limit of rotor peripheral 
speed. 

The maximum length of core is determined by such factors as 
ventilation, bearing temperatures, critical speed and limits to 
weight imposed by forging and transportation facilities. 

Fig. 4 shows present limits to kv-a. rating at speeds from 3600 
to 900 rev. per min. These limiting values are given as indicat- 
ing present boundaries to knowledge and experience, rather than 
as real physical or other limits that cannot be exceeded. 

Mechanical forces due to short-circuit current, and damage 
caused by armature winding failures, are no greater in the very 
large generators indicated by Fig. 4 than in present day 20,000 
and 30,000 ky-a. units. 

No opinion is expressed as to the wisdom of installing very 
large single-shaft units. If operating engineers desire units of 
50,000 to 100,000 kw., there is no question but that such genera- 
tors can be conservatively designed and constructed. 


EDUCED to the simplest terms, maximum output at any 
speed is attained when slot space is provided for the 
maximum possible ampere turns (in either stator or rotor), and 
core cross section is provided for the maximum possible flux. 
These conditions require the most effective rotor diameter 
(or stator bore) and the maximum rotor and stator core length. 
All factors that limit rotor diameter (or stator bore) or core 
length have a possible bearing on limiting outputs. 

The most effective rotor diameter for a given speed is not 
necessarily the largest diameter. For maximum output, the 
rotor should have maximum space for winding and maximum 
tooth and core section for flux. Obviously, these requirements 
are antagonistic and the actual design is a balance between 
slot area and tooth and polar area. Again, as the diameter is 
‘inereased (with a given speed) there is more room for both 

1537 


1538 NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS (Nov. 14 


winding and flux, but with increase in diameter each pound of 
copper exerts an increasing centrifugal force and the ratio 
of slot area to tooth cross section must be decreased in order to 
keep within desired stresses. Beyond a certain peripheral 
velocity, ampere turns must be decreased, in spite of the 
increase in available space, and the most effective diameter 
has been passed. It is seen, therefore, that in order to obtain 
maximum output at a given speed, the rotor proportions 
must be chosen to properly balance mechanical stresses, rotor 
ampere-turns and flux. 

Turbo generator design has settled down to one type of 
rotor, so far as form is concerned. This is the so-called radial 
slot type, in which the ends of the winding project beyond 
the core body. This construction is shown in Fig. 1, indicating 


Fie. 1 


the slot arrangement. This type of design requires solid rings 
of very good material for holding these projecting coil ends. 
The hoop-stress in the coil retaining rings is an important limit 
to output, and is, in fact, a more important limit than the tooth 
stress in the main rotor body. 

In a large-diameter low-speed turbo generator (1200 rev. 
per min. and below) it is generally possible to employ a larger 
rotor diameter and more rotor ampere turns than can be 
properly balanced by stator ampere turns. The density of 
stator ampere turns is limited by the ability to dissipate heat 
(with permissible temperature differences) and by the per- 
_ missible concentration of ampere turns in a single slot. Ob- 
viously, there is no such rigid limit to weight or depth of copper 
in a single slot in the stator as is imposed by centrifugal stresses 
in the rotor, but there is a limit to the depth of stator slots 


1919] NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS 1539 


determined by the rapid increase in eddy current losses with 
deep slots and by the ability to construct and insulate long 
coils having a very large ratio of depth to width. 

Thus, in certain cases the rotor is the limiting member and in 
other cases the stator is the limiting member. In general, 
the rotor first reaches its limit in ratings of 1500 rev. per min. 
and higher speeds, and the stator first reaches its limiting 
output in ratings of 1200 rev. per min. and lower, considering 
commercial frequencies. 

It is apparent that unless the ratio of rotor ampere turns to 
stator ampere turns is a fixed design relation, all generators 
could be designed for the maximum possible output as deter- 
mined by the stator, and the rotor need never be the limit. 
As a matter of fact, there is a tendency in this direction, the 
restraining fact being that as the field is weakened, relatively 
to the armature, the increase in field current and exciting 
voltage as the load is increased becomes greater. A reasonable 
limit to increase in excitation with load is desirable from the 
standpoint of voltage regulator operation. Regulators can 
readily handle a range of one to two or one to two-and-a-half, 
and large generators are proportioned to meet this ratio of 
no-load to fuJl-load excitation. Voltage regulation has ceased 
to be a limit to output. These field and armature proportions 
result in regulations of roughly 25 per cent at 100 per cent 
power factor, and 40 per cent at 80 per cent power factor. 
Obviously, such regulations could not be tolerated if regula- 
tion were a factor in operation. 

A fundamental difficulty in laying down definite limiting 
outputs is the difficulty in arbitrarily stating limiting stresses. 
The two principal stresses in the radial slot rotor are the tooth 
stresses in the main rotor body and the hoop stress in the coil 
retaining rings. Soft carbon steel is employed for the main 
rotor body, and a good quality ductile alloy steel (usually 
chrome-nickel or chrome-vanadium) is used for the coil re- 
taining rings. Turbo generators are designed for a maximum 
speed 20 per cent above the running speed. At this over-speed, 
the tooth stresses should be approximately one-fourth the ulti- 
mate strength of the carbon steel and the coil-retaining ring 
stress should be approximately one-third the ultimatestrength. 
This results in working stresses, in both cases, approximately 
half the yield point. It is important that the material be 
ductile; carbon steel with proper working, can readily be ob- 


1540 NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS [Nov. 14 


tained with 22 per cent elongation and 35 per cent reduction 
in area and the alloy steel should have 22 per cent elongation 
and 50 per cent reduction. These figures refer to standard 
two-inch test pieces under tension. 

American design practise has established 400 ft. per sec. 
as an upper limit of peripheral speed for maximum ampere 
turns and output for rotational speeds of 1500 rev. per min. 
and higher. This, of course, assumes existing rotor materials 
and factors of safety. 

It is apparent that having increased the rotor diameter 
to the most effective value, output will be proportional to the 
length of the rotor and stator cores, and maximum output 
will be secured when the length is increased to its limiting 
value. This limit to length is even more a matter of opinion 


Fie. 2 


and judgment than is the limit to rotor or stator diameter. 
It is determined mainly by cooling air requirements, by bear- 
ing proportions, by limits to weight imposed by transportation 
facilities and the ability to secure forgings of necessary diam- 
eter and weight. 

Ventilation. The generator losses, and consequently the re- 
quired volume of cooling air increase almost in proportion to the 
core length. In the simple radial or air gap system of ventilation, 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2, all of the cooling air must 
pass through the air gap entering the annular openings between 
stator and rotor at the two ends of the generator. The radial 
dimension of the airgap is constant with constant rotor diameter 
and consequently the volume of cooling air can only be increased 
as the core length is increased by increasing the air pressure. 


1919] NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS 1541 


Also, as core length is increased, the diameter of the shaft 
extension of the rotor body must be increased and the fan 
intake becomes restricted. In the axial system of ventilation, 
illustrated in Fig. 8, the stator ventilation is taken care of 
independently of the air gap and the requirements as to cooling 
air becomes less important from the standpoint of limiting 
output. But with either system of ventilation, designers are 
already finding it necessary to devise more complicated sys- 
tems in order to take care of 3600 and 1800 rev. per min. 
ratings now in prospect. 

Rot r Deflection. As the core length is increased, necessi- 
tating an increased distance between bearings, the rotor 
deflection increases. This increases the reversing stress in 


IEG a 


the shaft material at the journals and reduces the value of 
critical speed. As the core length is increased, the journal 
and bearing sizes must be increased in order to keep the 
shaft stress and the critical speed within desired limits and 
a limit may be imposed by bearing losses and temperatures. 

Winding Temperatures. The limiting ratings given in this 
paper are based on 150 deg. total rotor winding tempera- 
ture and from 125 deg. to 150 deg. total stator winding 
temperatures. It is not probable that ratings will be 
increased by increasing these temperature limits. Higher 
temperatures would be of most value in connection with 
the rotor winding since the rotor limits rating in the two- 
and four-pole designs commonly used. But temperatures 
higher than 150 deg. result in relatively little gain in 


‘ 


oo 


a= 


1542 NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS [Nov. 14 
rotor ampere-turns on account of the rapid increase in 
resistance of the winding. If the rotor winding temperature 
rise is assumed proportional to the loss, an increase in operating 
temperature from 150 deg. to 250 deg. (an increase in measured 
rise from 100 deg. to 200 deg.) results in an increase in ampere 
turns of only 25 per cent.* Thus doubling the temperature 
rise and rotor loss results in a gain of only 25 per cent in output. 

Temperatures much above 150 deg. in connection with very 
long rotors are not considered favorably on-account of the 
danger of trouble from “creeping” of the winding caused by 
linear expansion. 

Transportation facilities may impose a limit to size in the 
case of six- and eight-pole 60-cycle generators. With the 
larger two-pole, 25-cycle and four-pole, 60-cycle generators 
now being built, the stators are now too heavy for convenient 
handling and transportation, and they are assembled in place 
at the power station. Rotors, from the special nature of their 
design and the special skill and equipment required for wind- 
ing and assembling, should be completed at the builder’s fac- 
tory and shipped as a unit. The weight of the complete rotor 
of a four-pole, 1800-rev. per min. generator of 40,000 kv-a. 
capacity will be roughly 90,000 pounds. This can be trans- 
ported without difficulty, but the largest possible 1200-rev. 
‘per min. rotor would weigh more than 200,000 pounds, and 
would require rolling stock and trackage (in some cases) not 
now available. s 

Another general limitation to output that applies to the 
larger diameter rotors is that imposed by the forging facilities 
of the country. At the present time it is not possible to obtain 
forgings of suitable physical characteristics weighing more 
than 50 to 60 tons nor much larger than 50 inches (assuming 
a minimum amount of working down from a 72-in. ingot). 
This limits the rotor, made from a single forging, to an output 
of roughly 50,000 kv-a. at 1500 rev. per min., and a propor- 
tionately decreasing kv-a. at lower speeds, assuming a solid 
rotor. By adopting the rotor construction involving two or 
three inch plates and up-set flanged shaft ends, the limiting 
diameter ‘may be increased sufficiently for the largest 1500- 
and 1200-rev. per min. outputs, shown by Fig.4. The design 
~ *A discussion of this point is contained in the author’s paper, “ Ra- 


tional Temperature Guarantees for large A-C. Generators’’, TRANSAC- 
trons for 1916, Part I, Page 1497. 


1919] NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS 1543 


of 1200- and 900-rev. per min. generators for maximum 
output will be governed by questions of forging and shipping 
facilities, rather than by more strictly design matters. 

Fig. 4 shows in curve form limiting generator capacities 
at various speeds. At 1500 rev. per min. and higher, the 
capacity is determined by the rotor and is inversely propor- 
tional to the rev. per min. squared. At lower speeds, the ca- 
pacity is limited by the stator and falls somewhat below the 
corresponding rotor limiting capacity as indicated by the dotted 
extension of the rotor curve. This curve is actually based 
on constant core length, when, as a matter of fact, the length 
can, with reason, be increased as the diameter is increased. 
The curve ratings, however, represent maximum lengths of 


100,000 


80,000 


60,000 


U.S.Battle 
Cruiser Turbo. 
51.3 Cycles 33,000 


> 
Ss 
2 
8 


KILOVOLTS-AMPERES 


Kv-a. 


20,000 -_|90% P.F, 
60-Cycles 
| 


- 


0 
600 1000 1400 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400 
REVOLUTIONS -PER MINUTE 


Fic. 4 


core so far employed, and material extensions in core length 
involve questions of linear expansion that must be very care- 
-fully considered. This limiting capacity curve represents ca- 
pacities that can be obtained with existing commercial mater- 
ials and without radical changes in stresses and bearing pro- 
portions. The curve does not represent limits that may not 
be exceeded in the future. It is, more properly, an indication 
of present boundaries—boundaries that will be extended as 
our knowledge and experience are increased. It represents 
also the present judgment of designers, a judgment influenced 
greatly by the economic and operating advantages of still 


larger ratings. ; 
The capacities shown by the curve are somewhat in advance 


1544 NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS [Nov. 14 


of accomplished results. Ratings of several turbo generators 
that are the largest that have been placed in operation or are 
under construction by the Westinghouse Electric and Manu- 
facturing Company have been added to Fig. 4 with self-explan- 
atory comment. 

As previously explained, the limiting capacities given for 
speeds below 1500 rev. per min. can only be attained by ex- 
ceeding present transportation facilities if present design types 
are adhered to. 

Incidentally it is interesting to note the advantage in limits 
gained by the use of 50 cycles as: compared with 60 cycles. An 
increase of nearly 50 per cent in rating is made possible by 
the 20 per cent decrease in two-pole and four-pole speeds. This 
is of interest mainly when European and American maximum 
ratings are being compared. 

The bare mention of ratings larger than 50,000 kv-a. raises 
the question of limits to size of individual generating units 
imposed by operating considerations, such as the relation be- 
tween unit and station rating, the extent of the damage in 
case of winding failures, ability to withstand sudden short 
circuits and so on. 

While the detailed discussion of these questions is beyond 
the scope of the present paper, some design information affect- 
ing operating questions may be of interest. 

There is no reason for considering the larger low-speed 
generators less reliable than the high-speed generators in- 
dicated by limiting curve of Fig. 4. As a matter of. fact, 
the lower speed ratings can usually be designed, both in 
stresses and in electrical factors, with more margin. 

Mechanical forces developed by short circuits are deter- 
mined by the short-circuit ampere turns of the armature 
winding,per inch of armature circumference—and, to a limi- 
ted extent, by the density of the magnetic field set up by the 
rotor winding. Both the distribution of ampere turns and 
‘the density of the airgap magnetic field are substantially 
constant for all limiting ratings of a given frequency. While 
the forces developed in a 25-cycle generator will be greater 
than in a 60-cycle generator—due mainly to lower reactance 
and the resulting greater values of ampere turns—all 60-cycle 
ratings indicated by the limiting curve will have substantially 
equal forces developed on sudden short circuit. The stresses 
in the coil ends will be determined by these forces and by those 


1919] NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS 1545 


factors determining the rigidity of the winding. Except pos- 
sibly in the maximum size 1500-rev. per min., 25-cycle gener- 
ator, with its long coil-end extension, there Heed be no material 
difference in the rigidity of the winding. Thus a 50,000-kv-a., 
25-cycle, 1500-rev. per min. generator represents the most 
difficult design from the standpoint of short-circuit stresses. 
However, such a generator would not differ materially in short- 
circuit stress conditions from 30,000-kv-a., two-pole generators 
that have been in successful operation for three years. It 
can be stated with confidence that the danger of winding fail- 
ure due to sudden short circuit, with generators of the indicated 
limiting outputs, will be no greater than 20,000- and 30,000- 
kv-a. generators that have been placed in operation in large 
numbers during the past six years. 

Another question of interest to those responsible for the 
operation of large generating units is the extent of damage 
to winding in case of internal short circuits caused by failure 
of insulation between turns of the same coil or failure of insu- 
lation from copper to ground. Experience with large units 
now in operation has shown that, in the event of a winding 
failure that results in the flow of abnormal power current, 
the chances are that the entire winding will be destroyed and 
that a hole of considerable size may be burned in the core 
laminations. Generating units are already of such size that 
a winding failure usually results in the loss of output from the 
unit for several months. The results of failures in still larger 
generators will be of the same degree and will be no more 
serious except, of course, in that loss in kv-a. output will be 
greater. In this connection, it is pertinent to point out that 
the fusing of metal and other local effects of an internal gen- 
erator failure is a function of station capacity rather than of 
individual unit capacity. The volume of metal fused at the 
point of failure is determined largely by the impedance of the 
generating circuits feeding into the vault. ‘Therefore, the only 
difference between a failure in one of two 30,000-kv-a. units 
and a failure in a single 60,000-kv-a. unit is in the impedance 
of the leads buses, and other connecting circuits between 
the two 30,000-kv-a. units. The two 30,000-kv-a. unit instal- 
lation has the obvious advantages that protective reactance 
may be installed between the units, and the trouble is usually 
confined to half the station capacity. 

The author has not intended to express an opinion as to 


1546 NEWBURY: TURBO GENERATORS [Nov. 14 


the wisdom of installing very large single-shaft units. The 
only purpose has been to point out from the design stand- 
point the feasibility of certain ratings. Whether it is desirable 
or even wise to install very large units—above 50,000-kv-a.— 
will depend very largely on the growth and size of generating 
stations. .When stations double in size—when stations of 
300,000 kv-a. and 500,000 kv-a. become typical of American 
practise—there will undoubtedly be a demand of considerable 
volume for units of 50,000 kw., 75,000 kw.,-and 100,000 kw., 
and if single-shaft units are justified from the turbine stand- 
point, there is no question but that such generators can be 
conservatively designed and constructed. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1547 


DISCUSSION ON “PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF 
SINGLE SHAFT STEAM TURBINES” (JOHNSON), ‘PRESENT 
LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE-SHAFT CURTIS 
STEAM TURBINES” (BERG), AND “PRESENT LIMITS OF 
SPEED AND OUTPUT OF SINGLE-SHAFT TURBO GENERATORS” 
(NEWBURY), NEW York, N. Y., NOVEMBER 14, 1919. 


Philip Torchio: It was a little over twenty-four years ago 
that The New York Edison Company started the operation of 
the first steam turbine used in a central station in this country, 
not a stone’s throw from this building, at the West 39th Street 
steam station. A week ago the same company put in operation 
a 35,000-kw., 1500-revolution single-flow machine, which is the 
largest machine designed for that speed. The machine of 
Ja atin years ago was a 800 h. p. and the present a 50,000 

Dt 

A few years after the first experiment on this turbine, built 
by the French De Laval Company, and operated for a few 
years with more or less success, the principal American electrical 
manufacturers started to build steam turbines. The first 
American built units were about 500 kw., but soon ascended to 
5000 and 7500, and in 1906 units of 12,000 were built; in 1908, 
the largest was 14,000; 1912, 20,000; 1913, 30,000; and in the 
last year units up to 45,000 kw., 60 cycle, 1200 revolutions, 
were built. 

I have not the statistics available, but probably two-thirds 
or three-quarters of the central station generating equipment 
today consists of turbo units. When we consider that the 
central stations furnish not more than one-sixth of the total 
power used in the country, aggregating considerably over 
100,000,000 h. p., and when we further consider such facts as 
were brought out by Mr. W. S. Murray, that by central station 
power generation, of which 93 per cent by steam and 7 per cent 
by water, savings in the order of $150,000,000 a year and more 
can be made on the northeastern seaboard section of this 
country alone, we are forcibly impressed with the importance of 
steam turbine design. 

B. A. Behrend: In 1906 I stated in Cassier’s Magazine 
that: ‘The power station of the future will contain as many 
20,000-kw. units as the power station of today contains 
5000 kw. units.” I venture now, twelve years later, to go on 
record that the power station of the future will not contain the 
75,000 and 100,000 kw. units, of which we have heard a ‘great 
deal in the papers presented this evening. . 

The course of evolution is never always in one direction. 
The time must come when the limit is reached, and the down- 
ward process must be commenced. I desire to discuss briefly the 
reasons for the limitations of size from a slightly ‘different angle 
from that adopted by the speakers. 

Beginning with mechanical stresses, as weZencounter_ them 
in the electrical machinery or in rotating machineryflike’steam 


1548 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


turbines, it must be emphasized that these are not static 
stresses, but essentially dynamic stresses. 

Stresses in bridge members are both static stresses and dy- 
namic stresses, according as the load of the bridge is a static load 
or a dynamic load. A livetoad, or a moving load, produces 
variable or dynamic stresses. In the rotating elements of the 
steam turbine, and of the electric generator connected thereto, 
the stresses are usually vibratory stresses changing both in 
magnitude and in sign. The shaft is bent in such a manner 
that at one period of the motion it is bent in one direction, and 
at another period it is bent in the opposite direction, and 
therefore the material and its molecular structure are subjected 
to alternating stresses. The same applies to other parts. The 
ancient rules of the mechanics as they are taught unfortunately 
even at this day do not apply to the problems we are facing. 
We must view the theory of elasticity from the point of view of 
vibratory stresses. Mr. Berg has told us that the disks in 


Fie. 1 


the steam turbines may have perfectly safe static stresses, and 
yet they may be entirely unsafe because of vibration set up in 
the disk. The maximum stress in a disk, subject to rapid 
rotation, exists in the center. In any ordinary test bar cut out 
of a plate, the test bar being shaped as test bars usually are, 
if a hole is made in it, the maximum stress at the inner surface 
of this hole is in general twice the ordinary stress which appears 
in the section. Suppose we call this ordinary stress 10,000 Ib., _ 
the maximum stress as it appears on the inner surface will be 
approximately 20,000 lb., but this stress will be a serious stress 
only if the ductility of the material is small. _ If the ductility of 
the material is high, then the stress will be distributed, and the 
material will flow and rupture will not occur as a result of the 
initial excess stress caused by the hole in the test bar. 

If two test bars are made of equal and high ductility, one 
containing a small hole one-thirty-second inch diameter, and 
the other having no test hole at all, both bars will rupture 
the same load. The same is not true with bars made of hard 
steel lacking ductility. 


— 


— #6 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1549 


I see little or no mention made of the fact that hard materials 
must be avoided. The ordinary tempered steel referred_to for 
thin disks is very hard steel, and I doubt if such steel in the 
form of a disk could be bent flat on itself, into the position 
Fig. 1, without showing any seams or rupture whatsoever at 
the point A. 


The elastic limit is, after all, only one criterion of the quality 
of material. Material for these disks must be ductile and must 
bend flat on itself, cold, without rupture. If it does show 
rupture, you may be fairly secure in your assumption that that 
material is unsuited for the use to which it is put, namely, 
resistance to stresses reversing in magnitude and sign. All 
fractures with which I have been familiar have been due to 
vibratory stresses. I know of no failure of any part of a ma- 
chine occurring under a pure static stress. There may be such 
failures, but they are unknown to me. 


: This Fig. shows the right direction in 
which test sample is to, be taken. 


Fiag. 3 


Reference to the limitation of capacity being due to the 
turbine only is, in my opinion, incorrect. 

The rotating end bells are stressed to such a point that it 
became necessary to make them as thick as possible so as to 
reduce these stresses to a point where a satisfactory material 


ean be obtained. The stresses run up to 30,000 lb. per sq. in. 


under normal conditions, and the ultimate stress of the material 
is approximately 100,000 lb., with a ductility measured by an 
elongation of 20 per cent and a reduction of area of 40 per cent 


1550 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


ina2in. sample. The test bar in breaking must show a frac- 
ture like Fig. 2., and making these end bells is no small task, as 
they are subject to tangential stresses, so that the work of 
forging has to be done in such a manner that the material is 
homogeneous tangentially, Fig. 3. A test bar taken radially 
would show a very greatly reduced “strength’’ in the sense in 
which I am using that term, though the elastic limit might be 
the same, yet the ductility would be less, and therefore the 
“strength” would be less, so that you see that the term 
“strength” now means something different from what it meant 
thirty years ago, as it now includes ductility, whereas twenty 
years ago it meant nothing but the elastic limit, which is some- 
thing quite different. These end bells, if thickened too much 
will make it impossible to put the rotor into the stationary 
element and therefore a limitation of construction lies in the 
length of the air gap. 

These machines have not been in operation long enough for 
us to come to a definite conclusion as to the life of the structure. 
Fatigue may not become apparent in ten years, and yet later 
fractures may occur, due to fatigue. You may say, as Pro- 
fessor Scott likes to say, ‘“You are pessimistic, as usual.” [I 
do not say this is going to happen. I say that vibratory stresses 
are dangerous, and that we have not had sufficient experience 
in regard to vibratory stresses to understand their effects 
thoroughly. It is to be hoped that the societies interested in 
testing materials will make tests with vibratory stresses, as our 
mills will not now accept specifications based on vibratory 
tests. 

These remarks tend to show that there are limitations in the 
design of the electric generator and therefore the assertion made 
tonight that the limitation of units is entirely a question of the 
design of the steam turbine cannot be upheld. > 

To sum up my remarks, we are confronted with great engi- 
neering problems the ignoring of which will do us no good, but 
the bold and courageous facing of which, with all the knowledge 
that can be brought to bear upon the subject from every 
possible angle, will lead to success. 

The course of evolution, as I said at the outset, cannot always 
beupward. Thesize of the machine, as far as cost is concerned, 
decreases to a certain point, and beyond that point it increases. 
Another. point of importance is the increase in the armature 
current in machines of 50,000 kv-a. or over, which makes the. 
problem of reducing the heating of the stator coils a difficult 
one. The loss which is troublesome to the designer is the loss 
produced in the stator coils as the result of eddy currents. 
That trouble increases with the increase in the cross sectional 
area of the coils. It may become necessary to increase the 
standard voltages now in use in order to obtain smaller conduc- 
tors in which it is possible to reduce the eddy current losses to 
such an extent as to make the machines safe as regards coil 
heating. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1551 


W. L. R. Emmet: I have always thought it a strange 
condition that construction so radically different as the two 
types of turbines present in these papers should co-exist, but an 
analysis and examination of these papers, gives a good explana- 
tion of it. Both machines described show the evidence of 
highly scientific study, and the justification for either might be 
expected to be found in the results which they have produced. 

These papers do not give direct comparisons. Mr. Berg’s 
paper simply seeks to show the limitations imposed by rating 
up of machines. It gives a condition which corresponds to the 
highest economy obtainable with a machine of that type, and 
then shows the consequences of modifications of design or of 
increase of rating. Mr. Johnson’s paper shows the general 
characteristics of limit of design, and gives a very good analysis 
of all the strains and conditions existing in the turbine, and a 
statement covering the whole field rather more particularly 
than Mr. Berg, who simply speaks of two specific turbines. 

The inherent differences between the impulse and the reac- 
tion turbine might be stated as follows, as I understand them— 
of course, I understand the impulse turbine very thoroughly, 
whereas all of the limitations of the reaction turbine I do not 
understand, although I have studied it to some extent, generally 
speaking, in certain ways the less work you do in a single 
operation in a turbine, the more perfect the operation; that is, 
if you put a small amount of work into a stage of the impulse 
turbine, you can get rather more perfect nozzle action, and a 
rather better performance. The Parsons type turbine gives 
this condition, and in that respect is very good. It has, how- 
ever, the disadvantage that it is more affected by leakage, and 
that the action of the stationary parts on account of leakage and 
other conditions, is presumably less definite, whereas in the 
impulse turbine, the leakage is very small, and the action of the 
stationary part, by suitable proportioning and using ample 
space, can be made very efficient. Thus by a good propor- 
tioning of the stationary part, quite high steam velocities may 
be justified, although in this type, also, the use of high steam 
velocities and the concentration of a large amount of work in a 
single stage, is not without its relative disadvantages. _ 

Something has been said concerning these papers relating to 
limits of capacity, and I am rather inclined to agree with Mr. 
Behrend that there is no particular reason for building very 
large turbines; that is, there has been a good deal of demand 
for very large turbines, but the justification for them is not 
very apparent to me. With turbines of the type we build, 
such as described in Mr. Berg’s paper, there is a distinct 
disadvantage in going to large sizes involving low speeds. On 
account of the great diameter of the wheels, there is a waste of 
space involved and practical difficulties in diaphragm construc- 
tion and the physical structure of the stator becomes excessively 
large and is rather objectionable. The large double-unit 


1552 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


machine which has been built by the Westinghouse Company 
in which the low-pressure element operates at a low speed is a 
splendid machine, but these machines are quite large and expen- 
sive, and there seems to be some question as to whether two 
entirely independent units, each one complete in itself, may not 
be about as good a solution of the problem, as far as the user is 
concerned. The effects of congestion in the low-pressure 
stages which is a thing which chiefly governs the rating and cost 
of turbines is a very important matter, but it is extremely hard 
to get at any numerical comparisons, and people must judge 
about the relative values from experience or from the guaran- 
tees which are offered, and by experience in use. 

I can see a certain disadvantage in running very high bucket 
speeds in a machine of the reaction type, on account of concen- 
tration of a large amount of work in a single row of blades, 
discrepancies in the areas of successive blades, and such things 
as that in the low-pressure end, but I cannot say, quantita- 
tively, what these limitations may be, so I really do not know 
very well what the economic limitations are of such turbines 
as some of those which have been described. In our machines, 
I do know very well what these limitations are, and Mr. Berg’s 
paper has tried to make the whole matter perfectly clear. 

If I have understood or observed the practise of Mr. Parsons 
himself, he has not gone in for very high bucket speeds in the re- 
action turbines. The construction now used by the Westing- 
house Company from the mechanicalstandpoint seemsto becon- 
servative and good, but what its efficient limitations may be, I 
do not very well know. I cannot altogether agree with Mr. 
Behrend’s generalizations on the subject of vibrating and 
static strains. If we could not calculate upon or predict the 
nature of vibrating strains, we could not build anything 
because almost everything is subject to motion. However, 
there are pretty definite laws which govern the question as to 
whether things do or do not vibrate. One of the essentials of 
sympathetic vibration is the rather perfect state of elasticity, 
and many structures which are used in motion, are very far 
from that perfection of elasticity, which will enable them to 
vibrate synchronously with any periodic force. As an example 
of that, I might refer to an armature mounted on a shaft—the 
shaft may be regarded as an elastic structure loaded; but in 
point of fact what it is is an elastic structure, the shaft upon 
which a very inelastic load of material is attached; that is the 
laminations are upon it, and these laminations make it rela- 
tively inelastic. In the same way these rings or end bells 
described here are loaded by masses of coils giving very high 
weight, in proportion to the elastic strain on the ring, and also 
this mass on it is, in itself, giving a condition particularly 
favorable to dead running, so I would really, without hesitation, 
put a strain on such rings to the highest possible degree, without 
any fear of their being broken by vibration. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1553 


As to this question of periodic motion, it is the cause in my 
opinion of the breaking of certain wheels in the General Electric 
turbines, and some of the possibilities of that situation were 
beautifully illustrated the other day in Schenectady. We 
made up out of rubber two or three wheels some rather thick 
with heavy edges, and some thinner with light edges. These 
edges were loaded with little staples hooked through them in a 
manner equivalent to the load imposed by turbine buckets on 
wheels, and the wheels marked out like a checkerboard. Holes 
were put in the wheels, they were then revolved on a shaft, and 
the shaft was made to actuate a high potential spark at one point 
of its revolution, so that the result of this, when running in the 
dark, was that this wheel apparently stood still, with an exact 
and perfect definition of its markings. The dry skin on the 
surface of the rubber was even visible upon close examination, 
and as the wheel loaded up, you could see the skin on the surface 
of the rubber crack, and draw into various forms, indicating 
the various distribution of strains around the holes, and the 
lines we drew on the wheels were distorted. 

This gave us a beautiful illustration of the nature of centri- 
fugal strains in such a wheel. That is what we did it for, and 
did not expect to show anything else. But in the case of the 
lighter wheel when we came to run it up to a given speed, we 
began to see something else, and that something was this— 
that the edge of the stationary wheel slowly began to work . 
around like a snake, crawling slowly through the grass, that is, 
it would have three or four points in it that would go worming 
around, and as you speeded up the wheel, the snake would 
travel faster, but not in proportion to the increase in the speed 
of the wheel, showing the state of elastic distension in this thing 
had some tendency to equalize itself through a periodic action, 
which was not an accident. 

With the stiffer wheels we had, although they were all very 
limber, made of rubber, and just a little bit thicker at the edge, 
we could not produce that effect. We could not run them at a 
speed so they would stay on the shaft, and at the same time be 
subject to this motion. 

Generally speaking, all tendencies to vibration, and particu- 
larly all tendencies to injury through vibration, diminish very 
rapidly as the object is made stiffer, because the local strain 
produced by a certain amplitude of vibration is simply a ques- 
tion of the degree of elongation of the fibres on the surface. 
With small amplitude of motion, the degree of elongation is very 
minute, and consequently the strain imposed is very little. 
Movements of such character have unquestionably been the 
principal cause of the very serious troubles which have recently 
been experienced with wheels and buckets of General Electric 
turbines of the newer types. ; : 

The lightening of General Electric turbine wheels which has 
made such trouble possible has been incident to the use of a 


1554 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


very light method of bucket arrangement which made the rim 
of much less weight, and made a great lightening of the web 
possible from considerations of centrifugal force alone. Lack 
of stiffness in the rim as well as in the web conduce to this tend- 
ency to motion. These rubber wheels showed that, because it 
was only with the light rim that such motion was produced. 

Mr. Berg stated in his paper that the generators can be made 
up to the limits of the possibilities of the turbine. That applies, 
of course, to a turbine of a type which he speaks of, but if you 
+ made a double-flow turbine of the same speed, you would soon 
get beyond the capacity of the generator, and I personally do, 
not think that there is very much practical advantage in trying 
to build a turbine up to the capacity of the generator in that 
way. A double flow turbine of the same type could be made 
of twice the capacity, but it would not be any more efficient, 
and would be quite complicated and large, and you might 
find it necessary to have two generators, and probably would, 
and I think it is better to keep to a reasonable size, and have 
independent turbine units. 

W. J. Foster: Mr. Newbury has very kindly asked me to 
tell you of the largest generators which have been built by the 
General Electric Company, and I will begin by telling you that 
about five years ago there were three 30,000-kw., 25-cycle 
generators put into operation. These were 25-cycle generators 
at 1500 rev. per min. Since that time we have put into service 
several 35,000-kw., 25-cycle generators, and one of approxi- 
mately 39,000-kv-a. at 90 per cent power factor, now oper- 
ating for one year. 

In the 60-cycle line, we have several 6250-kv-a. 80 per cent 
power factor, 3600-rev., and one 7500-kv-a., 6000-kw., 80 per 
cent power factor, that has been in operation about one year, 
and we are building 3600-rev. per. min. generators up to 9375- 
kv-a. at 80 per cent power factor. 

In the 1800 rev. per min. we have quite a number of 31,250- 
kv-a., 80 per cent power factor and some 33,333-kv-a. at 90 
per cent power factor, and we are building 40,000-kv-a. at a 
power factor of about 85 per cent. 

In the 1200 rev. per min. we have had a 50,000-kv-a. in — 
operation about one year. . 

_ Mr. Newbury’s curve, which I think is an excellent one, and 
is scientifically correct, is based apparently on 80 per cent power 
factor. He makes a statement which agrees with my experi- 
ence, that the limit is reached in the rotor, and not in the stator, 
with these high-speed generators. In the curve Mr. Newbury 
draws, if we remove the power factor restriction, and put it on 
a unity power factor basis, the capacity can be raised about 20 
per cent. In my experience, there is no trouble with such 
temperatures as Mr. Newbury mentions in at once going to 
20 per cent higher ky-a. output on that curve for any given 
speed. In other words, it has been my experience to design 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1555 


the generators for lower temperatures. They are in the 105 
deg. and not in the 150 deg. class, and that is also true in the 
case of practically all of the 60-cycle generators which have 
been built by the General Electric Company up to date. 

_ The question as to how lower temperatures may be obtained 
in the stator is one which Mr. Behrend touched on. I hardly 
know why he considers the matter of eddy currents so formid- 
able. It may be impossible to design a machine without some 
eddy currents, but there is no need of having them in anything 
like such quantities as to imperil the life of the machine or to 
cause excessively high temperatures. 

There is, a point with reference to the voltage—when it 
comes to the very large sizes—the further up we go in capacity, 
the higher the voltage must necessarily become. If we should 
build 90,000- or 100,000-kv-a. generators, it would be difficult 
to build them in less than the highest voltages at which we are 
now building generators. I think it is possible with 1200 rev. 
at the present moment, by new equipment, but not making 
such a radical change as we made six or eight years ago, when 
we stepped up to 30,000 kv-a., to build 90,000-kv-a. 1200- 
rev. machines. 

In Mr. Newbury’s paper reference is made to the ventilation, 
—axial and radial. I claim that the radial ventilation 
presents greater possibilities in furnishing larger surfaces for 
the cooling media to remove heat from the parts where it is 
generated, from the iron and from the windings. The coils 
are exposed at short intervals, and thus large areas of them 
exposed to the cooling air. In addition large surfaces of the 
core itself are exposed so that heat removal is far more effective 
than in anything I can conceive of as attainable in axial 
ventilation. The holes in the core that are put there for the 
air to pass axially, cannot be right in the teeth, to any great 
extent. ‘They cannot be very close behind the teeth, except at 
a considerable loss in efficiency. The area of the walls of the 
holes must be small in comparison with the area which sur- 
rounds the numerous small sections in the radial ventilation. 

I remember in one of our 31,250-kv-a., 11,000-volt machines, 
where a careful analysis was made of temperature drops from 
the inside of the coils, the temperature drop from inside the 
coil to the outer surface of the insulation or through the insula- 
tion, was between 30 and 31 deg. The drop from the coil 
surface through the short space of laminations was 4 deg., and 
from that surface to the air was 12 deg., even at the low rate of 
flow we had at that time. 

A statement was made, I think, in the paper, that in the case 
of radial ventilation, the area of entrance at the two ends of the 
machine is limited. That is true. But we are discussing now 
what has been done, and what is possible, and I wish to point 
out that several years ago, the first General Electric machine 
embodying the multiple flow of air in a strictly radially venti- 
- lated core was installed. These machines have been tested out 


1556 STEAM TURBINES (Nov. 14 


with the ventilation both ways—the air passing in simply at 
the two ends of the machine, and compared with air passing in 
with multiple paths, and the result has been a decidedly lower 
temperature with the air in multiple paths. That idea can be 
carried further, and so the possibilities of running at lower 
temperatures are many. 

I do not see at all that it is necessary to have the stator as a 
limiting feature in the low-speed machines. _ If I were drawing 
a curve for Mr. Newbury, a practise curve, I should be inclined 
to put the heavy line on the other side of the dotted line, but I 
agree with him that in the lower speed machines, the chances 
for lower temperatures in the rotor-are better, inasmuch as with 
the larger diameters it will be possible to ventilate the rotor to 
a certain extent which is not practicable in very small diameters. 

Mr. Newbury makes a reference to periodicity, and he speaks 
of the advantage of 50 cycles over 60 cycles. I agree with him. 

Alexander M. Gray: As to the theoretical limits of single- 
shaft turbo alternators discussed by Mr. Newbury, such 
alternators have been built with an output of 45,000 kv-a. at 
1800 rev. per min. and one naturally wonders what is the 
maximum output that may be obtained at this speed. 

The rotor diameter is not limited by the disk stress but rather 
by the hoop stress in the end connection retaining rings. In 
the case of a 51-in. machine rotating at 1800 rev. per min. the 
peripheral velocity at 24,000 ft. per min., the stress in a coil 
supporting ring of this diameter due entirely to its own weight 
is 15,000 lb. per sq. in., and this ring must also support the end 
connections. 

The maximum rotor excitation. For a given stress in the rotor 
teeth there is a certain slot depth which gives the largest slot 
area. The number of ampere conductors that can be placed in 
this slot is limited by the internal temperature and a consider- 
able portion of the temperature drop is through the rotor slot 
insulation. This drop can be kept reasonably low by the use 
of a large number of rotor slots, so that there is a large surface 
through which the heat may pass. It has been shown elsewhere 
that with a tooth stress of 14,000 lb. per sq. in. and 100 deg. 
cent. temperature rise above the entering air, the maximum 
excitation is about 1000 ampere turns per pole per inch of rotor 
diameter, or 51,000 ampere turns per pole, for a 51-in. machine. 

The maximum stator excitation: In the stator m. m. f. with 
full-load current is equal to the maximum rotor excitation, then 
the demagnetizing effect is such that on low. power factor the - 
generated e. m. f. is practically zero, and the regulation of the 
machine exceedingly poor. Machines are now built with the 
armature ampere turns per pole as large as 0.6 (maximum rotor 
excitation). In the case of the 51-in. machine, this value is 
30,000 ampere turns per pole. 

The generated electromotive force can readily be determined if 
the air gap flux density is known. The flux density is limited 
by that in the stator teeth and if we assume the stator tooth 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1557 


density to be 100,000 lines per sq. in., and the ratio of tooth to 
slot equal to 1.1, reasonable value for 13,000-volt insulation, 
then with a peripheral velocity of 24,000 ft. per min. the voltage 
induced in the conductor is 1.88 volts per in. of iron, and 65 per 
cent of this value per inch of machine. This gives along with 
the figures for armature excitation a value of about 450 kv-a. 
per in. of iron. 

The axial length of rotor. This is limited by the alternating 
bending stresses in the journal, it being assumed that the 
bearing holds the journal horizontally. With 19-in. water- 
cooled bearings the rubbing velocity is 9000 ft. per min., and 
with such bearings the length of a 51-in. rotor between bearing 
faces is 310 in., if the bending stress is limited to 5000 lb. per 
sq.in. This stress, be it noted, is alternating. 

With a length between bearing faces of 310 in., the effective 
rotor length will be about 230 in., and the output about 
70,000 kv-a. 

Summary. The maximum output of 

an 1800-rev. per min. single-shaft, 
turbo-alternator, is about.........70,000 kv-a. 

Whe rotor diameters. 402.2... 2.4.51 An. 

The peripheral velocity of rotor. ....24,000 ft. per min. 

The temperature rise of rotor conduc- 

Sa Le aoe irk teh eree B 6 a o 100 deg. cent. 

The armature m.m.f. at full load 

equals 0.6 of the maximum rotor 


excitation. 
The flux density in stator teeth...... 100,000 lines per sq. in. . 
The ratio of tooth to slot........... al 
The bearing diameter.............. 19 in. 


The rubbing velocity of bearing. ... .9,000 ft. per min. 
The axial length of the rotor and stator 
conductors will be about..........240 in. 

I do not suggest that the machine such as the above should 
be built. There will be undoubtedly manufacturing troubles 
due to the length of coils, and also trouble due to the movement 
between conductor and insulation, because of the increase of 
length with increase of temperature. It is possible to reduce 
the length of the machine and the various factors in the above 
summary are open to attack. 

R. B. Williamson: I desire to discuss Mr. Newbury’s 
paper on ‘Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single-Shaft 
Turbo-Geénerators.” The various elements that go to limit the 
possible output of a turbo generator operating at a given speed 
have been well brought out by Mr. Newbury in the present 
paper. In this type of generator the mechanical considerations 
are equal to if not of greater importance than the electrical 
features and as the two are more or less antagonistic the design 
as a whole must be a compromise. In the higher speed ma- 
chines the maximum possible output is at present limited by the 


1558 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


rotor while in large slow-speed generator the stator becomes the 
limiting factor. 

So far as the rotor body is concerned this is made of carbon 
steel and as pointed out, the peripheral speed of 400 ft. per sec. 
is as high as it is advisable to run on the higher speed machines. 
With lower rotational speed the peripheral velocity might, if 
necessary, be allowed to go higher than this so far as tooth 
stresses are concerned, because of the lower angular velocity 
which is of the most importance in determining the centrifugal 
stresses. It should also be remembered that higher peripheral 
speeds result in greatly increased skin friction loss. If rotor 
bodies could be made of alloy steel; the stresses might be pushed 
higher and larger limiting output thereby secured but this kind 
of steel when used in large masses is very liable to develop 
cracks and at present is not reliable for this purpose. Attempts 
to use this steel for large shafts in other classes of machinery 
have shown this to be the case. For the coil supporting rings 
at the ends of the rotor it is necessary to use alloy steel but here 
the cross-section is comparatively small and the metal is very 
thoroughly worked during the process of forging and expanding 
the ring from a solid piece. Test bars from these end rings 
almost invariably show uniform physical qualities. As indi- 
cated in the paper, these end rings may have an influence on 
the maximum possible output. Referring to Figs. 2 and 3, 
of the paper it will be noted that the rotor coils project straight 
out beyond the core. Unless the wedge used for retaining the 
coils in the rotor slot is made very deep, which is undesirable 
» because of the loss of valuable copper space in the rotor slots, it 
follows that the outer diameters of the end rings will be greater 
than the outside diameter of the rotor body as shown in Figs. 1 
and 2. The inside diameter of the stator laminations must be 
slightly larger than the outer diameter of the end rings so that 
the rotor can be slid into the stator, thus the minimum air gap 
may be fixed by the end rings which thereby indirectly affect 
the ampere turns to be supplied by the rotor and the possible 
limiting output for a given speed. 

Referring to the radial system of ventilation, Fig. 2, the 
amount of air that can be passed through a stator is limited if 
the air is passed through the air gap because the cross section 
of the gap is necessarily limited. However, it is entirely 
practicable to use the radial system by introducing the air at 
the back of the laminations between the latter and the stator 
yoke or casing and blowing it radially inwards against the rotor. 
The air then reverses its direction of flow and passed out radially 
through the adjacent parts of the stator core. By this means 
any quantity of air required can be handled readily by providing 
a suitable number of parallel paths, and the air inlets at the 
back of the laminations can be made of ample area to keep the 
air velocities within reasonable limits. This arrangement also - 
has the advantage of introducing cool air into the center of the 
machine where the parts normally attain highest temperature. 


\ 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1559 


This method of ventilation has worked out successfully in 
machines having a ratio of stator length to inside diameter of 
3 to 1 and the results obtained indicate that much longer 
stators could be ventilated in this way and still maintain the 
central portions within the allowable temperature limits. 

Referring to the curve shown in Fig. 4 the ouptuts indicated 
are, as stated by the author, somewhat in advance of anything 
so far accomplished. For example at 3600 rev. per min. a 
possible output of 10,000 kv-a. is shown. Machines have been 
in operation for some time that have carried loads as high as 
7500-8000 kv-a. at 3600 rev. per min. in regular commercial 
service. Of course these generators have long rotors, but we 
are of the opinion that an ultimate output of 10,000 kv-a. at 
3600 rey. per min. could be obtained as indicated by Mr. 
Newbury without going beyond the limits of present materials 
provided such output should be considered desirable for, the 
steam end of the unit. 

Francis Hodgkinson: The limit of capacity of a steam 
turbine is exceedingly hard to discuss because of its elasticity. 
Why should not one of the turbines which have been described 
have their diameters slightly increased, and be provided with 
slightly greater length of blades when the turbine would have a 
corresponding increase in its capacity. To what extent such 
things may be done, and what should be the limits of stress, 
is largely determined by the judgment of the designer. This 
applies to the calculated stresses of centrifugal force, etc., but 
in addition to these there are the obscure vibratory stresses to 
which Mr. Behrend refers. 

It is difficult to draw definite lines to which materials may be 
stressed when combined with indefinite vibratory stresses and 
temperature strains, the result of the inner and outer parts of 
the revolving limits being at different temperatures on a change 
of load or operating conditions. To do so is, after all, to 
determine what risks shall be taken. The designer is some- 
times in an unfortunate position, in that commercial pressure 
is brought upon him to increase speeds and dimensions beyond 
what he considers best judgment, which at times is hard to 
Be ities have increased in capacity of late years in the 
manner Mr. Torchio has recited, and as far as my association 
with them has been concerned, I have always felt that every 
increase of size should be accompanied by an increase in the 

iability. 
sea escebl iat Bis discussion, touched on some real truths. 
Of course, he referred principally to the type of turbine built 
by competitors of the company I represent, but I venture to 
say that any of the turbine disks he described would stand the 
destructive bending tests which Mr. Behrend pointed out as 
desirable. I believe they would pass such a bending test 
perfectly well, but, such material, ductile and strong though it 
may be, would still be unable to resist continued vibratory 


1560 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


stresses, should they produce strains slightly above the elastic 
limit in any fibers. I do not say that such vibrations neces- 
sarily exist, but should they do so and any fibers be stressed 
beyond the elastic limit, the end will be disastrous. 

The views of engineers have undergone some change of late 
years in that the physical characteristics of reduction of area is 
considered one of the most important features, for it is this 
physical characteristic which, when structures are locally 
strained beyond the elastic limit, produces a strengthening of 
that part and permits an evening up of the stresses throughout 
the structure. 

Mr. Emmet referred to a power station in which single units 
were employed as compared with cross-compound units. I 
have personally favored these cross-compound units for the 
reason of simplicity. A turbine, working with high pressures 
at one end, and high vacuum at the other, calls for skill in 
arranging the distribution of the metal of the turbine structure 
so that expansion and contraction shall be uniform and no 
distortion result. Any simplification of the structure is, there- 
fore, an advantage. By cutting the steam cycle in two, and so 
similarly dividing the temperature range, there is a direct 
simplification. Many people regard the cross-compound 
principle as a redundancy, because there are twice as many 
bearings. Bearings do not give any trouble. That does not 
mean anything, but the simplicity of the turbine structure 
means a great deal. There is a further advantage that different 
speeds may be employed for each of the elements, selecting 
that speed which is most appropriate for the steam volumes in 
the high-and low-pressure elements respectively. For example; 
for 60-cycle work the high-pressure turbines may operate at 
1800 rev. per min., the lows at 1200; similarly for 25-cycle 
service the high may operate at 1500 rev. per min., the low at 
750, although in certain cases two low-pressure turbines have 
been employed, all three elements operating at 1500 rev. per 
min. By means of such construction high stresses may be 
avoided and ordinary commercial materials employed. 

B. G. Fernald: In Mr. Johnson’s paper the importance of 
the reliability factor in turbine design is strongly emphasized. 

The calculated stresses in his turbine rotor when operating 
at 20 per cent over normal speed is given at 20,000 Ib. per sq. 
in. or when operating at normal speed at 13,900 lb. per sq. in. 

» The elastic limit of the material used, as determined by test 
rings taken from the billet close to the point of maximum 
stress is from 22,000 to 25,000 Ib. per sq. in. 

_ The material used is ordinary carbon steel and is not sub- 
jected to any heat treatment other than thorough annealing. 

_ In Mr. Berg’s paper the calculated stresses at normal speed 
in the rotor wheels of his turbine design are given as 23,450 lb. 
per sq. in. in the hub and 22,950 lb. per sq. in. ih the web and 
he uses a nickel steel disk quenched and tempered and claims 
an elastic limit of 55,000 Ib. per sq. in, No information is 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1561 


given as to the method of obtaining the test specimens or their 
location with respect to the finished wheel. 

Now, on the face of it the element of safety would seem to be 
greater with the heat treated alloy steel disks of the G. E. 
design than with the annealed disks of the Westinghouse 
design, since the margin between the calculated stress and the 
elastic limit of the material is greater. 

The reverse, however, would seem to be the case since Mr. 
Berg’s report mentions several failures of their design and Mr. 
Johnson reports no failure of the Westinghouse design. From 
my own knowledge, I would not pretend to offer a definite 
opinion on the cause of the accident to the disk wheels or to 
question the accuracy of Mr. Berg’s diagnosis of the trouble, 
but I submit that his explanation does not take into considera- 
tion the fact that the failure of the disk occurred where the 
calculated stresses were lowest but where the unknown internal 
stresses would probably be highest if a disk of substantially the 
same form shown in Fig. 3 were quenched by immersion. 

I wonder if any one has had such experience as will enable 
him to tell us that we can heat treat a disk and know when we 
get through that the disk is free from internal shrinkage 
stresses? 

_ Recently the Emergency Fleet Corporation placed a contract 

for eight twin-screw troop ships, each screw being driven by a 
cross-compound single-reduction geared turbine of 6,000 s. h. p. 
or 12,000 s. h. p. total for the ship. 

The element of reliability was, of course, of extreme import- 
ance on a troop ship and overshadowed all other design stresses. — 
However, before the vessels were under construction and the 
final contracts for the turbine let, the war was over, and it was 
decided to convert the vessels into passenger steamships. 

While reliability was still of the utmost importance and we 
wanted, if possible, to secure turbine units which would be free 
from the troubles which had been so prevalent on the smaller 
cargo vessels, it was necessary that the design take into consid- 
eration high economy as well as reliability. It was realized 
that the turbine designers task in satisfying the dual considera- 
tions of reliability and economy would be simplified by using 
material permitting high unit stresses. 

Very little exact information about the character of alloy 
steel which we would receive from the mills was available to us, 
but, we did know from general experience during the war that 
the mills were not making extra good material and it was diffi- 
cult and unreasonable to attempt to force them to produce the 
large quantity required and hold them to close limits of quality. 
Furthermore, our inspection facilities -were inadequate to 
competently handle such an exacting task and our experience 
had not warranted us in dispensing with all inspection so it was 
finally decided to limit the designers of the turbines to the use 
of ordinary commercial carbon steel with no heat treatment 
other than thorough annealing and all calculated stresses had 


1562 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


to be based on and kept well within the elastic limit of such 
material. ; 

We realized that we were open to criticism for being ultra- 
conservative, but, we could not secure information warranting 
us in taking any other course and we were particularly uncer- 
tain about the possibility of successfully heat treating alloy 
steel disks for turbine wheels. 

While the information would be too late for use in the con- 
nection just mentioned, I would ask Mr. Berg to give us some 
information about the heat treatment of the disks of his design 
and the test methods used for determining that the elastic 
limit mentioned existed in the disk itself. It is recognized, of 
course, that it is not difficult to obtain by heat treatment an 
elastic limit of 55,000 lb. inasmall bar of uniform section such 
as is used for test pieces. 

B. A. Behrend: As to theypoints brought up by Mr. 
Emmet and Mr. Hodgkinson, I may point out that vibratory 
stresses need not be stresses due to resonance. Vibratory 
stresses are all stresses which change in direction. If resonance 
occurs, there will be more rapid destruction in a shorter time 
interval. Where there is no resonance, the time period is 
lengthened out before fatigue occurs. 

Comfort A. Adams: Mr. Behrend’s remarks in regard to 
the fatigue of metals are very interesting. It may cheer him 
to know that a very elaborate fatigue phenomena research is 
now being conducted at the University of Illinois by Prof. 
H. F. Moore under the auspices of the Engineering Division of 
the National Research Council. More than $20,000 per year 
is to be expended for at least two years, of which $15,000 per 
year is contributed by the Engineering Foundation. 

Just a word in regard to the electrical end of this problem. 
Mr. Newbury pointed out the objection to using high tempera- 
tures and the very slight gain in output due to allowing exces- 
sive temperatures of the rotor conductors owing to their 
increased resistance. Is it not possible that the longitudinal 
expansion at high temperatures and the consequent slipping of 
the conductors through the insulation would constitute another 
limitation to temperature for any given length, or a limitation 
of length at the higher temperatures. 

Farley Osgood: I have heard nothing said from the 
operators’ standpoint in this matter of turbine design, the dis- 
cussion, which has consumed virtually the entire evening, 
having been confined to the designers’ arguments. It is the 
custom to separate the sheep from the goats, and it seems well 
that now we do so, in that as the discussion up to date has been 
held by the sheep, whereas nothing has been heard from the 
goats, namely, the users, who are in the very large majority, 
and who are the victims of the enthusiasm of the designers, as 
we all know. It gives me some consolation to hear less talk of 
50,000- and 70,000-kw. units, the authors having confined their — 
discussion to units approximating a 30,000 kw. limit in design. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1563 


_ From the standpoint of the operators there are some very 
important features which do not seem to have been touched on 
specifically this evening, and they might very properly be 
divided into four classes: 1. continuity of service; 2. capa- 
city of unit out of service during periods of repair; 3. invest- 
ment cost of units out of service or for spare; 4. length of time - 
to make necessary housekeeping repairs to the units. 

As to the continuity of service, I believe the designers now 
have sufficient experience to guarantee a very high percentage 
of continuous service of a unit if they do not permit their 
enthusiasm to take them into sizes which lead them into more 
or less uncertain, and certainly untried, fields of strains in the 
materials. 

As to capacity, I think it is a matter for the decision of the 
operator, rather than the designer, to elect the percentage of 
his whole capacity which he can afford to have out of service at 
the time of regular or emergency repair, and the operators’ 
enthusiasm for improved efficiency from large units should not 
lead him to a decision which may affect his whole service, when 
his large units are off the line. 

The cost of these large units, as compared with their smaller 
relatives, should be carefully considered, not so much from the 
standpoint of their value when running, which question they 
answer themselves by their performance, but from the stand- 
point of idle investment when the units have to be off the line. 

Finally, and most important of all, is the length of time to 
care for these large machines, and it seems to be clearly indi- 
cated by the papers that such machines require special tools, 
specially trained men, and usually factory work, when anything 
but the most minor repairs are made, and this certainly means 
long delays from every standpoint, so that a machine which 
can be cared for locally, either by the operating company’s 
men, or local machine shops, has many advantages over a 
machine requiring specialists and special factory attention, all 
this from the time-out standpoint. I have said before on this 
floor that the manufacturers give birth to the children, and the 
operators raise them and, as most of us know what it means to 
raise children and take them through the various vicissitudes 
of early life, I think we can say unhesitatingly that the operating 
group are much more familiar with the behavior of the units 
turned out by the designers, than are the designers themselves. 
I am firmly convinced that the designers do not give enough 
attention to the units in operation, that they do not spend 
enough time on the properties of their several customers, to 

‘become intimately familiar with facts which should materially 
assist them in turning out a product which will be more satis- 
factory to both the maker and the user, and I trust that even 
in the rush of business, which seems to be upon everybody, the 
necessity of closer cooperation between the designers and the 
users will be so appreciated as to bring such a thing about. 


1564 STEAM TURBINES [Nov. 14 


I very much regret that there is no time for a detailed dis- 
cussion from tke operators’ standpoint, as I notice a number 
of able operators here, who could add most usefully to the dis- 
cussion of this most important subject and, in fact, I was not 
aware that the entire evening was to be given up to the details 
of design, but I take the liberty of expressing a hope that the 
Chairman of the meeting at some time may have another meet- 
ing on this very important subject, at which the operators and 
the designers may be brought together and at that time the 
operators may be permitted to do the shooting instead of the 
designers, as has been the case this evening. 

Eskil Berg: I believe that Mr. Emmet has pretty nearly 
covered all the questions that were asked. However I would 
like to point out that the wheel discussed in my paper is a very 
conservative wheel, the elastic limit being 55,000 lb. which is 
as low we ever found in actual test. The great majority of 
wheels test.65,000 lb. or higher. We have, as a matter of fact, 
many wheels which are 100 inches in diameter running success- 
fully at 1800 rev. per min. 

With this wheel given, the best possible design is described, 
which under the steam conditions stated, is shown to be most 
economical at about 21,000 kw. It is also shown that by re- 
ducing the number of wheels the light load efficiency can be 
improved by a slight sacrifice of economy at higher loads, in 
which case the best point would be at about 26,000 kw. 

F.D. Newbury: Mr. Foster, in his discussion, advocates 
radial ventilation in preference to axial ventilation. Up to 
the present time neither system has reached its limit of develop- 
ment nor become a bar to further increase in rating. It has 
been necessary, however, in the case of the radial system to 
employ a four-path design, as described by Mr. Foster, for 
the larger generators while with the axial system the same 
conditions have been successfully met with a two-path design, 
that is, all of the cooling air is introduced from the two ends of 
the core. The four-path design can be employed with the 
axial system with no greater complication than in the radial, 
so that the axial system possesses greater possibilities than 
does the radial. This is, of course, due to the fact that in the 
two-path radial system the air-gap annulus is the only air 
entrance while in the two-path axial system this is supplemented 
by the parallel axial ducts. 

As to the intrinsic merits of the two systems I cannot agree 
with Mr. Foster that the radial system possesses any material 
advantage over the axial. The Westinghouse Company has 
used both systems extensively and has, furthermore, built 
experimental generators of 5000 kv-a., 3600 rev. per min. and 
10,000 ky-a., 1800 rev. per min. with the type of stator venti- 
lation described by Mr. Williamson. These experimental 
generators were rebuilt one with radial ventilation and one with 
axial ventilation so that directly comparable results were ob- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1565 


tained. Our practise, therefore, is based on practical experi- 
ence with all three systems of ventilation in use in this country 
and we can say that each of tke three has its advantages and 
its defects. We prefer the axial system in those cases where 
the simple two-path radial system cannot be used. Contrary 
to Mr. Foster’s opinion it is possible to obtain ample core cooling 
surface with axial ducts and the fact that the axial ducts are 
not actually in the tooth belt is compensated for by the fact 
that tre keat flow is in the direction of the plane of the lamin- 
ations instead of across the laminations, thereby making use 
of a conducting path having as much as ten times the heat— 
conductivity of the transverse path. 

Mr. Foster questions the importance of armature coil eddy 
current losses in these large generators. This is not a serious 
problem in 25-cycle units but in 60-cycle generators eddy- 
current losses become an important factor limiting generator 
ratings. In 30,000 kv-a. 1800 rev. per min. 13,000-volt units 
designers are now using such large slot sizes—in some cases 
614 and 7 in. deep—that the attempt to increase the stator 
rating, or to reduce copper temperatures, by increasing the 
slot depth increases the total copper loss, on account of increase 
in eddies, in spite of the decrease in J?R loss and increase 
in coil surface. 

I wish to take issue with Mr. Foster’s statement that these 
large 60-cycle generators of 30,000 and 40,000 kv- a. capacity 
can be designed with actual copper temperatures within 105 
deg. total temperature based on 40 deg. air. This is too large 
a question to discuss adequately here but it is a very important 
one and I hope papers on this subject may be presented before 
the Institute in the near future. 

Professor Gray gives certain figures representing limits for 
1800 rev. per min. generators. These limiting figures are well 
in accord with practise except in one important particular. 
The permissible length between bearings is given as 310 in. 
based on the reversing stress in the neck of the journal. Criti- 
cal speed, rather than stress directly, is the most important 
factor determining the maximum rotor length; with the pro- 
portions reached by Professor Gray the first critical speed is 
about two-thirds of the running speed (in coming up to speed 
the rotor must pass through its critical speed) and the second 
critical speed is only a little above the running speed. These 
are not conditions that would be considered permissible in a 
large and important unit. The largest 1800 rev. per min. 
rotors so far built are only half the length arrived at by Pro- 
fessor Gray and the prospect of any considerable increase in 
core length in one step must be approached with circumspection. 


i : 
i 
oe, is - 
‘ 
. 
r 
he . 
be fe 
‘ 
- ~~ 


rf Pee 
4 eee 


Y : we, 
= ets rt 4 aoe 


Presented at the 356th Meeting of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Elecirical Engineers, New York, 
December 12, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. E. 


APPLICABILITY OF AUTOMATIC SWITCHING TO 
ALL CLASSES OF TELEPHONE SERVICE 


BY ARTHUR BESSEY SMITH 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


_ This paper is an attempt to place before engineers general 
information in regard to automatic telephone switching. 

The subscriber’s requirements are independent of the means 
used to satisfy them. Automatic switching is uniformly fast 
and involves reduced mental stress to the user because the pass- 
ing of the number is positive and waiting time is reduced to the 
minimum. Viewed by the owner the apparatus has longer 
life, the service is very acceptable to the public, and but a tithe of 
the female employees are used. 

Automatic switching apparatus has increased greatly in margin 
of safety. Much progress has been made toward standardization » 
of form and toward best methods of maintenance. A few 
changes in structure are described and data given to show 
margins of safety in operation. Present practise regarding 
party lines and measured service (cash and credit) is stated 
briefiy. The durability of automatic equipment is illustrated 
by the fact that plants have not yet worn out. Maintenance 
routines are essential to successful operation. Girls do routing 
testing with marked success. 

Rural telephone lines present problems which have been 
solved in several ways, influenced by the greater number of 
telephones per line, the conditions of signalling subscribers, 
and the inferior insulation often encountered. Code ringing 
can be retained. Rural automatic service is only a little inferior 
to city automatic service. 

The community automatic exchange serves a small group of 
subscribers, either isolated or part of a telephone network. ‘The 
rotary line switch is used because it is simple, reliable, quick- 
acting, and provides 25 trunks. Hight variable factors in ex- 
change design are presented with a discussion of each. 

Toll switching in an automatic exchange gives the toll operator 
direct dialing to the subscriber, complete control over his line, 
and periodic ringing. The toll network has also been improved by 
applying automatic switches to intermediate points, so that the 
originating toll operator can set up the complete connection 
herself. The experience of the past twelve years shows that 
this increases the business-carrying capacity of toll lines at 
least 50 per cent to 100 per cent. A variety of schemes are 
available. ; 

The automatic switching of telephone lines is adaptable to all 
classes of telephone service and offers a flexible means of solving 
problems. 


NGINEERS and others interested in the building of | 

telephone plants often ask the question, “Will the auto- 

matic telephone system meet the needs of this particular case? 
1567 


1568 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


Though it may be successful elsewhere, perhaps it can not be 
adapted to suit the peculiar conditions found here?” To 
answer such questions as this is the motive underlying the 
preparation of this paper. Though the writer can not cover 
every conceivable condition, he believes that it is possible to 
place on record many facts which will be useful to those who 
have to do with automatic telephony. 

The approach to automatic telephony must be made with an 
open mind. A highly critical attitude prevents one from 
appreciating such facts as are observed. The writer formerly 
regarded automatic switching as desirable but somewhat 
inflexible. His experience and observation have led him to 
revise his opinion. Automatic switching can be adapted to 
meet every need of public and private telephone service, and 
will do it with marked advantages. 

Three kinds of service have already been discussed by the 
Institute. In 1908, Mr. W. Lee Campbell presented a paper 
entitled “A Study of, Multi-Office Automatic Switchboard 
Telephone Systems,” and again in 1910 a paper on “A Modern 
Automatic Telephone Apparatus.” In 1912 Mr. Gerald 
Deakin presented ‘‘Private Automatic Exchanges in Apartment 
Houses.”’ In 1910 the writer discussed ““The Automatic Tele- 
phone in Relation to City Service,’”’ including suburban traffic. 

The classes of telephone service which are to be treated in 
this paper are as follows: 

The single office exchange, the basis of discussion. 

Rural lines. 

The Community exchange. 

Toll or county line network. 

Long distance toll lines. 

The comprehensive system, including all kinds of service. 


GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Before taking up the details of various classes of service, it is 
well to call attention to a few general factors, such as the 
requirements of subscribers and of the owners of telephone 
exchanges and of the characteristics of automatic equipment 
most generally used. 
Subscriber’s Requirements. The subscriber’s requirements 

must be stated in terms which are independent of apparatus or 
methods. Much error will be avoided if we divest ourminds 
of conditions imposed by any one means of renderingservice. 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1569 


The subscriber requires, without unnecessary delay, without 
undue stress on himself, to be connected to the telephone which 
he desires (and to no other), to talk to the called subscriber with 
' ease and without interruption or eavesdropping, and to have 
this service available continuously. Stated concisely the 
requirements are 

Speed of connection (and disconnection) 

Kase of obtaining connection (and disconnection). 
Accuracy of connection. 

Voice transmission. 

Secrecy. 

Continuous service. 

Repeated tests of a formal nature and the general experience 
of users of both manual and automatic equipment have settled 
conclusively that the latter is very much superior to the former 
in speed of connection. But uniformity has value as well as 
actual speed itself. The average automatic connection is com- 
pleted in from 4 to 6 seconds, regardless of the time of day or 
the conditions of business. Subscribers judge the speed of a 
service somewhat by the average speed, but more especially by 
the occasions on which they suffer delay. The fact that 
automatic service is uniformly fast, greatly increases its value 
to the user. 

The speed of connection is greatly influenced by previous 
conditions. If a connection exists, and one of the two sub- 
scribers desires immediately to make another call, it can be 

-done most quickly with the automatic telephone. Hanging 
the receiver upon the hook for one second clears the line and 
permits the immediate originating of another call. A large 
- amount of telephone business may be transacted in a short 
time by automatic equipment. 

The stress laid upon the subscriber in originating a telephone 
call is mental rather than physical: It may be divided into 
two causes, the waiting periods and the transmission of the 
number of the called telephone. 

With the automatic telephone, waiting is reduced to a very 
low factor. ‘Things begin to happen the instant the receiver is 
removed from the hook. The subscriber has something to do 
from the very start, and when he gets through doing it, the 
connection has been completed and the bell of the called 
telephone is beginning toring. The only waiting period is the 
time of ringing. Even during this time the subscriber’s mind 


Br eee ihe tet 


1570 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


is more or less occupied by the sound of the ringing, which he 
can hear. Or if the called line is busy, he is immediately 
informed of that fact by the unmistakable “‘busy tone.” Not 
only does the automatic telephone greatly reduce the waiting 
time, but to a certain extent it conceals the total time required. 

The transmission of a directory number by the dial of the 
calling device produces less strain on the user than the effective 
transmission of the same number by the voice. It requires a 
distinct effort to enunciate the syllables of the various digits 
clearly enough to prevent mistakes. On the contrary, the 
sending of the number by a calling device is easy and involves 
no appreciable stress. For each digit, the finger is inserted in 
the proper hole, the dial rotated to the finger stop and let go 
free. The mechanical definiteness of number transmission 
makes automatic calling easy. 

When a subscriber desires to talk to a certain telephone, he 
wants that telephone and no other. It isa distinct advantage 
to him to know that he is getting exactly that number. This 
is afforded by automatic switches to a much greater degree than 
by human beings. Automatic switches, as now made, have a 
large factor of safety against error. They are designed and 
constructed so as to be as permanent in structure as modern 
materials will permit. Each part is separately adjusted within 
limits which impose rigorous conditions. The final assembly is 
again tested under conditions far more severe than those found 
in service. The chance of getting a wrong number by fault of 
the apparatus is so small that it can be entirely neglected. 
This fact is soon discovered by habitual users. 

There is nothing inherent to automatic telephone equipment 
to prevent the very best voice transmission. 

Much has been said for and against the value of the secrecy 
of the automatic telephone. It still remains true that users of 
the system recognize and value this property. It has been 
said that the operator at a manual switchboard is too busy to 
listen to conversations—this is true only during peak loads. 
Some manual switchboards have ‘‘automatic listening’, which 
excludes the operator as soon as her work is done—this prevents 
her from giving the connection any supervision, and defeats 
part of the fancied advantage of having a human intermediary. 
It has been said that the mechanicians employed in automatic 
switchrooms constitute as much menace to sécrecy as the 
manual operator. This is not so because the man’s work is 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1571 


laid out according to a fixed routine. He is not permitted to 
run about the room according to the dictates of his own judg- 
ment. What he shall do, when and how he shall do it are laid 
out on a schedule. His day is uniformly filled, without peak 
loads. Secrecy is even more evident in the private automatic 
exchange, where the personal interest between people is 
stronger and the danger of eavesdropping greater. These 
switchboards are without constant attendance; they run for 
long periods without adjustment or repair. 

Absolutely continuous telephone service has come to be the 
standard. Continuous service is given. But it is well known 
that manual night service is not as prompt or as good as day 
service. Automatic switches work just as promptly and 
accurately at midnight as at noon. The public deserve as 
good night service as day service, for often the need of a single 
night call may be more acute than that of many day calls. 

Requirements of Operating Company. The requirements of 
the operating company are determined by viewing the telephone 
exchange as an investment. It must yield an adequate income 
to the stockholders. It must be a permanent business. To 
be stable means that it must render satisfactory service to the 
subscriber and not be too difficult to manage. These require- 
ments are not all that there are, but they have an important 
bearing on the business. 

1. Earning ability of investment. 

2. Permanence of investment. 

3. Satisfactory service to subscriber. 

4, Ease of management. 

Telephone exchanges must pay their way. If automatic 
exchanges do not pay, there would not be any of them left in 
existence today, for this movement is twenty-seven years old. 

Five exchanges, formerly manual, were converted to auto- 
matic. They ranged in size from 2300 lines and 4400 tele- 
phones to 38,000 lines and 44,000 telephones. The totals for 
the five were 47,000 lines and 65,000 telephones. The com- 
parison of expenses is as follows: 


Manvuau AUTOMATIC 
4 
Total operating and maintenance ex- 
pemse per year.......5-....+--2-..- $552,600.00 $136,800.00 
Average per line per year............ 11.77 2.92 
Average per telephone per year..... a 8.50 2.11 


At least ten of the exchanges in the United States are from 


1572 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING (Dec. 12 


fourteen to sixteen years old. Based upon the record of the 
existing plants and the improvements in use today, new 
exchanges are built every year. 

The permanence of an investment depends upon the rapidity 
with which the equipment is destroyed, the danger of its being 
rendered obsolete by reason of advances in the art, and the 
attitude of that court of last appeal, public support. 

An apparatus to be a permanent investment as to deprecia- 
tion, must be capable of being kept in first class running order 
by ordinary maintenance, without stretching the meaning of 
the word. 

Surely any equipment which in ten years becomes so badly 
worn that it can not give adequate service, or that the repairs 
are considered excessive, so that it must be thrown out bodily, 
can not be considered as being very permanent. 

The life of an automatic switchboard is not known. Num- 
erous switchboards now in operation were installed more than 
15 years ago, have been in constant service since then, and are 
still giving the same grade of service. All the moving parts are 
subject to no other forces than those of the switch itself. 
Those forces are adequate and are always properly directed 
every time they act. Those parts which wear are capable of 
easy renewal and are taken care of by ordinary maintenance. 

Although the structure of automatic telephone apparatus 
has been changing through a considerable period of years, 
most of the changes are beyond the observance of the subscriber. 
The oldest equipment gives nearly as quick and satisfactory 
service as the latest. The telephone instrument has been 
improved in appearance, but the old ones are still giving a 
service comparable to that rendered by the new. For this 
reason, there is little obsolescence to automatic equipment. 
This being true of old apparatus, it is much more true of the 
latest apparatus on the market. 

Public support is a factor which must receive adequate 
consideration. Though in the past some have ignored it, the 
results have been anything but pleasant and have reacted 
unfavorably upon those who did the wrong. Any business to 
be classed as permanent, must have with it public support, and 
the more of it the better. 

The public recognizes and supports the company which gives 
its patrons the benefits of improved service obtained from new 
devices. They may not clamor for something which is rather 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1573 


hazy or of which they do not know. But let them once 
experience the benefits due to the new device and their support 
is assured. 

It is a matter of record that the great mass of the public who 
have habitually used both services, prefer automatic to manual. 
It is not a doubtful majority—the preference is as nearly 
unanimous as can be found. In 1911 the Automatic Electric 
Company sent out 3000 letters to subscribers who had been 
using both manual and automatic service, and 1869 replies 
were received of which 91.7 per cent unqualifiedly preferred 
automatic service. Since then others have investigated the 
subject with varying results, but always with the ratio in the 
same direction and very positive. 

Other things being equal, people prefer an investment which 
is easy to manage. One which presents troublesome questions 
which seem never to come to an end is shunned, because one 
can never tell when something may upset the financial condi- 
tion. Any factor which makes the business easier to manage, 
renders the investment more attractive. 

The manual telephone operator is the source of exceedingly 
vexatious problems. She requires careful handling, adequate 
accessory conditions, and although her pay is rising from year 
to year she does not stay long in the business. At best, hers is 
a nerve trying occupation, and it is no wonder that conditions 
are as they are. .They are inherent. 

The automatic telephone switchboard removes about. 90 
per cent of the female help in central offices. The increase in 
male help is only about 9 per cent. The duties of the former 
human operators are performed by machines which require no 
“managing.” 

EQUIPMENT CHARACTERISTICS _ 

_ Automatic apparatus of various kinds has been described so 
often that a general explanation is unnecessary. The type best 
known has been the subject of Institute papers, as well as of a 
few books. . 

Factor of safety is a thing of great importance. Upon it 
depend the maintenance expense and the dependability of the 
service rendered to the public. This is the principle which 
guided the development of automatic switching. Seemingly 
small details exert great influence upon the performance of 
apparatus. Some factors do not impress the casual observer, 
yet they have great influence upon results. . 


1574 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dec. 12 


A brief presentation of some of the improvements which have 
been made in recent years will bring the record of the subject 
up to date. It concerns chiefly the redesign of parts of the 
apparatus and the standardization of the assembly, adjustment, 
and mode of maintenance. 

The automatic switch, Fig. 1, presents a new general appear- 
ance. The relays are mounted above, the magnet mechanism 
in the middle, and the banks and wipers below. The relays and 
magnets are protected by a cover individual to each switch. 

The material of the switch frame has been changed from die- 
cast metal to cast iron, heavily zinc plated. The die-cast 
frame was subject to warping. It necessitated rather frequent 
re-adjustment of the mechanisms mounted on it and sometimes 


(| 
tim 


CTING 


SLOW A 


Fig. 2—HorizontTau AUTO- Fic. 3—AvtTomatic Retay Mountina 
MATIC RELAYS (Top View) 


even the chipping down of a lug which interfered with the 
movement of the wiper-shaft. The cast iron frame is rigid and 
unchanging. Apparatus mounted on it requires no attention 
from this cause. 

The sideswitch has been abolished on nearly all switches and 
its work performed by relays. The sideswitch as made was the 
source of considerable trouble due chiefly to the wiper friction. 
Its elimination has greatly increased the certainty of action of 
the switch as a whole. | : 

The relay has been completely redesigned (Fig. 2). The pin- 
pivot has replaced the point-pivot, the insulation between 
contact springs made permanent, and each relay rendered 
mechanically independent of all other relays. 


PLATE LXXv. 


VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


(QHUAAOON() MALA UVa) 
HOLIMG HOLOANNOD—ayT ‘dI 


Af 


(MAGIA LAay) 


HOLIMG YOLOUN 


NOD 


—oT ‘Ply 


(MOI A"LHDIYY) 
HOLIMG YOLOANNOD—ayqT - 


23 | 


(MIA LNOU,7) [HLIWS] 
HOLIMG YOLOANNOO—V]I ‘DIV 


PLATE LXXVI. 
Eales 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 7—Rorary LINE-swITcHES ON SHELF (FRONT AND REAR) 


[SMITH] 
Fig. 8—Rorary Linz-switca (Lert anp Rigut Views) 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1575 


The point-pivot, when adjusted without play or bind was as 
fine a pivot as could be made. But it was desired to have a 
pivot which would need no adjusting at all. The plain pin 
pivot has just enough play to make the armature work freely, 
and the wear is inappreciable. The point pivot is retained on 
the line relay of the plunger line switch, where the conditions 
are not severe. 

The relay contact springs are insulated by phenol-fibre, which 
is a good insulator and very constant. Each assembly of 
springs is aged by heat treatment, so that it is practically one 
solid mass. Looseness and uncertainty of spring action have 
been practically wiped out. 

The relays are mounted individually ona base plate Fig. 3. 
This base plate has openings through which the relay terminals 
(for coils and springs) extend to the rear. There the wiring is 
placed, connecting the relays together in a compact but 
accessible place. A plate covers the wiring so that none of the 
wiring on this part of the switch is exposed. The few wires 
which feed the magnets and wipers pass through a single hole 
in the base plate. The base plate carries also the switch 
frame, in which the vertical, rotary, and release magnets are 
mounted. 

The adjustment of an automatic switch may be divided into 
two parts, the relay adjustment and the adjustment of the 
motor magnets. Every relay is adjusted to a definite armature- 
stroke with a fixed residual airgap. The amount of contact 
that each spring makes with its mate is likewise fixed. These 
distances are measured with thickness gauges placed between 
the armature and the pole of the magnet. 

The contact springs of each relay are given a tension which is 
measured in terms of the operating and non-operating currents. 
Thus the spring tension is kept within limits. 

The motor magnets (vertical, rotary, and release) are 
adjusted in a definite sequence to the proper relations to the 
wiper-shaft. These relations are also expressed in distances, 
most of them measured by thickness gages. 

The final performance of the completed switch is tested iss 
being operated over a line under conditions worse than any 
imposed by commercial use. The calling device delivers 
impulses at 14 cycles per second with an impulse ratio of 61 
per cent (circuit opened 0.61 of total impulse period.) One 
test employs a line of zero loop resistance with a 20,000 ohm 


1576 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING (Dec. 12 


leak across it. The other test employs a 1200 ohm line without 
leakage. 

The spring tension of the motor magnet armature is adjusted 
so that perfect operation is secured under these two extremes 
of line conditions, with the battery voltage between 46 and 49 
volts. 

The control of automatic ‘switches over the subscriber line 
is a telegraph problem. The elements involved Fig. 4 are the 
line circuit, the release relay circuit, the motor magnet circuit 
and the release magnet circuit. All but the line circuit are 
wholly within the central. office where the conditions are con- 
stant. Each element contributes its share toward fixing the 
line characteristics which are necessary for operating a switch. 

The normal operation is as follows: The calling device 
springs (CD) are opened and closed as many times as there 


WIPER 
SHAFT 
i] 
RM } 
mere ey . 
RELEASE SERIES 


CIRCUIT RELAY WIPER 


Fic. 4—ContTrRoLuINnNG Circuit FoR AUTOMATIC SWITCHBOARD 


are units in the digit being transmitted. The line relay (LR) 
follows these impulses. The release relay, (Rel-Ry) having a 
copper collar remains energized during the series. The series 
relay pulls up the first time the line relay falls back and remains 
energized during the series of pulsations to which the magnet 
(VM) responds by moving the wiper shaft the required number 
of steps. At the end of the group of impulses, the line relay 
comes to rest energized, the series relay falls back and causes 
the local circuit to be changed to suit the next action. 

The period of an impulse Fig. 5 is the time from the opening 
of the line to the next opening of the line. It includes a “‘break’”’ 
and a “make.” The upper line represents the time that the 
line current is flowing. It is shown as broken three times, as 
in sending the digit ‘8.’’ Each opening of the line produces 
one pulsation to the magnet. This is represented by a line | 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1577 


just below the break in the line current. Owing to the delay 
of the line relay in obeying the current, there is a little time- lag 
at the beginning and at the end of each pulsation. 

The impulse ratio is the ratio of the time that the line is 
opened to the total period of the impulse. Applied to the 
magnet, it is the ratio of the time of current flow to the total 
period of the impulse. Formerly a fifty per cent (0.5) impulse 
was used. It has been found that a longer opening of the line 
circuit gives greater certainty to the selection, so that sixty-one 
per cent (0.61) is now used. The reasons are discussed below. 

The release relay must be held energized continuously, 
because when it falls back it will cause the switch to release. 
The greatest break in current which the release relay can stand 
without letting go is about 77 per cent. (For a group of 10 
impulses at 10 per second.) At the beginning of a group of 
impulses, the release relay is fully energized. While the line 
relay armature is vibrating, the release relay is kept energized 


LINE CURRENT 
MAGNET CURRENT 


IMPULSE IMPULSE IMPULSE 
Fie. 5—IMPuULsES 


by pulsations fed to it, one pulsation each time the line relay 
pulls up. If these pulsations are short, the magnetism will not 
be fully restored each time but will gradually rundown. There 
is always enough magnetism remaining to hold the armature to 
the end of ten impulses. The aging of a slow acting relay 
(equipped with a copper collar) always tends to make it hold 
better. 

The series relay must also remain energized as long as pulsa- 
tions are being sent to the motor magnet. The shortest 
pulsation which it can have is about 28 per cent for ten pulsa- 
tions at 10 per second. The conditions which supply long 
pulsations to the series relay, give short ones to the release 
relay. But the short pulsations which each can endure give a 
large range through which the ratio can vary without causing 
either relay to cease to function properly. 

The vertical magnet requires at least a 27 per cent pulsation — 
and not more than 86 per cent for satisfactory operation under 
the same conditions. Being in series with the series relay, it 
gets the same impulse ratio. Since the magnet has consider- 
able work to perform, it can stand a very high ratio. 


1578 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING (Dee. 12 


The rotary magnet of a connector can stand a variation of 
impulse ratio from 30 per cent to 95 per cent. . 

The total performance of the automatic switch is judged from 
the standpoint of the subscriber’s line. Ordinarily a switch 
is adjusted to work over lines of varying length. This is 
because any telephone may use almost any switch. Some- 
times a switch is to be used on one line or trunk only; in this 
ease the line relay can be adjusted to operate on a 2500- or 
3000-ohm loop. When adjusted.for such a loop it would not 
work well on a low resistance loop (800 ohms and under). 
Loop resistance of the subscriber’s line does not include the 
telephone instrument because in an automatic telephone the 
talking apparatus is cut out during the dialing period. 

If the subscriber line is of zero length with no leakance or 
capacitance, the impulse ratio may vary from 38 per cent to 
71 per cent without causing the switch to fail. 

The effect of simple line resistance is to lengthen the pulsa- 
tion delivered to the motor magnet, and shorten the pulsation 
to the release relay. This results in weakening the release 
relay so that it may start to fall back near the end of a ten 
impulse digit and if the line resistance be excessive may even 
cause premature release. If the loop is 500 ohms, the impulse 
ratio may vary from 36 per cent to 72 per cent without causing 
the switch to fail. If the loop is 1000 ohms, the limits are 35 
per cent and 68 per cent. The margin for safety is ample. 

The practical safe limit for a subscriber’s line is a loop 
resistance of 1000 ohms. This is a greater resistance than is 
necessary for good common battery transmission, so that any 
loop which is low enough in resistance for good transmission 
is good enough for automatic dialing. 

The effect of line leakage is to cause the line relay to be slow 
to fall away and prompt to pull up. This gives the motor 
magnet and its series relay a shorter pulsation, so that there is 
less power available to move the switch and a greater likelihood 
of the series relay not remaining energized throughout the 
- group of pulsations. The practical limit of leakance is about 
50,000 ohms for the subscriber’s line, measured between wires 
or from either wire to earth. Since the switches are adjusted to 
operate perfectly with a leak of 20,000 ohms across the line, the 
factor of safety is ample. 

Distributed capacitance such as found in telephone cable 
exerts no bad effect upon dialing. A capacitance between the 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1579 


two conductors has a tendency to delay the relay in falling 
back, and thus to shorten the pulsation delivered to the motor 
magnet. This partly neutralizes the effect of line resistance. 
In fact, the capacitance may be increased to seven microfarads 
without causing the automatic switch to fail. 

Lumped capacitance, as found in telephone instruments on 
a party line, affects the dialing. It is more correct to say that 
it is the inductance of the bell in connection with the capaci- 
tanee of the condenser that influences the signals. For this 
reason the capacitance of condensers used with harmonic bells 
(5 bells on one party line) is made 0.7 microfarad. With this 
value at least two more bells could be used without causing any 
failure of dialing. 

In general, line faults have the same effect upon an automatic 
switchboard that they have upon a manual switchboard. The 
chief effects are compared in the table following. 


Manual Automatic 

Open. No calls, no indication No ealls, no indication 
+ Legrd. Line noisy, conversation Line noisy, conversation poor 

poor Dialing bad, sometimes impossible 
— Legrd. Permanent signal Permanent signal 
sht. ckt. Permanent signal Permanent signal 

Crosses between lines. 

+ Land +L Cross talk Cross talk, a second trunk oc- 


cupied but no trouble 
— Land — L Cross talk, two line Cross talk, a second trunk is oc- 


signals show when cupied when one calls 
one calls 

+ Land— L Permanent signal on Permanent signal on one line 
one line 


A rotary line switch has been produced which beside giving 
access to 25 trunks possesses other advantages. It was the 
equipment furnished by the Automatic Electric Company for 
the Automatic Telephone Exchange at Orleans, France. Its 
chief use in America is in the Community Automatic Exchange. 
It will be described in this paper under that subject. 

Periodic ringing is the accepted practise, on both individual 
and party lines. If the subscriber removes the receiver from 
the hook, the ringing current is cut off at once, even if it occurs 
during a time of ringing. The cut-off is quick enough to be 
complete before the receiver reaches the ear. 

Party lines are segregated and served by party line boards, 
one hundred lines per board. 


1580 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


The preferred practise is to provide a party line board with 
four or five groups of connectors, each group being supplied 
with a different frequency of ringing current. Each subscriber 
line is multipled to all these groups of connectors. The hun- 
dreds digit of the call number selects the group of connectors 
and therefore fixes the frequency which shall be used. The 
last two digits control the vertical and rotary motions of the 
chosen connector as usual. Any group of-connectors can 
equally well connect to the desired line, but the bell which rings 
depends upon which group of connectors is used. 

An alternative method is to have but one group of connectors 
per hundred lines and to equip each connector with a frequency 
selecting device which is operated by the last digit of the call 
number. It makes each call number one digit longer, but is 
somewhat cheaper as to initial cost. 

Telephone service for intermittent users (other than regular 
subscribers) is usually furnished by stations equipped with 
some form of coin collecting box. For local service, the rate is 
displayed near or on the telephone instrument together with 
directions for its use. For toll or long distance service, the 
user must call for the toll board to receive supervision and 
information. 

The automatic telephone has been successfully equipped 
with “nickel-first’”’? and “nickel-last’’ coin-boxes. With the 
former, the deposited coin is held until the called station an- 
swers, then a reversal of current operates a polarized relay in 
the coin-box which collects the money. With‘ the latter, the 
user dials the number as usual, the answering of the called 
station reverses the battery current which operates the polarized 
relay in the coin box, the latter short-circuits the transmitter 
and shunts the receiver enough to prevent its use as a trans- 
mitter, but still permits hearing that the called station has 
answered., Depositing the coin clears the transmitter and 
receiver. . 

A credit meter is also in use, which records the number of 
completed connections. It may be attached to the instru- 
ment and worked with a push-button (instead of a coin) or 
may be located apart from the telephone on the subscriber’s 
premises and require no act of the subscriber. An older type 
of meter is designed to be located in the central office. 

If the pay station be used to call a free local number, no 
current reversal will take place: All free lines are connected to ~ 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1581 


a group of connectors which do not reverse the current when 
the called station answers. 

When the user of a pay station desires an out-of-town con- 
nection, he dials the toll recording desk as any local subscriber 
would do. When the connection is ready, the line operator 
calls the pay station automatically, requests the payment, and 
is by sound notified of the deposit of the coins as is the case in 
manual practise. 

Durability. The durability of automatic equipment is 
attested by the performance of the older plants. A group of 
ten exchanges scattered over the Union, were installed from 
May 1903 to December 1904. These exchanges are still (1919) 
in operation. Their original joint capacity of 19,476 lines has 
grown to more than 104,000 lines. The original equipment is 
still in use. During about fifteen years of service, the regular 
maintenance has been able to keep the apparatus in good 
shape. Today the cost of maintenance material for the switch- 
board per line per year is from 7 to 9.5 cents, and for the calling 
device 2 cents per year. 

Maintenance. The proper maintenance of any machine 

requires that it shall be prevented from deteriorating. It is 
' cheaper from every reasonable standpoint to keep it in good 
working order than to neglect it until its condition is so bad 
that it has adversely affected service. Each function should 
be tested at such intervals as have been found necessary to give 
good service. 

In a public exchange the routines involve inspections occur- 
ing daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, twice a year and yearly. 
The daily, weekly and monthly routines are merely precaution- 
ary inspections, they are not adjustments. 

The daily routine includes a rapid inspection of the functions 
of selectors. Once a week there is a rapid inspection of the 
line switchboards and of the functions of connector switches. 
Once a month the alignment of line switch plungers is examined, 
and the dust cleaned off the switch covers, tops of bays, ete. 

Every three months the selector trunks are tested (con- 
tinuity of bank and terminal wiring, particularly of infre- 
quently used or overflow trunks and switches), wiper cords 
are examined and replaced if necessary, master banks and 
wipers are cleaned and inspected, and alarm relays are inspected 


and adjusted. ; 
Twice a year the contact springs of relays and other devices 


= 


1582 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


are inspected for proper movement and tension and brought to 
standard. The switches are tested for operation under extreme 
line conditions. Switch shafts and master switches are cleaned ~ 
and oiled. Banks are cleaned and wipers adjusted and replaced 
if worn. <A rapid inspection is given to the rotary motion of 
selectors. All equipment is tested for freedom from grounds 
on frames and supports. 

Once a year everything is checked up for conformity to 
standard and brought to standard. This includes the ratchet 
mechanism (vertical, rotary, and release) of each selector and 
connector, the repeaters, the line switch plunger alignment and 
its bank contacts and the cut-off relays. 

The maintenance of an automatic exchange requires the 
attendance of persons who know what to do and when to do it. 
The average mentality required is not higher than for a manual 
plant of the same size. 

A single office exchange having 2300 lines and 5500 sub- 
scribers telephones requires approximately the following force 
for maintaining the central office equipment. 

One switchman. 

One service clerk. 

One line tester. 

One information and complaint clerk. 

One night man (answers toll board in addition.) . 

_ A two-office plant having 5400 lines and 10,000 telephones 
requires the following central office force. — 

One service chief. 

One switchman. 

Two apprentices. 

Two service clerks. 

One tester. 

Two information clerks. 

Two assistant clerks (also take care of complaints.) 

The telephones can be increased to 13,900 without adding to 
the central office force. A service chief has charge of the 
switch room and does work on equipment. A switchman 
makes adjustments and repairs. An apprentice performs 
routine tests, supervises signals, and answers telephone calls 
to the switch room; an apprentice may be in training to be- 
come a switchman. A service clerk.is a girl who performs 
the same duties as an apprentice. A tester makes tests on 
local and long distance lines; and in a small plant may act as 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1583 


) 
\ 


despatcher, routing the outside troublemen. The duties of 
information clerk are the same as in a manual plant. The 
employment of girls to perform routine tests has become a 
factor in exchange maintenance. They learn easily, are quick 
and careful in their work, and are proving very satisfactory. 


RURAL TELEPHONE LINES 


Telephone service on rural lines differs from that in cities 
and towns in that dwellings are much farther apart, there is 
usually no common center (except the nearest town) and 
greater dependence is placed on the telephone. 

The requirements of the subscriber are low rental, dependa- 
bility of service, and the ability to make many calls to those in 
his own neighborhood. On the other hand, the rural sub- 
scriber is usually willing to do more than his city brother. He 
will gladly push buttons, turn cranks, and do anything else if 
necessary to get good service. 

The operating company must have cheap but substantial 
lines, with as low an upkeep as possible, and a simple telephone 
requiring little maintenance. 

Manual rural lines are usually operated with local battery 
transmission. Automatic rural party lines are also in use with 
local battery and with success. But a special weak current 
common battery transmitter has been developed which gives 
as good transmission on a 400 ohm loop as an ordinary trans- 
mitter does on zero loop. This has to a large extent made it 
possible to operate rural lines with common battery, with 
evident economies. 


EQUIPMENT CHARACTERISTICS 


The characteristics of the equipment which handles rural 
lines depend upon the telephone instruments, the method of 
operation which is desired, and the line conditions which are 
necessary in this class of business. Insulation can not be 
maintained at as high a figure as is possible in the city. Line 
resistance must greatly exceed the usual values. Many more 
telephones must be put on a single line than is necessary in 
town. These facts require changes in the apparatus. 

Because of the number of bells and condensers (sometimes 
ten) bridged across the line and the lower insulation which is 
at times unavoidable, the control circuit and apparatus must 
have a greater factor of safety than is usual. To secure this a 


1584 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


repeater is interposed between the rural line and the regular 
exchange apparatus. 

This repeater has two line relays, Fig. 6, one in each battery 
lead. The impulsing is done with the relay which is connected 
to the positive grounded battery terminal. Also, during the 
time that impulses are coming in, the impedance of the nega- 
tive line relay is greatly lowered. These two provisions greatly 
increase the reliability of the selection. 

It frequently occurs that rural-lines produce so much traffic 
that it overloads the group of first selectors belonging to the 
line-switch board (hundred line group). This is relieved either 
by subdividing the line switches into smaller groups, or by 
providing each rural line with its own first selector instead of a 
line switch; in this case the selector performs the functions of 
repeater as well as of selector. The relative cost of the two 
plans varies with conditions. 

One condition incident to placing so many telephones upon 


aT ~ atte 
C.D. 
48V 


er eee Sex ot 
+LR. 


Fig. 6—Rurapt Linge ContTrROLLING Circuit 


one line is the chance of interference of one subscriber with the 
dialing of another. This is obviated by providing each tele- 
phone with a hook stop. It permits the hook to rise part way, 
only far enough to connect the receiver across the line (in series 
with a 2 microfarad condenser.) This allows the subscriber to 
listen without interfering with dialing which may be going on. 
If the line is free, the subscriber presses the hook stop; the 
lever then rises to the full extent of its stroke, connecting up 
the calling device and completing the talking circuit. Beside 
preventing interference with dialing, this device permits the 
rural subscriber to listen as much as he desires—a habit which 
is firmly established and warmly defended. 

The signalling can be either selective or code ringing. The 
latter is very largely employed by manual exchanges, is under- 
stood by the subscribers, and seems to be satisfactory. Selec- 
tive signalling is better in some respects, but the choice prop- 
erly lies with those who are closely in touch with local condi- 
tions. 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1585 


To ring ten bells selectively, five bells are bridged from each 
line wire to earth and rung with five frequencies. Two systems 
of frequencies are in use. The “multiple harmonic system”’ 

employes 16.7, 25, 33.3, 50 and 66.7 cycles per second. The 
‘ “non-multiple harmonic system” uses the frequencies 20, 30, 
42, 54, and 66 cycles per second. This duplication resulted 
from the historical development of two systems, and there are 
many installations of both in use today. It is tobe hoped that 
one of the two may be retained as the better, and the manu- 
facture of the other discontinued. 

Code ringing permits all the bells to be alike and to be 
bridged across the line. In order not to interfere with dialing, 
the bells are wound to 3600 ohms (approx. 5000 ohms imped- 
ance at 10 cycles per second) and the condensers limited to 
0.3 microfarad capacitance. Signals may be made of combina- 
tions of long and short rings or of two groups of short rings 
separated by a pause. 

Rural lines are served by a line-switch board set aside for 
this purpose. The special apparatus required is localized to 
this part of the equipment. If the signalling is selective, each 
connector has mounted on it a minor switch which picks out the 
frequency to be used. If code ringing is used, each connector 
has a code selector and a code switch. The latter groups the 
code signals, the former picks out the desired signal. The 
code switch is a single motion (rotary) switch with a 25-point 
bank. The code selector is the same in form and size as a 
first or second selector. They involve mechanisms which have 
been established by experience. 

In general, reverting calls are handled by providing special 
switches leading to reverting call connectors. Each of these 
connectors is equipped much as a regular rural connector is 
equipped, but is wired so as to ring back on the originating 
line. If selective ringing is used, the reverting call connector 
will send out alternately the frequency of the originating sta- 
tion and of the called station. The total period of repetition is 
4 or 5 seconds. To make a reverting call, the subscriber con- 
sults a list of the subscribers on his own line and dials the num- 
ber given for the desired station. He then hangs up his 
receiver. The alternate ringing begins and continues until 
the called subscriber removes his receiver from the hook and 
presses the hook-stop. The originating subscriber, noticing 
the cessation of his own signal, takes his own receiver, touches 


1586 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


the hook-stop and proceeds to converse. Release is accom- 
plished when both subscribers hang up their receivers. If the 
called station fails to respond, the originating subscriber stops 
the ringing by removing his receiver pressing the hook-stop, 

and hanging up the receiver again. . 

The line requirements for rural lines are as follows: maxi- 
mum safe loop resistance 1000 ohms, minimum safe insulation 
resistance, wire to wire or either wire to earth 25,000 ohms. 
Any commercial telephone cable -has low enough capacitance 
not to affect dialing. 

Automatic switching offers to the rural subscriber a telephone 
service which is vastly superior to manual service and only 
slightly inferior to city automatic service. He has the same 
instantaneous, positive, direct calling at night as at noon, and on 
holidays as on work days. It is inferior to city automatic 
service only in the loading of the party line with so many 
telephones. In fact the moving force which hastened the 
application of- automatic switching to rural lines was the 
pressure exerted by the farmers themselves to be given calling 
devices. 

THE COMMUNITY EXCHANGE 

The community exchange, as the term is now used, is a small 
unattended plant, whose toll switching and miscellaneous calls 
are handled from a distance and whose apparatus is often 
designed with the requirements of rural lines primarily in view. 
The community which it serves may be the farmers of a region, 
a small village or town, or the small suburb of a town. The 
traffic is chiefly local though by no means confined to the local 
telephones. 

Miscellaneous services, such as information, complaint, dead 
numbers, etc., are usually cared for by the nearest public 
exchange where such service is maintained. “Most of these 
community automatic exchanges are auxiliary to the ordinary 
type of public exchange. When the C.A.X. subscriber dials 
the information number, the call is trunked to the information 
clerk in that exchange, where records are kept for all the terri- 
tory served. 

Toll switching is handled in the same way as the above 
mentioned miscellaneous services. In fact it may pay to 
combine on one call number all these things, because one person 
can care for them all. The toll line operator is provided with 
a calling device and trunk connections to the community 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1587 


automatic exchange, so that she can complete and control any 
connection. 

The subscribers requirements are the same as for any single 
office exchange with rural lines. From the standpoint of the 
operating company, the apparatus must require little attention 
and the investment must not be too large. 

The characteristics of the equipment are influenced by the 
conditions of the particular installation. Too great rigidity of 
standardization would result in inefficiency. This will be- 
come apparent as we study the matter farther. 

The rotary line switch Fig. 7, is the regular equipment for 
community automatic exchanges. It possesses simplicity of 
structure, individual control, minimum of motion, and greater 
trunk group than the plunger type. 

The rotary line switch Fig. 8, is a single-motion switch, with 
a 25-trunk bank set vertically. The motor magnet armature 
has a pawl which normally locks the wipers on any trunk. The 
wipers rest where last used. When the magnet energizes, it 
withdraws the pawl so that it catches the next tooth on the 
ratchet wheel. When the magnet de-energizes, the armature 
spring drives the pawl and rotates the wipers to the next trunk 
contacts, and locks them there. The magnet is self vibrating, 
like a door bell. 

Associated with the switch proper is a line relay and a cut 
off relay. They are mechanically interlocked so that if the 
line relay is de-energized, the cut off relay can pull up only 
part way—just enough to break contacts and clear the line of 
attachments. If the line relay is energized, the cut off relay 
can pull up all the way, connecting the subscriber’s line to the 
wipers. 

When a call comes through a connector to the subscriber, 
the connector energizes the cut off relay alone. This clears the 
line of line relay and ground, but does not connect the line to 
the wipers. Thus there is a clear pair of wires from the con- 
nector to the subscriber’s telephone. 

When the subscriber originates a call, by lifting the receiver 
from the hook, the line relay pulls up and causes the trunk to 
be tested. If the trunk is busy, the magnet rotates the wipers 
at a speed of 60 to 80 trunks per second until an idle trunk is 
found. The magnet then stops, the cut off relay pulls up, 
clears the line, and extends the line to the first selector. During 
conversation, the cut off relay alone is energized. On release 


1588 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


the cut off relay merely falls back—the wipers remain where 
they are. If the trunk upon which the wipers were resting at 
first is idle, the cut off relay pulls up completely and without 
delay. The time required to seize the trunk is only that 
required for two relays to energize. The maximum time 
required, if the wipers must pass over 24 trunks, is about half a 
second. 

Most calls take an idle trunk without moving the line 
switch wipers at all. Tests made on a busy private automatic 
exchange showed that about 16 per cent to 20 per cent of the 
calls moved the wipers one or more steps—the rest of the calls 
required no motion. 

Because it possesses no common mechanism, the rotary line 
switch lends itself admirably to rural exchanges. There is so 
little to get out of order, and the factor of safety is so large, 
that it can be relied upon to require very little attention. And 
if any one part should fail, it affects only one subscriber line 
instead of a group of lines. 

The most important variable factors are herewith presented 
and will be discussed in detail. 


Pek Dram AUB SO DS cnt sierd Local battery or common battery 

272 LILIERT OLY thr. Sener oe ee Double wound or ground relay 

3. Line equipment..........Lineswitch or selector 

4. Signalling...............Selective or code 

5. Signal control. ...:.....°.. Push-button or periodic 

6. Reverting calls........... Push-button, periodic or hand generator 
7. Battery charging means...Motor generator or gasoline engine 
8. Battery charging method. . Float or hand start with automatic stop 


The tendency is to use common battery transmission as far 
as possible. The replacement of dry cells is a great and in- 
creasing expense. It is to be incurred only if the salvage of 
present equipment causes it to seem more profitable to retain 
the local battery, or if the lines are so long that it is necessary 
for good transmission. As far as automatic operation is 
concerned, it makes no difference which is used. Most lines 
are long enough to require a special weak current common 
battery transmitter. In all cases the polarized receiver is 
necessary, because the subscriber must be able to listen through 
a condenser to see if the line is in use. 

The line relay (LR-Fig. 6) which handles the impulses should 
be connected to the positive or grounded battery terminal. 
Here it has a greater factor of safety than if it has two windings, 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1589 


one being to each battery terminal. If the line conditions are 
as good as in town, the usual double-wound line relay is fully 
adequate. 

The usual practise is to carry all lines in a community auto- 
matic exchange to line switches. All selectors and connectors 
are usually equipped with the ground line relay circuit, so as to 
render repeaters unnecessary. 

In regions where rural subscribers have been using local 
battery magneto telephones for years and are accustomed to 
code signals, the code signal can still be used with automatic. 
The non-secret nature of the call is by some regarded as a 
positive advantage. It is difficult for the city-dweller to 
realize how the farmer uses his telephone. An instance will 
illustrate one point. One evening Jones repeatedly heard his 
bell give the signal for the Browns, who lived a quarter of a 
mile down the road. Knowing that the whole Brown family 
had gone to town for the evening, he stepped to the telephone, 
and gave the calling subscriber the information. More con- 
gested rural regions seem to require greater secrecy, and the 
selective signal is favored and sometimes even requested. 

The signal may be controlled by the subscriber or by the 
central office apparatus. The former is called ‘push-button 
control” or “‘push-button ringing.” If it be code signalling, 
the subscriber presses a button on his telephone so as to form 
the signals. They may be thus made more accurately and 
easily than by the hand generator, with its revolving armature 
which must be started and stopped several times in each signal. 

To secure push-button ringing, the button is arranged to 
ground the negative line and open the positive line. The 
negative line relay remains energized and prevents the con- 
nection from releasing. The positive line relay controls the 
ringing apparatus. 

Code ringing was described under the heading ‘Rural 
Telephone Lines.”’ 

Reverting calls are handled in accordance with the method 
of signalling used. If local battery magneto telephones are 
employed, the subscribers ring each other on the same line just 
as they did with the manual switchboard. If selective sig- 
nalling is employed, the subscriber dials a special number and 
receives alternate signals as was described above, (Rural 
Telephone Lines.) If code signalling is used it may be either 
periodic or push-button controlled. The latter requires 
reverting selectors, available to the party lines, 


1590 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


When a rural subscriber desires to call a person on his own 
line, he dials a special number. He then presses his push- 
button to form the code signal. This action controls a relay 
in the reverting selector, which sends ringing current back onto 
the originating line. 

If the code ringing is periodic, reverting calls are handled by 
reverting connectors which are equipped very much like the 
regular connectors. The subscriber consults a list of sub- 
scribers on his own line (posted on the telephone.) He then 
dials the special number given for the desired station and hangs 
up his receiver. The desired code signal is sent back on the 
line, repeated periodically. When the called stations answer, 
the ringing: is cut off—the originating subscriber then comes in 
on the line. Both subscribers hanging up release the reverting 
apparatus. 

The charging of the battery is done preferably by a motor 
generator run by commercial power. The battery bus bars 
are equipped with a voltage relay, which starts the motor 
generator whenever the pressure falls to 46 volts and stops it 
when it reaches 52 volts. A self-closing reverse-current circuit 
breaker stands between the generator and the battery. When 
the generator voltage is high enough to be safe, the circuit 
breaker closes and the charging begins. When the motor has 
been cut off by the high voltage, the generator voltage dies 
away until a slight reverse current operates the circuit breaker 
and cuts off the circuit. 

If nocommercial power is available, a gasolene unit isinstalled. 
This is started by hand as often as necessary. The regular 
maintainer need not do it, some one who lives near the exchange 
and is familiar with gasolene engines is employed to set it to 
going. The stopping is automatic. An ampere-hour meter 
is included in the battery circuit. It is compensated so as to 
run slowly when charging, but full speed when discharging. 
When the meter indicates the necessary ampere-hours have 
been put into the battery, it opens the ignition circuit of the 
engine, so that the latter stops. The circuit breaker discon- 
nects the generator from the battery. During the time of 
charge, the circuit breaker inserts counter e.m.f. cells in the 
discharge lead to the power board—they prevent undue rise of 
voltage on the bus bars which would prematurely stop the 
charging. 

The equipment is made up in three general units, the switch- 


a 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1591 


board, the storage battery and the charging machine. The 
switchboard is made in two or three parts, which are installed 
side by side so as to form one unit. These parts are the local 
switchboard, the powerboard and the main distributing frame, 
and the trunking board. The latter is omitted if the exchange 
is isolated (no trunks to other exchanges.) All but the trunk- 
ing board have been fairly well standardized. Because of the 
many variable conditions to be met in different places, the 
trunk board, containing selectors and repeaters, is made up in 
accordance with the needs. 

A community automatic exchange needs no special building 
to house it. It has been installed in a store, in the bedroom of 
a residence—any convenient place which is available. There 
_ are signals to indicate when a fuse blows etc. The conditions 
of community life and the location of the apparatus are such 
that someone is always not far away. 

This type of exchange has not been in service long enough to 
secure data of general worth as to the amount of maintenance 
labor required. In one case a group of three of these exchanges 
located on a straight line 2614 miles long, together with the 
telephones belonging to them are maintained by one man. 
The man is of the same general type as those who maintain 
ordinary automatic equipment. 

The line requirements are the same as those given under 
“Rural Telephone Lines.” 


TOLL SWITCHING 

Toll service between line and subscriber may be handled in 
any one of a number of ways. The methods described here 
are considered the best, as the result of much experience. 
Person to person calls alone are considered. 

The recording toll clerk receives calls from the subscriber 
over trunks which come from selector banks and terminate on 
desks. The tickets are made out and passed to the toll line 
operator in the usual way. 

The toll line board is provided with trunks which pass to toll 
selectors. Over these trunks the toll operator dials the full 
directory number by using a calling device which is keyed into 
the circuit. The selectors lead to toll connectors, the latter 
located in the hundred-line boards, adjacent to the local con- 


nectors. * 
These toll connectors may be used for local service as well. 


1592 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


If all the local connectors are busy, the local traffic will take one 
or more of the toll connectors. In this case the connector acts 
like a local connector, having the same current supply relays 
and: condensers. When seized by a toll selector, the local 
apparatus in the toll connector is cut out, leaving a clear cir- 
cuit from the last selector through the connector to the calling 
line. The last selector supplies current through a repeating 
coil. 

The ringing is intermittent, but must be started by the toll 
operator. When the subscriber answers, the ringing stops 
automatically. If the subscriber hangs up his receiver, the 
usual supervision is given, and the toll operator may start the 
ringing again, if desired. . 

Intermittent ringing is used for toll calls because it has been 
found to be the more effective than manual ringing. Where 
local ringing is periodic and toll calls are rung by hand, much 
delay results. The subscriber is inclined to think that the 
manual ring is merely some local call which is very shortly 
released. Consequently he pays no attention to it. But the 
periodic signal gets his attention and greatly shortens the time 
of response to toll as well as to local calls. 

The toll connector tests the called line as does any connector. 
If the line is busy, it sends a busy tone to the operator and also 
extinguishes the supervisory lamp at the toll board. When 
the line becomes free, the connector seizes the called line, stops 
the busy tone, and lights the supervisory lamp at the toll 
board. When the toll operator sees that the line is free, she 
starts the ringing by pulling a key. 

The release of a toll-to-local connection is controlled by the 
toll operator. Merely pulling the plug out of the trunk jack 
causes the switches to be restored to normal. 


TOLL SWITCHING BETWEEN EXCHANGES 


It is desired to discuss under this heading the general con- 
siderations involved and to give some concrete illustrations 
of how exchanges are linked together. 

General Considerations. The linkage of exchanges of any 
kind into a network requires, beside the toll lines, adequate 
means for switching these links to each other and to the lines 
of the subscribers who are to talk to each other. In arranging 
this switching, thought must be given to the cost of effecting 
such connections, and the effect of the means on the volume o 
traffic handled, 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1593 


The usual manner of handling such calls is to have one or two 
operators in the originating exchange to connect the originating 
telephone and the toll line together, another operator at each 
switching office for toll lines, and one or two operators at the 
called exchange to connect the toll line to the called telephone. 
If each exchange has several offices and private branch ex- 
changes, still more operators may be required. 

It has been found that the manual switching of toll lines, 
among themselves and to the subscriber lines, entails con- 
siderable loss of time. This is chiefly due to the time required 
to gain the attention of operators who have other lines to 
serve beside the one in question. It lengthens the time re- 
quired to set up a connection, it interferés with supervision, 
and delays the release of the circuits after both subscribers 
have hung up their receivers.- This is so great a drag on the 
service that it has led to the establishment of many direct toll 
lines between important points, so as to do away with inter- 
mediate switching. This lowers the time-efficiency of the long 
direct line, because it can not be used for any intermediate 
traffic. 

For at least twelve years toll lines have been switched by 
- automatic means and experimenters have been at work pro- 
ducing apparatus which is adapted to this service. The first 
discovery made was that automatic switching increased the 
capacity of the toll line at least fifty to one hundred per cent. 
This remarkable increase is due to the speed of connection, the 
accuracy and promptness of supervision, and the quick clearing 
of the line after both subscribers have hung up their receivers. 

No matter how the switches are controlled, the line must 
permit manual operation at any time, must operate automati- 
cally in both directions if both ends are at automatic exchanges, 
when seized must give positive indication to all stations con- 
cerned and must give supervision of both originating and called 
subscriber to the one operator who controls the connection. 

Uniform operation is highly desirable. This point has 
received attention in developing automatic switching over toll 
lines. It is so arranged that if the operator plugs into the jack 
of an automatic toll line and rings, the call will go through 
manually as formerly. But if, after plugging into the jack, 
the operator throws the calling device key, she can put the call 
through automatically. After dialing the number, the operator 
rings with the regular ringing key. This operation holds no 


1594 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING (Dec. 12 


matter whether she is switching toll lines only, or if she auto- 
matically completes the connection to the called subscriber. 

A few illustrations will show how automatic switching is 
applied to various toll traffic services. In order to avoid 
confusion, the examples will be very simple. 

Consider the case of two adjacent exchanges which have 
free service from one to the other Fig. 9. Let each exchange 
be represented by four hundred-line-boards, having selectors 
and local connectors. 

The lines (1 and 2) which carry the inter-exchange traffic 
are equipped at each end with a selector, and are in addition 
multipled to the banks of local selectors. A repeater is inserted 
between the selector banks and the lines for the purpose of 
holding the local switches from releasing, feeding common 
battery for talking, ete. 


TRUNKS “ae sos TRUNKS. 
FROM AUTOMATIG EXCHANGE ~A AUTOMATIC EXCHANGE-B FROM 


SELECTOR 
BANKS 


[}|REPEATERS _ 


OLL Sy ; - oNT 
SELECTORS SELECTORS 


LINE CIRCUIT=) 


LINE CiIRGUIT-2 


Fig. I—AvuTOMATIC EXCHANGES CONNECTED BY FrEB AUTOMATIC TRUNKS 


The banks of the toll selectors are run to the jacks of toll 
connectors, one in each hundred-line-board. These toll con- 
nectors have their banks multipled to the banks of the local 
connectors, so that all subscriber lines can be reached. 

When a subscriber in exchange A desires to call one in B, he 
dials a figure which causes his first selector to seize one of the 
lines, making it busy on the banks of all other first selectors in 
both exchanges A and B. He then dials the directory number 
of the desired telephone, which first operated the toll selector 
at B and then the toll connector in the hundred-line-board 
chosen. 

If pay service is the rule, the lines can be arranged so that 
the toll operator at the originating exchange can complete the 
connection without the aid of the toll operator at the distant 
exchange, Fig. 10. The toll lines will terminate at each end in 
toll selectors and jacks and lamps on the toll board. The 
trunks from local selector banks will also run to the toll board. 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1595 


When a subscriber in B desires to call one in A, he dials a 
single figure number which causes his first selector to take an 
idle trunk to the toll board. The toll operator answers the 
call in the usual way. She has a calling device which may be 
associated with any pair of cords. When she plugs into the 
jack of the toll line, she makes it busy at both ends, showing 
the busy lamp at exchange A, so that the toll operator there 
will not try to use the line. The operator at B then dials the 
call through to the subscriber in A. 

The operator at B controls the connection, giving it the 
usual supervision. When the subscribers are through, she 
pulls out the switchboard plug, which causes all switches to 
release. 

The identity of the originating station may be verified by 


TRUNKS ~ 
RUN = “ TRUNKS 
=~ AUTOMATIC EXCHANGE-A AUTOMATIC EXCHANGE- B FROM 


TOLL ~p 
SELECTORS 


e) ‘e 


je ees Te EY, 


TOLL BOARD TOLL BOARD 


Fig. 10—Avromatic Excuanarms ConNECTED By Automatic Tout LINES 
fi 
having the subscriber hang up his receiver. When the line 
connection is ready, the operator calls the originating sub- 
scriber automatically and permits conversation. 
The apparatus is arranged so that the toll lines can be 
- operated manually without change. If the operator after 
plugging into the toll line jack rings in the ordinary way, she 
_ will cause the customary lamp or drop to be displayed at the 
other toll board. ~ 
If between two such exchanges there is a toll central office, 
the lines can be interconnected by automatic switches with 
great saving in time. Consider, Fig. 11, four toll lines meet- 
ing at a toll office, which is manually and automatically 
operated. The former may be necessary for handling traffic 
‘to and from local subscribers. 
Each toll line will terminate in three places, the toll board 


~ 


1596 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


multiple, the automatic switch bank multiple, and the jack of 
the automatic switch belonging to that line. 

If a distant exchange seizes a toll line, it is automatically 
made busy on the banks of the toll selectors and also lights the 
busy lamps belonging to it on the toll board. The distant 
exchange then dials the number of the toll line desired. When 
that line is seized, it is made busy on selector banks and toll 
board (as was the originating line.) 

If the incoming call is for a subscriber in the exchange 
attached to the toll office, two ways are open for handling 
it. The distant exchange may ring on the toll line, cause the 
line signal to show on the toll board at the toll office and 
use the operator there to complete the connection manually 


TOLL LINES 
ha Neo aaue saan ~ 


+t | 
il ASM TOHES 
ye a J 1 ] 
a 
Ora OV) 2-0 —) 
> 
=9ARD 


oS) | 


645 bd 


J I MULTIPLE 
Or Dae) TOLL 


Y) 
O 
U 


5 
U 


bs & 


JACK O 


Fig. 11—Avtomatic Toit SwiTcHING OFFICE 


or automatically. The second way is to run trunks from the 
banks of the toll selectors to the automatic switches of the local 
exchange and to permit the distant toll operator to dial through 
to the subscriber and supervise the call. 

The application of automatic switching to toll lines in a small 
net work will illustrate some of the possibilities. For the sake 
of simplicity, each exchange is limited to 1000 lines. 

Let us consider five automatic exchanges Fig. 12. Four of 
them, A, B, C and D, are located at the corners of an approxi- 
mate square. Exchange M is near the center of the quadri- 
lateral. Assume further that free service is given between all 
adjacent exchanges, but that a charge is made for traffic 
between opposite corners (A and D, Band C). The exchanges 
are numbered from 1 to 5 as indicated. 


1919]. SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1597 


The exchanges are connected by lines. To keep the illus- 
tration simple, assume that there is only one line between 
adjacent exchanges, eight lines in all. Any link can easily be 
increased by adding lines and switches without changing 
the principles described. 

Each exchange has two kinds of first selectors, local and 
incoming. The local first selectors (illustrated by only one, L) 
handle all the traffic originated by subscribers in that 
exchange. One bank level carries the traffic into the local 
switches to local subscribers. Since this is a small system, to 
keep the numbering uniform, each exchange has a different 
local level. In.A it is the first level, in B it is the second level, 
etc. The other levels lead to adjacent exchanges, each accord- 


EXCHANGE-A (1) EXCHANGE-B (2) 
TO LOCAL SWITCHES TO LOCAL SWITCHES 


BS) 
TOLL BOARD 


TO LOCAL SWITCHES 
a 1-D I-™ 


Fig. 12—Typrcan Network or SMALL AUTOMATIC EXCHANGES 


ing to the number of the exchange. From the second level, a 

trunk goes through a repeater (R) to the line leading to £, 
where it terminates on an incoming selector (I-A from A, 
I-D from D, etc.) 

From the third level a trunk goes through a repeater (R) to 
the line leading to C, where it terminates in an incoming 
selector (I-A from A, I-M from M, etc.) 

The repeater inserted in the outgoing trunk holds the local 
switches in the originating exchanges. 

The incoming selectors (I-A, I-B, etc.) have the right level 
multipled to the banks of the local selectors (L) so that they 
have access through the local switches to the local subscribers, 

These free lines are in reality two-way trunks. Each end — 


1598 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING (Dee. 12 


of a line is attached to an incoming selector for incoming 
traffic and is multipled to the banks of all the local selectors (L) 
for outgoing traffic. 

Suppose that a subscriber in exchange A calls a subscriber in 
exchange C, whose local number is 3225. The subscriber in 
A will first dial the figure “‘3’’ which causes his first selector (L) 
to lift its wipers to the third level and seize the line to C, making 
it busy at both ends so that no one else can intrude. Then he 
dials the figure “‘8’’ of the local-number, which causes the 
wipers of the incoming selector (I-A) to rise to the third level 
and to seize an idle trunk to second selectors. The remaining 
three digits choose the hundreds, tens and units and. complete 
the call. 

To handle pay traffic between A and D and between B and 
C, as well as between the network and the long distance lines 
to other parts of the country, a toll board is installed at M. 
All incoming selectors in M have the fifth level multipled into 
the banks of the local selectors (L) because all the other ex- 
changes are to call M free of charge. But the tenth or “‘O” 
level is run separately to the toll board. Any call for long 
distance by a “‘C”’ subscriber will go directly to the toll board, 
because the directory lists the long distance operator so as to 
secure that result. “‘Long Distance’ may be listed as “‘50”’ or 
as “00”, because the banks of the local selectors (L) at each 
exchange can be multipled that way. 

Trunks from incoming selectors at M and the toll board are - 
kept separate, so that the toll operator knows the origin of 
each call which comes to her. 

If a subscriber at A desires to call some one at D, he is 
instructed by the directory to call ‘‘50’’ which leads his call to 
the toll board. The operator makes the charges and com- 
pletes the call. The operator has lines leading into the local 
~ switches through which any exchange is available. If desired, 
special toll selectors may be.set aside for her use. If the 
identity of the calling station is in question, the operator 
directs the originating subscriber to hang up. Then she calls 
the number which he gave, this establishes identity. 

If the subscriber at A tries to avoid payment by calling 
through B or C, he will fail. The incoming selector (I-A) at 
both these places does not have any connection on its bank for 
the D exchange. It is impossible to get out of that place. If 
he tries to dial from A through M, to D, he will run against the 
same is acu 


> 


1919] SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING 1599 


It is possible to multiple the banks of local selectors so that 
if a subscriber tries to evade payment, his call will be diverted 
to the toll board. This is done by connecting the level which 
ee be called to the level carrying the trunk to M (see exchange 

-) 

Suppose that a subscriber in D has business with a sub- 
scriber in B, whom he calls frequently free of charge by dialing 
“22” plus the rest of the number. If that D' subscriber moves 
to C and attempts to call ‘‘22”’ as before, he will find himself 
answered by the toll operator at M, who will make the charge 
and complete the call. Level ‘2’ of local selectors in C is 
multipled to level “‘5’’ and the trunk to M.-The incoming 
selector (I-C) in M has its second level multipled to the tenth 
and thus to the toll board. 


LONG DISTANCE TOLL LINES 

It seems to the writer that there is no insurmountable 
obstacle to prevent the extension of the automatic switching 
of toll lines to include long distance lines of any length. The 
only limit is that of desirability. Any distance over which 
telegraph can be worked can be covered by automatic dialing 
on toll lines. The problem is more difficult than straight 
telegraphy, for the transmission of the voice must be safe- 
guarded. But as the advantages become more generally 
known, automatic switching will be extended as far as there is 
any advantage to be gained. The farther two points are apart, 
the more line there is involved in each conversation and the 
greater the need of economizing time. 


THE COMPREHENSIVE SYSTEM 


The automatic switching of telephone lines of all kinds is 
available for building up a comprehensive telephone system of 
large usefulness. It serves equally well the farmer, the small 
town dweller and the citizen of the metropolis and links them 
all together. Everywhere that telephone lines are to be joined 
and disconnected, and where human intelligence is not abso- 
lutely indispensible, the automatic switch materially increases 
the efficiency. Every year people are revising their views on 
what constitutes a real need for human intelligence, and this 
revision is not confined to any one industry. 

Gradually the use of automatic switching is extending its 
usefulness and raising the effectiveness and the efficiency of the 

whole comprehensive system. . 


1600 SMITH: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dee. 12 


SUMMARY 


Automatic switches made with reasonable care, to well 
known and definite limits, give superior telephone service with 
plenty of margin to spare. Automatic switching is not so easy 
that any kind of apparatus thrown together in any sort of way 
will give good service; neither is it so difficult that prohibitively 
expensive machinery barely secures commercial results. 

The ways of connecting automatic switches together so as 
to form a smoothly operating system are many and varied, and 
permit adaptation to any class of telephone service. It meets 
the need for telephony, not as manual switching meets it, but 
in its own way, which in many particulars is better. This art 
rests upon a reasonable and scientific foundation. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1601 


DISCUSSION ON “APPLICABILITY OF AUTOMATIC SWITCHING 
TO ALL CLASSES OF TELEPHONE SERVICE (SMITH), NEW 
YorK, N. Y., DECEMBER 12, 1919. 


Selby Haar: I saw an announcement in a New York 
paper recently that some of the new exchanges which are to 
be opened by the telephone company in this city will have, 
at least, In part, some automatic equipment. I wonder if 
that will be of the type described in the paper tonight. 

Lyman F. Morehouse: I think perhaps I can answer the 
question just asked. There are several types of automatic 
telephone equipment, and Mr. Smith in his very interesting 
paper has described one of them, which has attained quite 
a field of usefulness. The conditions which obtain in New 
York City, for example, are, however, such as to require the 
installation of automatic equipment different from that des- 
cribed by Mr. Smith. 

Paul S. Clapp: I had the good fortune to be in Central 
Europe with Mr. Hoover’s Commission and assisted in the 
establishment of communications for that Commission. At 
Prague we came into rather intimate contact with the Czecho- 
slovak Director of Public Telegraph, and he said as soon as 
they could get money in that country, they would build 
telephone systems. Of course, the labor question is a very 
important one throughout Europe, and they were particularly 
interested in anything connected with automatic telephone 
systems. That statement of the Director of Postal Tele- 
graph has two significances—one, in showing the alertness of 
EKuropean engineers to grasp improvements in American means 
of communication, and secondly, a realization of the shortness 
of labor and their desire to introduce machines to do work 
wherever possible. 

Fred L. Baer: (Read by D. McNicol) In these days 
of disputes between employers and employees when both are 
so prone to ignore the third party to all such disputes, the 
long suffering public, it is perhaps of interest to mention that 
in several instances within the past year automatic exchanges 
continued to serve the public for periods of a month or more 
with practically no one in attendance in the central office. 
While under normal conditions it is necessary to follow main- 
tenance routines, these are largely precautionary methods to 
anticipate trouble which might ensue from non-standard 
conditions and many of the routines can be discontinued for 
a more or less indefinite period in case of an emergency. 

In the paper we have learned of many of the advantages 
of automatic operation under various conditions, but it might 
be of interest here to describe briefly how the condition of 
full automatic service, especially in large networks, is ap- 
proached. 

It is not often that the cut-over from manual to automatic 
operation is effected instantaneously in large networks except 


1602 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [Dec. 12 


where the manual equipment which is to be displaced is of a 
more or less uniform condition justifying the replacement. 
In most cases the transition period is likely to be from two 
years to seven years or more, so that there is a considerable 
time during which there is a mixed manual and automatic 
service. Obviously as far as the telephone user is concerned 
the method of operation should be such that manual sub- 
scribers will originate all of their calls as they have been doing 
and automatic subscribers will originate all of their calls by 
* means of the dial. 

Various plans have been followed for affording the mixed 
service during the transition period, each having advantages 
peculiar to the particular case. For calls from a manual 
subscriber to an automatic subscriber the procedure is as 
follows: 

The manual subscriber lifts his receiver and gets the opera- 
tor who is known as the “A” operator. The “A” operator 
ascertains the number that is desired and must have means 
for disposing of the call. Since the subscriber is likely to 
require service either to a manual or to an automatic number, 
the “‘A”’ operator must be able to take care of either case. The 
control and supervision of the connection should always 
remain with the “A” operator. The plans for completing 
the calls to automatic are, 

First. The “A” operator’s position can be equipped with 
a dial and the operator can dial the desired number. Ordinar- 
ily the operator will have trunks direct to each office, and it 
will be necessary for her to dial only the last four digits of 
the number. The ‘‘A” operator’s work in handling a call of 
this kind is practically the same as for handling a manual 
trunk call by order wire. 

Second. The ‘‘A” operator can extend the call over a 
trunk to a sending operator, after having obtained a trunk 
assignment from the sending operator. The ‘‘A’”’ operator’s 
work is the same as in handling a manual trunk call. The 
second operator’s positions, located at one or more convenient 
points, can be equipped in the following manner: 

(a) A dial cut in key for each trunk and a common dial. 
After learning the number over the order wire and making the 
proper trunk assignment, the operator uses the dial cut-in 
key of the proper trunk and dials the number, then restores 
the dial key to normal. This operator has no supervision 
except busy guard lamps to prevent double assignment of 
trunks. When the “A’’ operator disconnects, the entire con- 
nection is cleared. The sending operator with this method 
Bs operation should handle from 300 to 350 calls per busy 

our. 

(b) «A special push button sending device, so that when 
receiving the number over the order wire, this operator 
sets the call up on an idle sending machine, and when the 
proper trunk has been seized by the “‘A’’ operator, then the 


/ 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1603 


machine is started and sends the impulses. This operator 
has only busy guard lamp supervision and the control of the 
connection rests with the “A” operator. A second-sending 
operator with this method of operation should handle from 
590 to 600 calls per busy hour. 

When only a relatively small portion of a network is to be 
converted to automatic initially, it may be more practical 
to use the second plan rather than to equip all ‘‘A” positions 
with dials and instructing the entire staff in the dialling 
method of operation. Whether the sending operator would 
be provided with a dial or a special sending device would 
depend on the length of the transition period, and since the 
special sending positions are considerably more expensive, 
than the dial position, and could be justified only on the basis 
of operating savings. Obviously as the conversion work pro- 
ceeds, there will be an economical point at which the dials 
can be placed on the ‘‘A”’ operator’s positions. 

For calls from automatic to manual the procedure is as 
follows: 

First. The directory listings can differentiate between 
manual and automatic subscribers. Then the automatic sub- 
scriber could be instructed to call a predetermined digit, say 
“9”, for calls to manual subscribers the call would then be 
routed over a trunk to a nearby manual operator, where it 
would terminate as a subscriber’s line. An “A” operator 
would answer and complete the connection the same as a 
manual call. 

Second. The directory listings can differentiate between 
manual and automatic subscribers. Then the automatic 
subscriber could be instructed to call certain digits to route 
the calls to the proper manual exchange where the trunks 
would terminate before an operator who would answer and 
learn the desired number and the call would be completed 
by plugging into the multiple. If the trunks are plug-ended 
and equipped for machine ringing, then the operator can com- 
plete about 300 calls during the busy hour. 

Third. The directory listings would all be on an automatic 
basis. Then the automatic subscribers would dial the 
numbers as listed, and the call would be routed to the proper 
manual exchange where the last four figures would be displayed 
before a special operator who could associate the proper 
trunk with the number indicated, and by plugging into the 
proper terminal of the multiple complete the connection. 
An operator with this method of operation should complete 
from 550 to 600 calls per busy hour. 

Fourth. The calling subscriber would proceed as in the 
previous case, but the call instead of being displayed before 
an operator, would be set up on selector, and connector switches. 
The banks of the connector switches would be connected to 
the corresponding hundreds of the manual multiple, and the 


1604 AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SWITCHING [ Dee. 12 


connectors would be arranged to function properly with the 
manual multiple. : 

When only a relatively small portion of a network is to be 
converted to automatic initially, it may be more practical to 
use the first methods, as the conversion proceeds the second 
method will: have its advantages. When a considerable 
portion of the plant has been put on an automatic basis, then 
either the third or fourth plans will be more suitable. Which 
of these two plans is followed would depend largely on the 
ability to finance the installation of the selector and _ con- 
nector equipment, because the saving in operating labor 
would be obvious. The fourth plan has many advantages 
to the operating company, because operating labor can be 
reduced to a minimum, even calls from one manual office to 
another manual office can be completed by the “‘A’’ operator 
in the originating office, through the selector and the con- 
nector equipment. 

It should appear, after describing the various means of 
affording mixed service during a transition period, that all 
plans are feasible. A special study is required in each case 
to determine the plan best suited. The writer, however, feels 
that the plan which has in view the complete conversion in 
the shortest time is the one which will eventually be followed, 
because there are certain advantages which are apparent, but 
which cannot always be represented in a cost study. 

Arthur Bessey Smith: I thinkit only right, that you should 
know that although the present automatic switch, to which, 
I referred, has a bank having only ten contacts on each level 
yet this does not by any means limit the number of trunks 
available for communicating between different offices, or trunks 
between different parts of the same office—all the way from 150 
to 200 trunks in a group are available by suitable combi- 
nations of the apparatus, and I think I am safe in saying it will 
not be difficult to increase them to 500 trunks in one group. 
This has already been done in part. 

In regard to the French situation, there is a company in 
France known as the Thompson-Houston Comany, which has 
been making some automatic apparatus and is in a position 
to make more. 

I think Mr. Baer’s discussion requires no answer from me, 
because Mr. Baer’s is an expert in his own line, and knows 
whereof he speaks. 


Presented at the 356th Meeting of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers, New York, 
December-12, 1919. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. E. 


THE SEARCHLIGHT IN THE U. S. NAVY 


BY RALPH KELLY 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


The types and uses of searchlights and signaling lights on 
naval ships are briefly described. 

A changed form of 12-inch incandescent searchlight is sug- 
gested which will insure the lamp bulb filament always being 
at the focal point of the mirror and of the correct type for the 
application. 

The present type of low-power searchlight has many faults. 
These faults may be corrected by supporting the carbons rigidly 
near the are, the positive carbon being held at the focal point by 
a simple automatic control. The best size and material of 
carbons should be used regardless of the burning ratio. 

The introduction of the high-power searchlight revolutionized 
the application of the searchlight to naval ships. Although 
great improvements have been made since that time there is 
still room for a material reduction in the number and complex- 
ity of the parts. 

It is believed there is also a possibility of a considerable im- 
provement in the electrodes. 

The use of the dome glass door enables a searchlight to operate 
in close proximity to large calibre rifles and makes it possible to 
successfully build even larger sizes of searchlights than those at 
present in use. 

The star shell has great possibilities, but it is doubtful if it 
will ever supersede the high-power searchlight. : 


HERE are three distinct types of searchlights commonly 
used in the United States Navy: 

The incandescent searchlight, 

The low-power searchlight, 

The high-power searchlight. 

These types are used for navigational work, for both daylight 
and night signaling and for illumination of enemy ships in night 
engagements. Each type has its field of usefulness in navy 
work. 

The development of the searchlight for naval use was prac- 
tically dormant for the few years prior to 1915.* In 1915 it was 
revived by the adoption of the high-intensity light for capital 
ships after a long series of tests under laboratory and sea-going 


Ss EMS Se a ee PE OOS pe che TERE tae 
* “Searchlights” by C.S. McDowell. Transactions A. I. EH. E. 1915. 
1605 


1606 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


conditions. Since that time the development has been so rapid 
that searchlights purchased in one year became almost entirely 
obsolete the next year. 

The object of this paper is to describe the various types of 
searchlight equipment at present in use in the navy, their field 
of application and the paths of future development demon- 
strated by experience gained during the war. It is hoped that 
there will be a free discussion along constructive lines of the 
suggestions for future development of searchlight equipment 
for naval use. 


THE INCANDESCENT SEARCHLIGHT 


At present there arefour separate forms of the incandescent 
searchlight used in naval service: 


3. 
Two Clamps, for holding an 
Officer of Deck Spyglass 


26" 


Fic. 1—Tue Portasie Tusrt BLINKER 


The portable tube blinker, 

The yard-arm blinker, 

The Aldis light, 

The 12-in. incandescent light. 

The two blinkers cannot properly be classed as searchlights as 
they are used only for signaling purposes. As all sizes of 
searchlights are largely used for signaling, a description of 
these lights is included to make the article complete. 

(a) The Portable Tube Blinker, Fig. 1, is extensively used for 
concealed local signaling at night between ships in column, 
between neighboring columns of ships or between landing 
parties on hostile coasts and their supporting ships. It is 
accordingly designed to throw a feeble beam of light of a very y 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1607 


contracted area in order to avoid its being observed at long 
ranges or by anyone at whom it is not directly aimed. 

It consists of a long brass tube with a small flash lamp bulb 
placed at one end at the focal point of a comparatively large 
parabolic reflector with a short focal length. The reflector is 
designed to project practically all the light from the lamp bulb 
in the form of a small diameter beam to the neighboring 
ship or station. The inside of the tube is painted black and 
has a long extension between the lamp bulb and the opening 
in the tube end. This tends to eliminate all stray light, 
keeping the beam to a small diameter. This form of signaling 


vat AA, _ 8S 23 6+------ ------- 
01 784L-4 - 
i H _Asbestos Wick 


Tm, Packing 


Glycerin 
2178-L-11 
Lense(Spec.31 -Lla) 
-6-Lamps Style-E 
15 Watt T-8 Tungsten 
(not furnished with 
Lantern) 


2178-L-6 


2178-L-7 


0.0508 Copper Wire Grounded to 
Gland Nut 

2179-L, 3’ Size, Complete 

2-No.8-36 R.H. BR. Mach. Screws 
¥ Long 


Fig. 2—Yarp-Arm Buinker LIGHT 


light performs its duties well and is universally used in naval 
service. . 

The only fault that has developed in its use is a minor one 
which may be easily corrected. When used on a small boat 
forming an unsteady platform, such as.a destroyer or sub- 
marine chaser, it is very difficult to keep the blinker directed at 
the desired receiving station due to the blinker rolling on the 
rail. A rectangular cross section of blinker or a ball and socket 
rest on the rail for the present style of blinker would improve 
the operation. ia 

(b) The Yard-Arm Blinker, Fig. 2, as its name implies, is a 


~ 


1608 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


blinker lantern mounted on the yard-arm of a ship and which 
gives out light that is visible all around the horizon. It is 
widely used for night signaling in times of peace and in pro- 
tected waters in times of war. The lantern is designed to 
contain a high-speed incandescent light with a filament which 
is placed at the focal point of a Fresnel lens. Signals are sent 
by blinking the light with a telegraphic key which alternately 
makes and breaks the circuit. The lamp bulb used in this 
lantern has been specially developed for Navy signaling work 
with a concentrated filament that. heats and cools very rapidly. 

This type of blinker has given general satisfaction and is a 
valuable addition to the signaling equipment of a ship in view 
of the large amount of signaling that takes place between 
naval vessels. In actual practise a circular nest of six com- 
mercial tubular lamb bulbs, connected in parallel across the 
line, are used instead of the correctly designed high speed signal 
lamp bulb with its filament at the focal point of the lens. 

No part of the filaments of any of these lamps coincide with 
the focal point of the Fresnel lens with the result that the lens 
disperses all except the direct rays of light to the observer, and 
could be replaced with a less expensive plane glass cylinder. 
The nest of lamps with a comparatively long life is used by navy 
personnel in preference to the short lived high-speed signal 
lamp, as the blinker lantern is located at the end of a yard 
arm. Any lamp combination that requires infrequent replace- 
ments is for this inaccessible light more popular with the blue- 
jacket than a better short-lived lamp. 

The nest of lamps, as far as can be determined, gives entire 
satisfaction in signaling work, making it possible to replace the 
comparatively expensive Fresnel lens with an inexpensive plane 
glass cylinder. 

(c) The Aldis Lamp, Fig. 3, is a projector of British design in 
which advantageous features are incorporated that make it 
superior to similar lamps previously used in naval service. 
While primarily designed for daylight signaling, it has been 
used successfully as a searchlight and for signaling in airplanes 
and dirigible ballons. 

The projector itself is a light, well balanced, portable affair 
of aluminum which signals by alternately throwing a search- 
light beam on and off an observer. This is accomplished by 
rocking the mirror back and forth by means of a trigger, the 
lamp bulb burning continuously. The lamp bulb is manu- 


cr 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1609 


factured to such close limits that when it is screwed into a 
special socket in the lamp, its filament is in the focal point of 
the mirror. 

This type of signaling lamp is universally used on ships, 
shore stations, dirigibles and airships. Its success is due to its 
high signaling speed, its compactness and portability, but most 
of all to the fact that, regardless of the personnel handling it, 
the lamp filament is always at the focal point of the mirror and 
a long range efficient beam is obtained at all times. 

(dq) The 12-in. Incandescent Lamp Fig. 4, is largely used in 
naval service on all classes of naval vessels for long range day- 
light signaling in fair weather, and for navigational use at night 


Fic. 4 


on small boats. This type of light has not been generally 
successful in its present form due to the fact that it requires 
special adjustments and care in service, for successful operation. 

It has a fixed parabolic mirror with a high-speed signaling 
lamp bulb which screws into a standard socket. The socket 
can be adjusted to place the filament of a commercial lamp bulb 
in the focal point of the mirror. This adjustment is made large 
to permit the use of several different sized lamp bulbs ranging 
from 150 to 400 watts. The whole is contained in a cylindrical 
drum which is commonly made of sheet iron. Signals are 
sent by blinking the filament of the lamp bulb by a telegraphic 


type of key. pork: : 
This lamp has proved successful for navigational work on 


1610 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


small craft and particularly so for submarines. A small 9-in. are 
lamp was specially developed for submarine use, but its lack 
of portability, attention required in operation, and necessity 
for frequent recarboning caused it to give way to the incandes- 
cent searchlight. An important factor that entered into this 
change is that a submarine is frequently submerged without 
there being sufficient time to dismount the searchlight and 
stow it below. An incandescent searchlight can be submerged 
without permanent damage, while anarclampis placed out of 
commission. The small amount of care required for the incan- 
descent type of searchlight, and the comparatively long life of 
a lamp bulb in comparison with a trim of carbons, makes a 
correctly designed light of this type ideal for use on small craft 
with limited personnel. 

The faults in the present type of light have been aerigastrarse 
by its use in daylight signaling. At the present time the cor- 
rectly designed Aldis light, with a414-in. mirror and 40 watt . 
lamp, is the equal in signaling power to the larger light with its 
11-in. mirror and a 150-watt lamp. Considerable adjustment is 
permitted, both in the horizontal and vertical planes of the 
12-in. incandescent light, to allow for variations in filament 
location in commercial lamps, and to permit the use of various 
size lamp bulbs. Every time a new lamp bulb is inserted in the 
projector, the operator should focus the projector for that 
particular filament. This is rarely, if ever done, and in service 
in not one lamp that the writer has inspected has the lamp 

filament been at the focal point of the mirror. In the majority 
of cases it has been approximately one inch out of focus in each 
plane. Of course in this condition the mirror is of no value 
and only the direct rays of light from the filament reach a dis- 
tant observer. 

The high-speed concentrated filament lamp bulb specially de- 
signed for this searchlight is almost identical in appearance toa 
concentrated filament stereoptican type of lamp bulb designed 
only for searchlight work. Long life being desirable in the latter 
type of lamp, its filament cools and heats very slowly and it can- 
not be used at allfor signaling work. Duetothesimilarity in 
appearance, both types of light are issued indiscriminately for 
the 12-in. searchlight. The personnel, not realizing that there 
are two entirely different types of lamps of similar appearance, 

condemn them both and use a commercial Mazda lamp which 
happens to fit the same socket, but in which no part of the 
filament comes any where near the focal point of the mirror. 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1611 


The design of a new type of light along correct fundamental 
lines, is contemplated to be arranged so that it cannot be used 
incorrectly by naval personnel. The same type and size of 
mirror will be used in a brass non-corrosive drum. The 
lamp socket will be permanently fixed in such a position that 
when a 150-watt, high-speed lamp bulb is placed in it, some 
part of the filament will be in the focal point of the mirror. 
The ordinary high-speed 150-watt lamp is manufactured with 
a dimension across the filament of approximately 14 inch so 
that in the great majority of cases with such a lamp, some 
part of the filament will be in the focal point of the mirror, 
even with ordinary commercial limits of manufacture. 

To eliminate the use-of lamps other than that specially 
designed for this class of work, the lamp bulb must be of such 
design that no other lamp can be used in the socket. One way 
of accomplishing this object is to make the signaling lamp with 
a bayonet base. Similar precaution will have to be taken in 
a 12-in. incandescent searchlight that will be used only for 
searchlight work to provide only for the use of a concentrated- 
filament, long-life, stereoptican light. 

Attempts have been made to extend the use of the incandes- 
cent searchlight to larger sizes such as 18- or 24-in. using 
larger wattage lamps. To obtain the larger lamp capacity; 
the filament area must be increased with the result that the 
intrinsic brilliancy of the filament remains approximately the 
same and there is practically no increase in light. There is no 
attempt being made at the present time to increase the size of 
the incandescent searchlight beyond the 12-in. size. 


LOw-PowWER Arc LIGHTS 


The number of sizes of low-power arc lamps in navy service 
at the present time is legion, a 9-in., 12-in., 18-in., 24-in, 30-in., 
36-in. and even a few 60-in. are used. The large number of 
sizes is a natural growth during a long period of years, new 
sizes having been developed for special applications. 

The 9-in. size was developed specially for submarine work 
and is practically the 12-in. size of lamp with a few nec- 
essary modifications to fit it to the smaller drum. It has 
recently been superseded for submarine use by the 12-in. 
incandescent searchlight. 

The 12-in. size is the most commonly used of all searchlights 
in naval service. It is used principally for long range daylight 


1612 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


signaling on all naval vessels and for navigational lights on 
small boats. It-has a wide field of usefulness and practically 
every naval ship has at least one of these lights as part of its 
equipment. 

The 18-in. searchlight prior to the present war was used only 
on merchant vessels. Although the present type is not well 
constructed, a large number of them were purchased when the 
United States entered the war as there was a great shortage of 
searchlight material at that time, and a large number of 
* ships to be equipped. 

The 24-in. low-power light has a limited application for 
navigational work on naval vessels, such as hospital ships, fuel 
ships and tenders of all types and a certain field for long range 
daylight signaling. 

The 30 and the 36-in. low-power searchlights were placed on 
battleships and cruisers prior to the development of the high- 
power searchlight. They are rapidly being replaced by high- 
intensity lights or being converted into high-intensity lights 
and will shortly be obsolete in naval service. 

It would be of great advantage in the future to use only 
one size of low-power searchlight, 12 in. or 18. in., develop- 
ing a searchlight along fundamentally correct lines to givea 
far greater beam candle power under operating conditions 
than the present 12-in. light. It is believed that a new 
12-in. light can be developed to give as great illumination 
on the target as the present 24-in. low-power searchlight. 

All sizes of low power searchlights in service are essentially 
the same in design, the mechanism differing only in size. A 
typical mechanism is shown in Fig. 5. The positive and nega- 
tive heads are each supported on a separate movable carriage. 
The carriages are separately geared to a motor or solenoid 
which feeds the two heads together at a predetermined fixed 
rate, which is supposed to correspond to the burning away of 
the carbons. The specifications for purchasing carbons call 
for carbons that burn at fixed rates which, combined with 
proper gearing in the lamp mechanism, will theoretically 
result in the positive crater being in the focal point of the 
reflector at all times. The arc length is kept fairly constant by 
a balanced type of feeding mechanism that feeds the negative 
carbon forwards or backwards when the arc voltage is higher 
or lower than normal. The present size carbons are of com- 
paratively large diameter, slow burning and with a low current 
density. ; <a 


PLATE LXXVIi. 
Ay I.E. €. 
VOL. XXXVI, 1919 


5—Lamp MeEcHANISM FOR A LOW 
PowER SEARCHLIGHT 


Fig. 38—A.xpis LAMP IN 
SERVICE 


[KELLY] 
Fic. 6—Tuermostat Box AND COVER 


PLATE LXXVIII2 


VOL. XXXVIII 


1919 


’ 


qd ddA, LHDITHOUVAG 


ALISNULIN] HDIF{ HONT-$Z VNUY—dG ‘DIY 
[ATTax] 


VV WdA, dWV'] LHOITHOUVAG 
ALISNULNT HOIPT TUAdWy-G) 


VNUY—V6 “DIY 


TIOULNOD ACOALOTIY AAIH, 
HLIM dWV'] LHDITHOUVAG—) “DIY 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1613 


This design of searchlight lamp has many inherent fundamen- 
tal faults that may be easily corrected. Its principal fault in 
operation is that rarely if ever is the crater of the positive 
carbon at the focal point of the reflector. When it is considered 
that a cross-wise deviation of 1/16 in. of the crater from the 
focal point of the projector will give a beam of approximately 
double the width and one quarter the intensity of a standard 
searchlight beam, it is realized how important it is to maintain 
the crater of the positive carbon at the focal point of the reflector. 
Carbons cannot be manufactured commercially to give the exact 
burning rates specified, but vary from that rate as much as 
20 per cent. in each direction in extreme cases. Specifying the 
burning rate of carbons is a distinct handicap toa carbon manu- 
facturer tending to hinder the development of better carbons. 

The carbons themselves are of comparatively largediameter 
producing an arc that has a tendency to wander over the face 
of the positive crater, resulting in an unsteady beam and a 
comparatively cool, low-intensity source of light for the 
searchlight beam. The intensity of a searchlight beam varies 
with the temperature of the positive crater which makes it 
desirable to have a carbon current density which will give the 
greatest temperature at the positive crater. Each grade of 
carbon has a definite boiling temperature and an increase in 
current density beyond that necessary to produce that tem- 
perature only causes the carbon at the crater to boil away 
faster with no increase in crater temperature. An ideal con- 
dition, therefore, is to use a carbon with the highest boiling 
point and a current density that will just produce a crater 
temperature that is equal to the boiling point of the carbon. 

The carbon heads themselves are not rigidly supported 
and have a marked play in all directions. This play is so 
marked that the rolling of the ship will change the posi- 
tion of the carbons in the searchlight drum. The current 
is fed into the carbons at their butt ends and flows through 
the entire length of the carbon to the arc. This tends to heat 
the carbon throughout its entire length which often causes 
it to spindle. It also results in a variable arc length, for 
with a short length carbon the voltage across the arc is 
materially greater than with new long length carbons. 

A correctly designed lamp mechanism for a searchlight 
should produce the longest are length possible at which the 
arc will burn steadily, to reduce to the lowest possible value 


1614 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


the shadow cast on the mirror by the negative carbon. The 
appreciable variation in arc length in the present type of low- 
power searchlight results in the negative shadow being materi- 
ally greater during the majority of the burning of a trim of 
carbons than the best obtainable condition. 

A 12-in. low-power searchlight could easily be designed 
to overcome the faults in the present low-power search- 
lights. Such a light would not only give a more intense 
beam than the present 12-in. searchlight under laboratory con- 
ditions, but in actual service its more exact mechanism would 
give a searchlight beam of very materially more power than 
the present inexact mechanism. The carbon heads in the 
proposed light would be rigidly fixed in position with absolutely 
no play nor adjustment, would have a simple automatic control 
of the positive crater to maintain that crater in the focal point 
of the reflector at all times, and would have the current fed into 
the carbons close to the are. As in the present 12-in. search- 
light, the are length could be controlled by a solenoid feed. A 
ground glass finder should be provided to enable an operator 
to check the position of the positive crater. 

The automatic control of the positive and the voltage control 
of the arc results in the carbons being fed independently of their 
burning rates. Accordingly, if improved carbons with different 
~ burning rates are developed they may be used in this lamp 
with practically no change in the lamp mechanism, a condition 
which is not possible in the present type of lamp. The carbons 
would be manufactured with diameters in the neighborhood of 
one half the present size, which would result in a higher temper- 
ature of crater, a closer approach to a point source of light and 
asmaller negative shadow on the mirror. These carbons should 
be made of the best combination of materials of the highest 
boiling temperature that will maintain a steady are. These 
searchlights should be equipped with a Venetian blind signaling 
shutter to permit their being used for daylight signaling as 
well as for navigational work. Such a light would be suitable 
for daylight signaling and navigational work on’ battleships, 
cruisers, auxiliary ships, destroyers, seagoing tugs, transports; 
in fact for all naval vessels it would supersede the numerous 
sizes of low-power searchlights now in naval service. 

The change would be of advantage both to the manufac- 
turers and to the navy. The manufacturers will have to 
develop and keep in stock but one set of tools and patterns and” 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1615 


can concentrate on the improvement and development of that 
one type of searchlight. The navy will benefit by having to 
keep a stock supply of only one size of low-power searchlight, 
which will require a stock supply of only one kind of spare 
parts and accessories like mirrors, lamps, rheostats, switches, 
shutters, etc. 
HIGH-POWER Arc LIGHTS 

The invention of the high-intensity are revolutionized the 
searchlight for naval use. The 380-in. and 36-in. low-power 
searchlights previously used had a maximum range of approxi- 
mately 2000 yards on a dark, clear night. The present 24-in. 
high-power searchlight has a range of approximately 4000 
yards and the 36-in. high-power searchlight has a range of 
approximately 7500 yards under similar conditions. It is 
evident that the the low-power lights are useless in gunnery 
work with modern, broadside defense guns, while the ranges of 
the high-power lights compare very favorably with those guns. 

The high-power searchlight swings to the other extreme 
from the low-power searchlight in that it is a very complicated 
exact mechanism with a large number of intricate parts which 
are designed to operate automatically. Its success depends 
on the so called high-intensity phenomena obtained by the use 
of carbons with impregnated flame cores with high current 
densities, and arranged at an angle to each other. The material 
of the shell of the carbon is of hard amorphous carbon, the inside 
being a combination of special mineral salts with the necessary 
flame producing ingredients. At the beginning the core burns 
more rapidly than the shell, forming a deep crater which 
becomes filled with the flaming gases of the core. The com- 
bined effect of the high current density of the arc and the angle 
of the negative arc stream is such that these gases are im- 
prisoned for a short period in the positive crater. These 
gases are heated to incandescence while imprisoned in the 
crater, and give a light that is far in excess in intrinsic brilliancy 
of that given off from the solid crater walls. This increase in 
intrinsic brilliancy of the source of light for the searchlight 
results in the superiority in range of the high power searchlight. 

The carbon heads are rigidly fixed in the drum with mechan- 
isms included in those heads for feeding the carbons. Contacts 
placed in the carbon heads, close to the arc, feed current in and 
out of the are circuit. The arc length is kept approximately 
-eonstant by a motor feed that is controlled either by the arc 


1616 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


voltage or by arc current and feeds the negative carbon either 
backwards or forwards to maintain constant arc conditions. 

The positive crater is kept at the focal point by automatic 
devices, either of the thermostatic type or of the third electrode 
type. Two of the companies manufacturing high power 
searchlights use a thermostatic control of the positive carbon 
while the other uses the third electrode control. Inthe thermo- 
static device, light from the positive crater is reflected by an 
optical arrangement of mirrors and lenses to thermostat strips 
placed in a box on the outside of the searchlight (Fig. 6). 
When the positive carbon burns back slightly from the focal 
point of the mirror, the reflected light strikes one of the thermo- 
stat strips, and distorts it by the heat. The thermostat strip 
in distorting closes an electric circuit which causes the positive 
carbon to feed forward. When it is fed forward to the focal 
point, the reflected light from the positive crater moves off the 
thermostat strip which cools instantly and opens up the feeding 
motor circuit. 

This device has worked well in naval service and under the 
best conditions of operation will maintain the positive crater 
at the focal point within limits of 1/32 inch, plus or minus. 
The present thermostat mechanism is mounted on the outside 
of the drum in a box which is exposed to the weather. In 
every case in which the writer has inspected searchlights that 
have seen service, there has been either a considerable amount 
of water in the box or evidence of water having been recently 
in the box. Again, the searchlight lamp and the thermostat 
have a definite relation to each other and an adjustment of one 
requires a separate and independent adjustment of the other. 
A thermostat placed inside the searchlight drum and secured © 
to the lamp standard would remedy both of these defects. 

The third electrode scheme for controlling the positive 
crater is more simple and substantial than the thermostat and 
operates well under service conditions. This device (Fig. 7) 
consists of a carbon electrode placed above and at right 
angles to the positive carbon slightly behind the crater. When 
the positive crater burns back from the focal point, the flame 
of the arc strikes the third electrode completing an electric 
circuit of which the conducting flame of the arc forms a part. 
Current flowing in this circuit causes the positive carbon to 
feed forward. When the crater is fed to the focal point of the 
reflector, the flame clears the third electrode and the feeding 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1617 


motor circuit is broken. This type of positive carbon control 
has the advantage of being placed inside the searchlight drum 
out of the weather, and of being integral with the positive 
head requiring no separate adjustments. 

The first type of third electrode developed was of carbon which 
required renewal every three trims of the searchlight carbons. 
There has since been developed a third electrode which is a 
copper disk, and which has a very much longer life than the 
carbons. In operation, a coating forms on this copper disk 
which protects the copper from burning and prolongs the life 
of the disk. 

The intense heat of the high-intensity crater and the large 
amount of smoke and fumes emitted from the flame carbons 
make it imperative to have forced ventilation of the carbon heads 
and searchlight drum. An early type of high-power searchlight 
used the comparatively cool vapor of an alcohol flame to cool 


Fig. 8—Dt1acram or VENTILATION OF A HiaH Power SEARCHLIGHT 


the carbon tips and the drum was exhausted by a fan connected 
to aseparate motor. The cooling of the high-intensity search- 
light was later improved by making hollow lamp standards, 
jacketing the carbon heads, and forcing air through these 
chambers and out through an outlet at the top of the search- 
light drum, thus doing away with the alcohol flame method of 
cooling. 

In the first high-power searchlights great difficulty was 
experienced due to the large heat absorption and unequal heat- 
ing of the mirror and a great number were smashed due to these 
causes. This condition was finally remedied by efficient cool- 
ing of both the front and rear of the mirror by a current of air. 
The ventilating system of a modern high-power searchlight, 
showing the paths of cooling air around the mirror, is shown in 
.Fig. 8. The heating of searchlight mirrors has been reduced 
during the past year by the development of a tough white 


1618 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Des. 12 


glass of pure materials which has approximately one per cent 
heat absorption against the five per cent absorption of the 
grade of glass previously used for mirrors. 

Three typical searchlights developed by the three present 
manufacturers of high-power searchlights are shown in Figs. 
9,10 and11. An inspection of these illustrations shows the 
progress in development of these exact well designed mechan- 
isms over the less refined, inexact, low-power searchlights. 

The 36-in. high-power searchlight is the largest size used on 
shipboard for it gives a range comparable to the largest guns 
and is the largest, at the present time, that will withstand the 
heavy concussions of the ships gunfire. It is only very recently 
that the searchlight has been adapted to withstand the con- 
cussion of-the gunfire of a nearby 14-in. gun. Prior to this 
time searchlights were equipped with glass front doors made 
of a number of plate glass strips. This type of front door cut 
off approximately 25 per cent of the searchlight beam, was not 
watertight and would smash at the first salvo of the main 
battery. The success of the ventilation system of the high- 
power searchlight depends on obtaining air through a duct in 
the bottom of the drum and forcing it through well defined 
paths and out through an exhaust outlet at the top of the drum. 
This scheme of ventilation is made ineffective when the front 
door is smashed with the result that the are flickers and the 
searchlight parts become overheated due to an insufficient 
supply of cooling air. 

The smashing of the front door strips leaves the mirror 
unprotected and it is an even chance that the mirror will smash 
at the next salvo from the main battery. It is common prac- 
tise on shipboard to dismantle searchlights equipped with plate 
glass front doors before a target practise, and stow them away 
in a safe place. 

This condition has been remedied by the use of a front 
door made of one solid piece of arch shaped glass similar in 
shape to the parabolic mirror. This type of door has given 
excellent service in the fleet and not one of the many dome glass 
doors that have been installed on navy vessels has been smashed 
during target practise. This type of door cuts down the 
searchlight beam no more than the plate glass strips and makes 
the searchlight entirely self-contained and waterproof. 

The trend of future development of the high-power search- 
light should be in the simplification and the reduction of the 


) 
N 


PLATE LXXIXxX. 


A. l. E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


LHSITHOUVAS YAMOd HOI, HONT-7Z— 401 “DL 
(A11a3] 


LHDITHOUVAG UAMOG HDI HON]-FZ YOU ANVIJ—VOT “DIT 


PLATE LXXX. 


E. E. 


A. |. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


LHDITHOUVAG UAMOT HDIF{ HON]-PZ—A4TT “Oly 
(ATTax] 


LHDITHOUV AG 
UAMOd HDIF[ HON]-fZ WOU dWVY—VIT “DI 


1919] KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT 1619 


large number of intricate parts on the present searchlights.. A 
searchlight must necessarily be placed in a position exposed to 
the weather, and will be operated by enlisted personnel. It is 
a struggle to maintain the present complicated high-power 
searchlight mechanisms in operating condition under the severe 
conditions of operation on smaller boats like destroyers. 
After a few days at sea on a destroyer in rough weather, the 
present high power searchlights often become inoperative and 
require a number of hours overhaul to place them in operating 
condition. Such a searchlight soon loses its popularity with 
destroyer commanders and they justly complain that the high- 
power searchlight is more suitable for laboratory use than for 
destroyer use. 

There is still room for a large improvement in the size and 
material of carbon electrodes for high-power searchlights. At 
the present time a carbon is used which has a hard carbon shell 
and a core made of a combination of flaming materials. This 
core gives off gases which are heated to incandescence in the 
are and give the high intrinsic brilliancy light characteristic of 
the high-power searchlight. It also gives off a very brilliant 
flame which causes a correspondingly brilliant objectionable 
foreground illumination and gives off gases that tend to blacken 
the mirror and the front door. 

It is a well established fact that the color and eae of a 
searchlight beam is dependent only on the temperature of the 
source of light. The use of flame-colored salts in the electrode 
gives a high temperature but also burns with a large brilliant 
flame. It is believed that a proper selection of carbon ma- 
terials, perhaps the use of a solid electrode of a very refractory 
carbon with a small negative carbon, will give the same amount 
of light that is obtained from the present high-power type of 
carbons. The flame from a combination like these would be 
practically transparent with no objectionable foreground il- 
lumination, the objectionable gases would be eliminated and 
the present type of very special carbon electrodes could be done 
away with. 

The star shell for gunnery work is also a factor in the devel- 
opment of high-power searchlights and bids fair to rival the 
larger high-power searchlights for gunnery work. A searchlight, 
unless skilfully and carefully manipulated, is more of a debit 
than a credit in action as it tends to give an enemy a definite 
point at which to aim. A star shell that satisfactorily illumi- 


1620 KELLY: SEARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


nates the target, leaving its own ship in darkness, has many 
decided points of advantage over a large high-power searchlight. 

However, even if the star shell gives the results claimed for it, 
it will be along time if ever before naval authorities will feel safe 
in removing the 36-in. high-power searchlight from capital ships. 
The 24-in. high power searchlight has had such a marked suc- 
cess in long range daylight signaling that it is improbable it 
will ever be superseded for naval use. 

The use of the dome glass door for 36-in. searchlights opens 
up a field for the use of larger size searchlights, such as the 
44-in. and 60-in. sizes for capital ships. It is believed if those 
larger sizes are ever required for.naval service they can be 
successfully developed. 

In closing the writer wishes to express appreciation to Major 
Howard C. Judson, U. S. M. C. for ideas contributed on ear- 
bon development. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1621 


DISCUSSION ON “THE SEARCHLIGHT IN THE U. S. Navy” 
(KELLY), NEw York, N. Y., DECEMBER 12, 1919. 


_ Donald McNicol: Mr. Kelly says that a special type of 
incandescent lamp is used. Is the novelty of the lamp in the 
design of the filament or the material of the filament? 

G. A. DeGraaf: I ask Mr. Kelly whether the navy has 
been experimenting with the all-metallic reflector for the 
searchlight mirror, as the army has been using it. I think it 
is a glass mirror which has been used in the searchlight which 
is apt to be destroyed, due to the compression of the heavy 
gunfire. 

M. L. Patterson: Under the heading of ‘“‘Low power are 
lights” the author of this paper has taken up the discussion of 
12-in. low power searchlights, as more or less typical of a com- 
pleted line of low power searchlights. It is fully understood 
that high power searchlights are superseding the low power 
searchlight at 24-in. size and above. I do not, however, 
agree with the author, as stated in paragraph 7, that there 
should be only one size of low power searchlight, for there is 
a large field of usefulness for at least two sizes, preferably 
12 in. and 18 in. 

In paragraph 7 the author states that it is believed that a 
new 12-in. light can be developed to give as great illumination 
on the target as the present 24-in. low power searchlight, and 
_ I wish to bring out a few facts to show that it is not practicable 
to accomplish this result. The current and the arc voltage 
of the two sizes referred to are as follows: 12-in. is 20 amperes 
and 45 volts across the arc. 24-in. is 50 amperes and 50 volts 
across the arc. 

Since the beam candle power varies as the area of the mirror 
or as the square of the diameter of the mirror, other conditions 
being equal, it will readily be seen that for the beam of a 12-in. 
searchlight to equal that of a 24-in., the intrinsic brilliancy of 
the crater of the 12-in. must be at least four times that of the 
present 24-in., or over twelve times the intrinsic brilliancy of 
the present 12-in. light. I hesitate to quote beam candle 
figures as data obtained by observers under various atmos- 
pheric and operating conditions, show such a wide divergence 
that any figures on beam candle power, unless accompanied by 
a statement of the conditions under which they were obtained 
would be valueless. Nearly all observers, however, agree as 
to the relative intensity of various sizes of searchlights, and 
it can, therefore, be stated that the beam candle power of the 
24-in. high power searchlight is approximately four times that 
of a 24-in. low power searchlight. From this it is evident that 
for the beam of a 12-in. low power searchlight to equal that 
of a 24-in., it would be necessary to use a 75-ampere high power 
are in front of the 12-in. mirror, and it is our experience that 
it would be utterly impossible to do this as no glass mirror at 
present manufactured would stand the intense heat of a 


1622 SEARCHLIGHT [Dec. 12 


75-ampere are within 6 in. of the mirror, 6 in. being the focus 
length of the 12-in. mirror. 

It should further be noted that an increase in current or an 
increase in size of the positive crater may not increase the 
beam candle power to any appreciable extent. It may sound 
paradoxical, but it isa fact nevertheless that the beam of a 60-in. 
searchlight is smaller than a beam of the 24-in. at or beyond 
500 yards from the searchlight. - This is due to the fact that 
the size of the positive crater of a 24-in. relative to the size 
of the mirror is greater than in the 60-in. searchlight. This 
would be true to a greater extent. with the 12-in. searchlight, 
especially if an attempt is made to materially increase the 
power. The extra candle power would go into beam spread 
rather than materially increase the foot candle illumination 
on the target. 

It is evident from this paper that the author favors the 
design of the 12-in. searchlight which will be entirely auto- 
matic and have fixed positive heads. If this were carried out, 
it would be necessary, of course, to have brushes for leading 
the current to the carbon, which would materially increase the 
size of the carbon holder. This construction would also re- 
quire a mechanism for advancing the carbon through the 
brushes and would require considerable more power than is 
now required to move the carriages holding the positive and 
negative columns. 

In reference to the current being fed in at the butt ends of 
the carbons, as referred to in paragraph 11, it has been our 
experience that there is very little tendency for the carbons of 
a 12-in. arc to spindle when operating under normal current. 
The current density in these carbons, as referred to in the last 
line of paragraph 8, is very low. As regards the variation in 
are length, it may be stated that the amount of carbon con- 
sumed.per trim is from 4 in. to 5 in. and the drop in this length 
of carbon with the low current density as used in these search- 
lights will be the only variation in are voltage (and length). 
This variation is less than the variation in voltage required to 
operate the present feeding mechanism. This is, the varia- 
tion in are length due to the range in feeding mechanism is 
greater than the variation due to the drop in the carbons. 

The very reason that the 12-in. low power searchlight has 
had such extensive use, as referred to by the author in para- 
graph 8, is due to its simplicity and inexpensive design, and 
while there is no doubt considerable improvement that can be 
made in the design without materially increasing the compli- 
_ cation of the mechanism, it would be a mistake to carry this 

design to the extent of a completely automatic low intensity 
mechanism. For automatic control it would require fixed 
heads, feeding mechanism for advancing the carbons through 
the heads, a thermostatic or third electric control of positive 
crater, and ground glass finder, and with all this added compli- 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1623 


cation, many of the advantages of the 12-in. low power search- 
light would be lost. 

Another point that should be noted is that with the present 
type of carbon holder, only short length carbon is wasted, 
whereas if fixed positive heads are used there will be a consider- 
ably greater length of wasted carbon per trim. 

In paragraph 12, it is stated that it is quite essential to keep 
the size of the negative shadow at a minimum, and in this 
connection it should be noted that a change of negative carbon 
holder to a fixed negative head with feeding mechanism would 
necessarily increase the size of the negative shadow. 

Under the heading of high power arc lights, the writer in 
the first paragraph has made a comparison in the ranges of 
the various searchlights, and gives these ranges in a definite 
number of yards. A statement of range without giving the 
illumination at the target or the kind of target that would be 
visible at a certain range, is meaningless. 

In paragraph 4, under “high power searchlights,” it is 
stated that two of the companies manufacturing high power 
searchlights use thermostatic control of the positive carbon, 
while the other uses the third electrode. In this connection 
it may be stated that at least one company manufacturing 
high power searchlights uses both the thirdjelectrode control 
and the thermostatic control. The third electrode feed 
being used where it is not essential to keep the positive crater 
in exact focus and thejthermostatic feed used where more 
accurate ‘control of the positive crater is required, as.for 
United States Army and Navy uses. 

E.J.Murphy: With reference to the high powered search- 
light, I note that the paper* of C. S. McDowell has been 
quoted and there is no doubt that the type of light described 
in Mr. McDowell’s paper has revolutionized searchlight practise 
especially for Naval use. Since the advent of this new light, 
the necessity of using the beam at high angles for defence against 
hostile air planes made it necessary to abandon the alcohol 
flame, otherwise the light has remained practically as originally 
designed. The principles involved have remained unchanged. 

I would like to refer to the thermostat control mechanism 
in Mr. Kelly’s paper, I note that he states that this device 
will hold the positive crater at the focal point of the mirror 
within one-thirty-second of an inch, plus or minus. He does 
not state, however, how close the third electrode scheme will 
hold the positive crater, and it might be interesting to find 
how accurately this method of control functions. 

With reference to the ventilation, I see Fig. 8 shows a pressure 
system of ventilation. It might be interesting to note that 
two types of ventilation have been evolved, one the vacuum 
type, the other the pressure type, and on page 1618 he states 
that the ventilation will be destroyed in case the front door is 

*Trans. A. Ll. B. E., 1915, Vol. I, p. 263. 


1624 SEARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


broken. The company I am connected with has tried out both 
of these systems, and tests have been made resulting in-gur 
discarding the vacuum system on account of certain advantages 
of the pressure system. The pressure system enabled us to use 
the fan motor for driving the mechanism of the searchlight it- 
self, thus eliminating any additional motor. 

There is another thing which we actually tried out, and that 
is the effect of wind against the front of the searchlight with 
a broken door. We noted that with the vacuum system, the 
are very frequently was ruptured, making the light practically 
useless, whereas with the pressure system, the pressure inside 
of the drum acted against the wind, and the light was operative 
in a thirty mile wind; under the same conditions the light with 
the vacuum system was practically useless. 

As far-as the dome glass door is concerned, I understand there 
is still some question as to its practicability, on account of 
refraction of light, ete. 

I note that certain illustrations show a thermostat box and 
the paper mentions that this box is not watertight. This 
thermostat box is part of the searchlight with which I am 
familiar. I may say that this searchlight was developed 
under stress of war conditions, and it was necessary to de- 
velop the design in the shortest possible time; we did not pro- 
vide gaskets for this particular box, but, notwithstanding this 
omission, I have not found a single case where water rendered 
these searchlights inoperative. In fact, I am aware that a 
great many of these searchlights have been at least once across 
the Atlantic, under heavy weather conditions, and in no case 
was the searchlight inoperative. Under war conditions, the 
personnel was not always acquainted with new apparatus such 
as the thermostat control and had not been previously in- 
structed in the operation of this new searchlight. I have seen 
reports on at least fourteen of these lights, all of which had 
been subjected to heavy weather conditions, in no case did any 
light actually fail in service. 

These lights were developed for use on destroyers under 
stress of war conditions and over 300 were delivered to the 
Navy before the armistice was signed, we kept ahead of the 
destroyer program, and this was extremely important, as we 
all know, on account of the submarine menace. 

On the next to the last page of Mr. Kelly’s paper there is 
mention as to whether the searchlights are really useful at sea. 
There has been some doubt of their value in the past, but 
reports from Admirals Beatty and Jellicoe, of the British 
showed that the Germans had superior equipment, and the 
British avoided battle at night—that is because the Germans 
had developed tactics that enabled them, when a hostile ship 
was observed to open the searchlight shutters with the light 
already directed on the target. This was possible due to highly 
developed fire control system, which is being now installed in 
our own ships and has already been adopted by the British 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1625 


Navy. With this system the light is only shown long enough 
to fire a single salvo and not long enough to make a target of 
the vessel. There is at present no doubt that in naval practise, 
searchlights are absolutely necessary for night fighting. 

_ J.C. Ledbetter: I am very much interested in the high 
intensity light, and I want to know whether a light of such 
brilliancy and such marvelous performance could possibly be 
used in some commercial way. Could not a light of this 
character be used in stage lighting, or flood lighting, or in some 
spectacular way, such as street light and advertising lighting in 
such places as Times Square. It might be that large business 
concerns would have use for a light of this character. 

R. A. Beekman: I wish to point out one feature with 
regard to the difference between the third electrode and the 
thermostatic control. The principle object, of course, of both 
of them is to maintain the crater in the focus of the mirror. 
The mirror is mounted rigidly in the drum of the searchlight, 
and hence the logical thing is to have the device, controlling 
its position, mounted on the drum of the searchlight, which 
is the form used with the thermostat in the past. It is now 
proposed to mount the thermostat on the lamp, as is done with 
the third electrode, and this does not provide a rigid coupling 
between the position of the positive crater and the focus, as 
is the case when the thermostat is mounted on the drum. 
~ B. P. Beehler: (Read by R.A. Beekman). I desire to call 
attention to the following points in Mr. Kelly’s paper: 

Paragraph 1. The range of a 24-in. high power light is 
at best 3000 yds. 

Paragraph 2, 5th sentence. The current density has no 
connection whatever in the formation of the gas crater or 
holding the gas. This feature is entirely controlled by the 
direction of the arc stream. The high current density of the 
positive electrode may be maintained without an arc stream 
or gas ball formation. <f 

Paragraph 4, last sentence. The feeding of the positive 
carbon in lamp operation is without exception, where auto- 
matically controlled, accomplished by independent solenoid 
or magnet operation. ; 

Paragraph 7, last sentence. The formation of scale or oxi- 
dation of metallic third electrode does not increase its life. 
The prevailing feature permitting of the use of a metal third 
electrode is the fact that the temperature of flame directly 
back of the crater is below the melting point of the copper. 
The metallic electrode or any type of this control has proved 
unsatisfactory for any arc of over 75 amperes. This 75-ampere 
arc is not a true gas are and therefore the maximum tempera- 
tures are considerably lower than high current arcs. The 
use of metallic third electrode has been disapproved by the 
U. S. Navy for all arcs over 75 amperes. 


= 


1626 SEARCHLIGHT (Dee. 12 


Paragraph 8, second and third sentence. The object of al- 
cohol in the high power arc is not to cool but to surround the 
electrodes with an oxygen insulator, thus preventing tapering 
of electrodes from air burning and enabling the burning of the 
electrode with its tip far removed from metallic positive head 
and still maintain the crater at electrode diameter. 

The cooling by air, later developed, is merely cooling of the 
metal, allowing the use of a metal head projecting over the 
electrode nearly to its tip, which metal insulates the electrode 
from atmospheric oxygen and thus eliminating the necessity 
of the alcohol. The air cooling also allows of use of less metal 
in heads, thus cutting down mirror shadows and beam holes. 
The high power lamp using alcohol on the electrode had very 
large and heavy heads, the cooling of which was accomplished 
by radiation. 

Paragraph 11, 4th sentence. The absorption of strip glass 

in the front door did not exceed 15 per cent and averaged 
about 10 per cent absorption of light. 
Paragraph 18. The dome front doors of the present para- 
bolic and spherical types have proven inefficient. Their dis- 
advantage is that they not only absorb about 15 per cent of light 
but they actually disperse about 15 per cent of light, throwing 
this light on the foreground, changing beam formation by virtue 
of the above fact and blind the observer by making a field of 
stray light through which he must look to see the target 

Paragraph 15. It has been found that the present sizes of 
electrodes are probably the proper proportions to give best 
service. A rise in current density, at present about 1.65 
amperes per sq. mm. will only add to flame and increase car- 
bon consumption, while reducing the density by increasing the 
electrode size will cause loss of intensity. 

Paragraph 16. It has not yet been established conclusively 
that the intensity of the high power arc is a factor of tempera- 
ture. A theory of fluorescence of the gas ball has presented 
itself indicating that the supposed black body radiation of the 
are is not a fact, but that a composite effect of black body 
radiation and fluorescence tend to give spectrum characteristics 
which are misleading, and indicate temperatures far in excess 
of those actually present. 

It has been found that the use of solid electrodes will not 
under any condition of burning give a light equal in intensity 
or visibility to that of the high power are. Solid electrodes 
have a critical temperature at best of 3300 deg. cent. and will 
not produce the gas ball phenomena as in the special cored 
electrode. It has been practically impossible to date to oper- 
ate a solid electrode efficiently at a current density in excess 
of 0.66 amperes per sq. m.m. whereas the high power posi- 
tive operates at a current density of 1.65 amperes success- 
fully and efficiently. 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1627 


Chester Lichtenberg: The Chief of Engineers, who is 
responsible for Army searchlights, has read Mr. Kelly’s paper 
with considerable interest. He noted that no mention was 
made of mobile searchlights, although this variety had under- 
gone a remarkable development during 1918 and 1919. He 
thought that the members of the Institute might be interested 
in seeing photographic reproductions of some of the more 
prominent recent developments of mobile searchlight equip- 
ment, and he has authorized the presentation of certain repre- 
sentative views. 

The mobile Army of the United States was equipped in 1917 
with only a few portable searchlights. These were of two 
varieties. One is shown in Fig. 1. It consists essentially 
of a 36-in. medium intensity searchlight mounted on an ex- 
tensible tower, which is in turn mounted on a314-ton motor 
truck. The power unit is a 15-kw., 125-volt gasoline-electric 
set, mounted on a duplicate 314-ton truck. Eight of these 
outfits were part of the engineer train equipments. They were 
used during the 1917 campaign on the Mexican border. They 
were not considered sufficiently mobile to accompany some of 
the army units. As a result, a horse drawn equipment was 
developed. This consists essentially of a 24 in. high intensity 
are searchlight placed on mast or tower extensible to 16 feet 
above the ground. The searchlight and tower are mounted 
on a caisson. The energy is supplied by a 5-kw., 65-volt 
gasoline-electric set mounted on a limber. Eight of these 
units accompanied the first engineer train which left the 
United States for France on August 2, 1917. 

Experience in France indicated that neither of the mobile 
searchlight units which formed part of the equipment of the 
Army at the outbreak of hostilities was suited for operation 
along the Western Front. The searchlights on masts were 
particularly unsuited since, if they remained lit more than 30 
seconds within the zone of the advance, they were demolished 
by enemy shells. This was due to the extreme accuracy of 
the range finding equipment of the German armies and the 
rapid responsivity and excellent coordination of their artillery 
fire. A survey station indicated that high-power search- 
_ lights on small mobile mounts, which could be quickly 

emplaced, were desirable. Specifications for these were sent 
to the United States late in 1917. | 

The first attempt to meet the specifications of the A. E. F, is 
shown in Fig. 2. This is essentially the standard 36-in. size 
seacoast searchlight, with a new design of trunnion arms and 
with a wheeled carriage. It utilized existing tool equipment 
so far as this was practicable, at the same time reduced the 
weight of the searchlight about 50 per cent, and greatly in- 
creased its mobility. About 36 of these searchlights were in 
use in the 1st and 2nd American Field Armies at the time the 
armistice was signed. They were supplied with power from 
various kinds of power plants. Some were supplied by French 


1628 SEARCHLIGHT [Dee: 12 


17-kw. sets of various makes, some by Riker trucks, the engines 
of which were equipped with 12-kw. generators and some with 
Mack trucks, the engines of which were equipped with 15-kw. 
generators. 

A. E. F. experience indicated, however, that 36-in. search- 
lights were not quite powerful enough. New specifications 
called for 60-in. portable or semi-portable searchlights.. To 
meet this demand, the design shown in Fig. 8 was developed. 
It consists essentially of the standard seacoast searchlight 
equipment placed on trailers. On the left is.shown a 60-in. 
stationary type high intensity are searchlight with its cable 
reel, rheostat, etc. On the right-is shown a stationary 25-kw. 
115-volt gasoline-electric set with its radiator, muffler, spare 
gasoline tanks and auxiliaries. This equipment, although 
mobile, was quite heavy and could only be moved at relatively 
low speeds. It was large in size and difficult to entrench. 
Only a few of these units were ordered to fill in the gap until 
more mobile equipments could be provided. Meantime large 
quantities of 60-in. coast defense searchlights, Fig. 4, and their 
generating equipments were shipped to France and placed in 
active service. One of these is shown in Fig. 5, with its em- 
_ placement and 3-meter sound detecting paraboloid. It is an 
pei ne i by the 56th U. S. Engineers in the St. Mihiel 

ector. 

Fig. 6 shows one of the early attempts at making a very light 
weight, extremely mobile 60-in. high-intensity are drum-type 
searchlight. It weighs, complete, about 2500 lb. Before it 
was completely developed, however, the design had been super- 
seded by the open-type which was suggested in the spring of 
1918 by Major R. W. Lewis, the representative in the United 
States of the A. E. F. Searchlight Regiment, the 56th U. S. 
Engineers. 

The original open-type searchlight, made in accordance with 
Major Lewis’ suggestions is shown in Fig. 7. It was made up 
at Ellington Field, Texas by a detachment of the 56th U. S. 
- Engineers. They took the mirror and back door from a 36-in. 
standard Navy searchlight and supported it in rude trunnions 
and trunnion arms. It was arranged to be rotatable about a 
horizontal axis only. In front of the mirror was placed the 
automatic high-intensity are mechanism, usually placed in 
the barrel of a 36-in. searchlight. The carbons and the upper 
part of the mechanism were enclosed in a tin can, which was 
intended to restrict stray light and to protect the arc from wind. 
The searchlight was operated for several weeks and proved 
unusually efficient. It had one very important characteristic. 
It had a very clearly defined beam, with a minimum of stray 
light. This was, no doubt, due to the fact that there was no 
barrel and so there were no reflections from the interior. 
Beside, it had no front glass so that there was no dispersion. 

The open-type searchlight seemed to be such a feasible pro- 
position that negotiations were immediately opened with 


PLATE LXXXI 
A. |. E. Es 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 1—Two Unit Mosite SHarcHLicHt HQuripMENT, MOUNTED ON 
’ 
314-Ton Trucks, SEARCHLIGHT BEING ARRANGED FOR HLEVATION BY 
MEANS OF AN EXTENSIBLE TOWER. 


[LICHTENBERG] 


Fig. 2—36-1n. BarrEL Type WHEELED Base SEARCHLIGHT, SUCH AS 
Usep sy Ist AND 2NnD Fieip Armiss, A. EK. F. 


PLATE LXXXIl. 
A. 1. 'E._E, 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 3—Trarter Typr or Mosite SEARCHLIGHT HQUIPMENT, CoN- 
SISTING OF 60 IN. BARRELL SEARCHLIGHT AND 25-Kw., 125-Vour GASOLINE- 
ELEectTric GENERATING SET. 


[LICHTENBERG] 
Fie. 4—60 1n. Hicu Inrensrry Arc BARREL TypeE SEARCHLIGHT, 
DasigNep For Coast Derensr INSTALLATION AND Usep During OPERA- 
TIONS OF THE 1sT AND 2ND Armiss, A. FE. F. 


PLATE LXXXill. 
A. lt. E. E. 
VOL, XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 5—A. E. F. Searcuiicur EMpLACEMENT, SHOWING 60 In. H1GH 
Intensity Arc, BARREL Typr SEARCHLIGHT AND THREE-MBETER PARA- 
BOLOID. 


[LICHTENBERG] 


Fic. 6—60 1x. Hieu Intensity Arc, Licur WEIGHT, BARREL SEARCH- 
LIGHT ON WHEELED BASE 


PLATE LXXxXIV. 
A. |; EE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fic. 7—OriIGInAL OPEN TYPE SEARCHLIGHT, WITH 36 IN. Mrrror AND 150- 
AMPERE Hicu IntTENsITY Arc, AUTOMATICALLY OPERATED MECHANISM 


[LICHTENBERG] 
Fig. 8—1919 Mopen or Open Type SEaRcuLicut, wiTH 60 in. Mrrror 
AND 200-AmMPERE Mepium Intensity Arc, Hann Ferp Mrecuanism 


PLATE LXXXV 
A. tl, E. E. 
VOL. XXXVII, 1919 


Fig. 9—1919 Moprt or OpeN Type SEARCHLIGHT, WITH 60 1N. Mirror, 
SHOWING WHEELS REMOVED AND Basb Reapy FoR EMPLACING 


Fie. 10—Mecuanism ror 200-AmpERE Meptum Intensity Arc, As 
UsED IN OPEN TPE SEARCHLIGHT 


[LICHTENBERG] " J 


Fig. 11—Parts or MecHANISM FOR OPERATING 200-AMPERE Merpium 
Intensity Arc IN OPEN TyPEr SEARCHLIGHT 


PLATE LXXXV¥I, 
Act Ene. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fic. 12—Very Ligut WEeIcHT MopgELt OPEN TYPE SEARCHLIGHT, WITH 
30 in. Mirror AnD 150-Amprre HicH Intensity Arc, HAND FEED MECH- 
ANISM 


[LICHTENBERG] 
Fie. 13—Mosite Searcuricnut Power Unir anp Lorry. wit 
Covers Rremovep, SHowinG GENERATOR, SWITCHBOARD, CABLE REEL 
AND 36 IN. WHEELED BARREL SEARCHLIGHT 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK . 1629 


several large searchlight manufacturers to produce commer- 
cial designs. Several months’ effort was expended and, as a 
result, a very light weight, 60-in. open-type searchlight was 
produced. One of the highly developed designs is shown in 
Fig. 8. It weighs complete 1200 Ib. It can be provided with 
either medium intensity or high intensity arc mechanisms. 
It has been operated in all kinds of weather and in the ordinary 
winds where aircraft can travel. It has proven unusually 
successful. It weighs about one-fifth as much as the old 
60-in. searchlights and is just as efficient. Besides, it has no 
complicated mechanism and is very easily operated by par- 
tially skilled personnel. The running gear can be easily de- 
mounted from it, as shown in Fig. 9. This makes it a simple 
matter to emplace. The mechanism also is exceedingly simple. 
A medium intensity design is shown in Fig. 10. It consists 
of relatively few parts which are strong, as shown in Fig. 11. 
The result has been a simplified, very light weight and mobile 
searchlight, which is easy to move and emplace and which can 
be operated by a minimum number of partially skilled in- 
dividuals and yet be just as effective as the very heavy, com- 
plicated searchlights previously standardized for certain classes 
of service. Besides it is easy to manufacture and takes pre- 
viously standardized mirrors and carbons. 

Another form of light weight, open-type searchlight is 
shown in Fig. 12. It was developed essentially for extremely 
mobile service where light weight is essential. It weighs 
225 lb. as shown. It has a 150-ampere high-intensity arc 
mechanism, which is hand fed. It has a 30-in. glass mirror. 
It gives fully as good service up to 14,000-ft. range as do the 
60-in. designs. However, it is not nearly so good beyond 
14,000 ft..on account of the wide spread of its beam. __ 

The advent of very mobile searchlights brought with it the 
need for mobile searchlight power units. One of the early 
designs is shown in Fig. 1. This was successful but not en- 
tirely satisfactory. Another of the early designs is shown in 
Fig. 3. This unit was not self-propelled and_ besides could 
only be moved at low speeds and then not readily. To meet 
the situation, astandard Engineer Department Mack 5!4-ton 
cargo truck was modified by the addition of certain electrical 
auxiliaries. A generator was mounted on an extension of the 
crank shaft. A switchboard was placed under the body. 
Rheostats were located on the chassis. A cable reel was 
mounted in the front of the cargo space. A wheeled barrel 
36-in. searchlight was placed in the back of the cargo space. 


The result was a complete and mobile searchlight unit which 


could be run over practically all ordinary roads at speeds up 
to 12 miles per hour and which could operate an automatic 
high intensity arc searchlight practically continuously. It is 


‘shown with covers removed in Fig. 13. About thirty of these 


units were used by the 1st and 2nd Field Armies of the A. E. F. 


prior to the Armistice. 


1630 SHARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


The development of the open-type searchlight reduced the 
weight of the searchlight from about 7000 Ib. to about 1200 
Ib. This permitted a very much lighter weight power unit 


Fig. 18—50-Kw. Size Mosite SrarcutigHt Power Unit anp Lorry, 
DESIGNED FOR CARRYING 60-1N. HigH-AMPERAGE SEARCHLIGHT, TWELVE 
Men anv Att THEIR AUXILIARIES 

Length overall—21 ft., 10 in.; height—9 ft., 5 in.; Fwidth—6 ft., 2 in.; wheel base— 
177-in.; wheel diameter—36 in.; wheel gauge, front—62 in.; rear—67 in. 

Note: Side curtains equipped with extra fly of sufficient length to extend 6 feet from 
side of car at ground line. 


to be employed. The situation was surveyed, and, based on 
careful studies, the power unit shown in Fig. 14 was developed. 
It consists essentially of a standard Cadillac ambulance chassis 
with a 21-kw. G. E. generator, mounted, on the propeller 


Fig. 19—6.5-Kw. Mosite Szarcuticut Power Unit, Designep For 
Carrying 30-1n. Open Typr SEARCHLIGHT AND THREE Mrn 


Length overall—15 ft., 10 in.; height overall—7 ft., 6 in.; width overall—5 ft., 5 in.; 
wheel base—134 in.; wheel diameter—33 in.; wheel gauge—56 in. 


shaft between the transmission and the differential, as shown 
in Fig. 15. Mounted on this chassis is a special, very light 
weight body which has ramps for carrying the searchlight, as 


PLATE LXXXVII. 
AL EOE. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 14—Latre 1918 Destan Mopine SEARCHLIGHT PowrR UNIT AND 
Lorry, witH 60 1n. OPEN TyPE SEARCHLIGHT 


Fig. 15—Tor View or Late 1918 Dusign or Mosite SEARCHLIGHT 
Power Unit Cuassis, SHOWING INSTALLATION OF GENERATOR BETWEEN 
TRANSMISSION AND DIFFERENTIAL 


[LICHTENBERG] 


Fic. 16—Larte 1918 Desten or MoBILE SrarcHLicHT Power UNIT AND 
Lorry, WITH Covers REMOVED, SHOWING SEARCHLIGHT IN POSITION 


PLATE LXXXVIII. 
A. 1. E. E. 
VOL. XXXVIII, 1919 


Fig. 17—Latr 1918 Destan Mosite SEARCHLIGHT PowER UNIT, OPEN 
Typr SEARCHLIGHT, PARABOLOID AND 60 1N. BARREL TYPE SEARCHLIGHT, 
IN OPERATION WITH 2ND Fietp Army, A. E. F. 


[LICHTENBERG] 
Fie. 20—Raitway Typr SEARCHLIGHT KQUIPMENT, WITH Power UNIT 
IN Box Car AND SEARCHLIGHT MouNTED on Hinaep TowER 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1631 


shown in Fig. 16. The entire equipment was conceived, de- 
signed and built in four months and was delivered and in opera- 
tion with the 2nd American Field Army in October 1918. The 
complete equipment weighs 9000 lb. It has an intermittent 
output of 21 kw. It carries a 60-in. open-type searchlight, 
provided with both medium intensity and high intensity are 
mechanisms and a crew of five men, with all the necessary 


58-72. 


Fie. 2i—Mosite Srarcutigut Townr anp Movunt, ILLUSTRATING _ 
TELESCOPING TyPE oF EXTENSIBLE TOWER 


auxiliaries for operation in the field. Another is shown in 
Fig. 17 operating an open-type searchlight in the 2nd A. E. F. 
Army sector. 

The success of this combined design of mobile power unit 
and lorry gave rise to a new line of searchlight power units. 
A 50-kw. design is shown in Fig. 18. It employs a LaFrance 
Fire Engine chassis with 177-in. wheel base. It has provision 
for a 60-in. high-amperage searchlight, a crew of 12 men, 
500 ft. of cable and all auxiliaries for maintaining this force in 
the field for one week. Fig. 19 shows a 6.5-kw. unit, employ- 
ing a Dodge chassis. This carries a 30-in. 90-ampere high- 
intensity open-type searchlight, with a crew of three to four 
men. 

_ Mobile searchlight units have been extended to include 
lights on towers for coast defense purposes. Fig. 20 shows a 


A 


1632 SEARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


recently completed design. It consists essentially of two 
railway cars, which carry a searchlight and its tower and the 
power plant respectively. The tower, when raised, places 
the center of the searchlight 33 ft. above the top of the tracks. 
The searchlight is a 60-in. high-intensity coast defense design 
similar to the one shown in Fig. 4. It is supplied by power 
from either one of two standard 25-kw. 115-volt gasoline- 
electric sets, which are located in the box car. These are 
similar to the one shown at the right in Fig..3. The sets are 
operated in series for supplying power to electric motors lo- 
’ eated on car axles. The motors are regulated by standard 
railway grids under the car floors and controllers placed at 
the car ends. By this means, the unit is made self-propelling 
at speeds up to 10 miles per hour. 

Another form of mobile searchlight tower now in develop- 
ment, is shown in Fig. 21. It consists essentially of a special 
form of searchlight tower mount, with a telescoping form of 
tower, on top of which is placed an open type searchlight. 
The complete equipment weighs twenty tons. It isso arranged 
as to have the load distributed on a track running over the 
wheels. This gives an average bearing of about 700 lbs. per 
sq. ft. It can operate at speeds up to 20 miles per hour on 
good roads or up to 10 miles per hour over very bad roads. It 
will go through a swamp where the water is not over 3 ft. deep 
and will climb a 75 per cent grade. 

Ralph Kelly: In answer to Mr. MeNicholls question, 
the special feature of the lamp used for signalling work is that 
it has a concentrated filament and is filled with hydrogen gas. 
This gives a high intensity source of light with quick flashing 
and dying out but with very short life. The lamp used for 
searchlight work is similar to the signalling light in having a 
concentrated filament but is filled with nitrogen gas with a 
slow period of flashing and a long life. I believe the filament 
temperature of the hydrogen lamp is the highest. 

The Navy experimented with metal mirrors a number of 
years ago but found they did not keep their shape and tarnished 
very quickly under sea service. The parabolic glass mirror 
has proven very satisfactory in Naval service with a com- 
paratively few breaks on record that were caused by gunfire. 

The army mobile Cadillac searchlight unit represents a 
remarkable development and among the many types of equip- 
ment that have been developed for field work, there are none 
that can compare with it for mobility and efficiency. ; 
_ There is only one way to fight enemy planes at night and that 
is to illuminate them with searchlights and fight them with 
aircraft. The friendly aircraft have the advantage of darkness 
while they attack enemy planes illuminated by the search- 
lights. Anti aircraft guns are of little use except in protecting 
the searchlight equipment by preventing enemy planes from 
flying down the beam to a low height where they can bomb the 


1919] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1633 


searchlight personnel. I might say that a searchlight must 
frequently have its position changed to prevent being shelled by 
enemy artillery or by being used as a land mark for navigation 
of enemy planes. This is the great reason why a field search- 
light should be light and mobile. 

Mr. Bassett stated that the searchlight mirrors are fairly 
well standardized but I don’t think the Army Engineer Corps 
will agree with him on this point. They are still in the midst 
of a very extensive investigation in the field of metal mirrors 
in which they have encountered and are still encountering tre- 
mendous difficulties. 

Mr. Patterson’s figures comparing the 12 in. and 24 in. low 
power searchlight hold good for those lights under laboratory 
conditions when operated by expert personnel.~ In actual 
service the present design of low power light operates very 
inefficiently as described in the paper. In my opinion there is 
no question that a well designed low power light, such as the 
12 in. can be manufactured to give the same light on the target 
as the present 24 in. light as it is now inefficiently operated in 
service. The type and design of that light is a problem for 
the future but it is generally conceded that their is great room 
for improvement in the present low power light. 

The 12 in. light I had in mind in writing the paper was one 
designed and built by Major Judson and Lieut. Thompson 
U.S. M. C. which used carbons ‘of a very refractory material 
with an are current of 30 amperes. The positive carbon 
had a diameter of 34 in. while the negative carbon diameter 
was 14 in. which resulted in a far greater intrinsic brilliancy of 
light source than the present low power light. This light was 
equipped with a ground glass finder which added materially 
to its efficiency as it enabled the operator to keep the carbons 
in focus at all times. 

In regard to Mr. Patterson’s recommendation that the 12 in. 
and 18 in. sizes both be retained, it is not only my own opinion 
but that of Naval officers generally that the Navy standardize 
on one size of low power searchlight. That size should be 
either the 12 in. or the 18 in. as determined after service tests. 

Commander Beehler’s discussion gives the status of the 
third electrode control of the positive carbon for Naval work, 
and also answers Mr. Murphy’s question on that point. 

The data Mr. Murphy gave on ventilation of searchlights are 
extremely interesting. His company did the pioneer work in 
the field of searchlight ventilation and had many troublesome 
obstacles to overcome before they arrived at their present 
arrangement. This has worked admirably on the 24 in. high 
power searchlights under the severest of naval service condi- 
tions. 

As stated in the paper, the thermostat development by Mr. 
Murphy has proven very successful in service. It will however 
be of advantage to mount the thermostat on the lamp structure 


1634 SEARCHLIGHT [Dee. 12 


out of the weather and where no special adjustments are re- 
quired to maintain the positive crater in the focal position. 

There was a great deal of question during the war regarding 
the real value of a searchlight on a naval vessel but there finally 
developed a strong feeling that well designed searchlight equip- 
ment, properly used will prove of immense value to a ship in 
a night engagement. This feeling was confirmed by both 
Admiral’s Beatty-and Jellicoe in their reports on the battle of 
Jutland. 

As Commander Beehler brings out, it is not the high current 
density of the carbons alone that causes the high intensity 
phenomena, but the combination of that high current density 
and the angle of the negative arc stream. The dome glass 
door, in accordance with his tests, is not as efficient in trans- 
mitting light as a clean plate glass strip door. The great point 
in favor of the dome glass door is that it stands up against gun 
fire while the present type of plate glass door shatters under 
gun fire. Until the plate glass strip front door is developed 
to resist gunfire, it is only feasible to use the less efficient 
dome glass door for the major characteristic of a front door 
is that it must withstand gunfire. There is also a field of 
development in improving the optics of the dome glass door 
with a view to improving its light transmission efficiency. 

The question of size, material, and current density of search- 
light carbons is still one in which there are a number of con- 
flicting opinions. Ifa more refractory material is used for the 
carbons which gives a greatly reduced tail light, the light source 
will unquestionably be of lower intrinsic brilliancy than is 
obtained with the present type of high powered carbons. 
However it is the light that comes back to the observer from 
the target that counts and with the absorption of the atmos- 
phere in the nature of the 6th power, it is apparent that there 
can be a material reduction in the brilliancy of the light source 
and still effect but very slightly the light reflected back to the 
observer from the target. Is it then worth while to have a 
lower brilliancy light source and eliminate the objectionable. 
foreground lighting caused by the tail light of the high power 
light or is the sacrifice in intrinsic brilliancy of the light source 
too great for the advantage gained? 


Presented at a Section Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, San Francisco, 
Cal., February 7, toro. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I.E. E. 


UNIFICATION OF THE MANUAL AND AUTOMATIC 
TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 


BY D. E. WISEMAN 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


A description is given of the physical consolidation of the 
Bell manual and the Automatic Electric telephone systems of 
Los Angeles, Cal., which previously to June 1, 1918 operated as 
separate systems. While similar consolidations had been made 
previously they included relatively small volumes of traffic and 
afforded no engineering precedents as a guide to the consolida- 
tion of two systems serving 129,000 stations. The plans for the 
physical union of the two companies were devised by a joint 
committee of engineering representatives, and contained a 
number of novel operating and construction methods which are 
described. 

Under the new system each subscriber has access to every 

_ other subscriber in the Los Angeles exchange and to all long- 
distance lines centering there. Where duplicate services were 
installed the subscriber was given his choice as to whether he 
would retain the manual or the automatic system, and about 
13,000 duplicates were eliminated, the choice between the two 
types being equally divided. 


N telephone engineering and the resultant physical and 
economic accomplishment, June 1, 1918 figures prominently, 
for on that date the formal union of the Bell manual telephone 
system operated by The Pacific Telephone and Telegraph 
Company, and the Automatic Electric system operated by 
the Home Telephone and Telegraph Company in the City of 
Los Angeles, was effected under the management of the newly 
created Southern California Telephone Company, giving to 
every telephone user in that area a unified and unrestricted 
‘exchange telephone service and universal service over toll 
trunk lines to some eleven million telephones throughout the 
United States. Consolidations of this character have been 
made prior to this date but involving relatively small volumes 
of traffic and simple operating methods so that there were no 
records of actual performance or established engineering prac- 
tises to serve as a precedent and guide for determining the 
effect of and the physical requirements necessitated by the 
sudden release of two large, distinct and separately bound 
volumes of traffic into a common channel. 


1635 


1636 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


Because of the novel operating and construction methods 
and the speculative possibilities involved in the important 
pioneering work of welding these fundamentally different tele- 
phone switching systems into a single eighteen million dollar 
plant serving 129,000 stations, a semi-technical summary of 
the events has been prepared for general information. 

A brief reference to the conditions which brought about the 
consolidation will be made in order to better understand the 
problems that confronted the two competing telephone com- 
panies and their subscribers.-. Believing that competition 
instead of control was the automatic remedy to apply to public 
utilities, the City of Los Angeles invited telephone competition 
about sixteen years ago and then struggled along with her 
business-firms and many of her residents paying two telephone 
bills for a divided and what proved to be an unsatisfactory 
telephone service. This condition was continued until the 
year 1916, when the public decided by popular vote to bring 
about an end to dual telephone service. Negotiations were 
begun and various proposals were considered by all concerned 
in an effort to avoid any waste or arbitrary measures. A plan 
was finally accepted for the organization of a local telephone 
company, which was to purchase the properties of the existing 
operating companies and unify the service, continuing with 
the equipments then in plant and giving the right to the tele- 
phone users to determine for themselves whether they would 
retain their automatic stations or manual stations. War con- 
ditions imposed restrictions in the conservation of materials 
and men for such projects and called for a careful weighing of 
the expected benefits and expenditures of materials and labor. 

With this clear understanding of the requirements, a joint 
committee of engineering representatives was appointed to 
determine the methods for the physical joining of the two 
systems. As a result of their efforts, a fundamental plan, 
together with preliminary estimates of cost, was submitted and 
formally approved by the City of Los Angeles, the Railroad 
Commission of the State of California and by the Attorney 
General for the Federal Government, and on May 1, 1917, 
formal authorization was given to proceed with the project. 

In order to picture the plants as they existed prior to the 
consolidation, I shall refer briefly to the physical properties 
and the operating methods of the two systems. Referring for 
a moment to Fig. 1, the area served by the duplicate plants was 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1637 


about 200 sq. mi. and lying within the corporate city limits. 
The open and solid circles show office and wire centers of the 
Home and Pacific Companies respectively, while the dotted 
and solid lines mark the areas of the respective districts. The 
Pacific Company was established first and the opening and 
location of its offices followed the telephone development of 
the city. The first office was located in the business area and 
as the population increased and spread to outlying districts, 
new offices and districts were established. Each office was 
located as near as practicable to the center of the wire distrib- 
uting system as determined by a study of the existing plant 
and expected growths for 15 or more years hence. ~As years 


| 


3 


= es 
X\y 22 
= 


So,Pasadena 
© (Branch Office) 
779 Sta. 


mS 


Hollywood f= 
(Branch Office)! @ 
707 Sta 


Adams © 
{Main Office) 
4559 Sta 


Fig. 1—Arza SERVED BY DUPLICATE PLANTS 


go by and old offices are outgrown studies very often show an 
economy in subdividing the original district or changing the 
boundaries so that this natural process tends to correct any 
errors in estimates of growths and locations of such expected 
growths. 

May 1, 1917, the Pacific Company’s exchange consisted of 
its standard outside plant and station equipment and nine 
manually-operated central offices serving about 69,000 stations. 
Bell equipment was used in units having a capacity of 9600 mul- 
tiple lines. Telephone connections were established generally 
by the calling subscriber removing the receiver from the switch 
hook, causing a light to appear before an answering A operator, 
‘who upon receiving a request for a particular number cut-in 


1638 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb.7 


on an order wire to the particular switchboard unit in the 
district, indicated by the prefix of the number called-for. An 
operator at the distant switchboard unit, assigned a trunk over 
this order wire to the calling A operator and completed the 
connection by plugging into the called-for subscriber's multiple. 
Fig. 2 shows a schematic transmission circuit of a typical con- 
nection. The operation of this circuit will be described later 
and in connection with the unified plant. 


MANUAL SYSTEM 


TRUNK 
LINE CIRCUIT OPRS, CORD CIRCUIT BETWEEN OFFICES INC: TRUNK CIRCUIT sue 
a 


HOLLYWOOD MANUAL OFFICE “SOUTH MANUAL OFFICE. 
Fic. 2—Ee@urpment INVOLVED IN A\ConneEcTION BETWEEN A HOLLY- 
woop Orrice ManvuaL SUBSCRIBER AND A SoutTH Orrice MANUAL 
SUBSCRIBER 


The former Home Company operated an automatic ex- 
change including a parallel and similarly constructed outside 
plant and fourteen offices serving a total of approximately 
60,000 stations. About 35,000 stations were equipped with 
dials and approximately 25,000 manual stations operated from 
private branch exchanges and as public pay stations. The 
lines from the manual stations terminated on a 45-position 
manual switchboard in the Olive Office. Calls from auto- 


AUTOMATIC SYSTEM 


LINE i” TRUNK INC 2"° 36 AUTO. 
‘suB ‘SWITCH SELECTOR REPEATER BETWEEN OFFICES SELECTOR SELECTOR CONNECTOR 
*Coauuine aa 1 fz = rn a 


4 


~ Sus. 
iS), (cauzo) 


: 


HOLLYWOOD AUTO OFFICE SOUTH AUTO. OFFICE 
Fig. 3—EqQuipMEentT INVOLVED IN A ConNECTION BerwrEN A Houty- 
woop Orrick AUTOMATIC SUBSCRIBER AND A SoutTH Orricr AUTOMATIC 
SUBSCRIBER 


matic stations to automatic stations were made by dialing five 
or six digits, as required, to reach the particular district and 
individual subscriber. In capacity the former Home Plant 
- was one of the largest and probably the most successfully 
operated of any automatic system installed in the United States 
or abroad. Home Company private branch exchange sub- 
scribers were reached by dialing the private branch exchange 
operator, who completed the connection. Calls outgoing from 
private branch exchange subscribers were trunked to the man- 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1639 


ual transfer board above mentioned, the calls coming in on 
an automatic traffic distributor which placed each line lamp 
signal before a non-busy operator. The operator upon taking 
up these connections would complete the call direct if to another 
private branch exchange station through the subscriber’s 
multiple or dial the number required, if an automatic station 
was wanted. Fig. 3 shows a schematic transmission circuit of 
a typical full automatic connection. The operations and func- 
tions will also be described step by step later. 

Los Angeles has had the distinction of having more telephones 
per capita than any other city in the world and is now very 
close to the top of the list. This general usage is reflected in 
the number of calls originating in each system, as shown by 
the records of traffic. The approximate numbers of daily 
average calls originating in the former Pacific plant and Home 
plant were in the vicinity of 430,000 and 420,000 respectively. 

The engineering problems demanded, therefore, a reasonably 
close approximation of the volume of existing and added traffic 
which could be expected to flow between the groups of stations 
of the various districts of the two plants; a determination of 
the most direct and economical routing of such calls based 
on efficient operating methods and the use of existing facilities; 
and the design and development of an inter-unit trunking plant 
and switching circuits necessary to maintain the commercial 
standards for transmission and supervision between the two 
systems regardless of the mechanical, electrical and operating 
inequalities. Visual and audible signals peculiar to the sepa- 
rate systems required for supervisory purposes needed to be 
synchronized or harmonized and extended when necessary so 
as to afford common usage. 

It is obvious that a great many plans and combinations of 
plans for unification were developed in sufficient detail to de- 
termine their relative capital and operating costs and advan- 
tages and disadvantages. The plan in principle that was 
adopted for handling the inter-office traffic between the systems 
was to operate all existing offices as units of the complete ex- 
change and route the new automatic or manual trunks of each 
office into the adjacent office of the opposite system, where the 
connection could be completed by the most direct method and 
route. 

Having referred to the facts that were most vital in shaping 
the project, I should like to outline the organization and 

‘schedule of work involved in the construction program esti- 


1640 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


mated to cost $1,250,000. Every reasonable effort was de- 
manded to bring about a unification of the properties without 
waste of time, and accordingly a complete schedule for the 
ordering of materials, manufacturing, assembly and installa- 
tion thereof was set up after a canvas of probable material 
deliveries and of the labor situation. It became evident that 
a period of twelve months would be the shortest time possible 
to complete the necessary work, keeping in mind that war 
demands might upset the schedule, and all effort was centered 
on finishing the project within.the minimum time. | Specifica- 
tions and plans were completed for each individual project, 
numbering all together about 110, and each one was charted 
with due regard to the materials involved, quantity, desired 


t= SCHEDULED PERIOD FOR COMPLETE DELIVERY OF EQUIPMENT 
*— ACTUAL EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF DELIVERY OF EQUIPMENT 
+--+ SCHEDULED INSTALLING PERIOD 
ivut ACTUAL INSTALLATION PERIOD 
© SHIPPING DATE REQUESTED FOR FRAMES & RACKS, CABLE & JACKS 


% ACTUAL SHIPPING DATE FOR FRAMES & RACKS, CABLE & JACKS 917 1918 
orice | S54 bistcce DESCRIPTION MAY |JUNE| JULY | AUG. — OCT. | NOV.| DEC. | JAN. | FEB. | MAR. | APR. | "MAY |JUNE 
EAST |4367-S], , 12] ADO.2 SUBSCRIBER SECTIONS & —}——_}—— +— { 
Nove | evs [4217] ODIALING TRKS. REARRANGE ANS ic Oot a |. 
= ADD MISC_EQUIP.& 190 DIALING TRKS 
BOY Us 5 6 Sl5.4-17 REMOVE 660 ANS. JKS.REARRANGE nS Cre, aa = sats weal 
NO.5 | E-496 ANS. JKS.& ADD RINGING TONE \ J 
RE |4365- REMOVE 380 ANS.JKS.REARRANGE t 
aa la ae 5-3-17| ANS,JKS.AOD 270 DIALING TRKS —— ah ree f 4 
0.3 ADD RINGING TONE 
MAIN [eaae-s| REMOVE 1180 ANS, JKS REARRANGE — SS = 
NO 15 |E-499 vet Be ee ae crotie wei} EO CD EY EO 
MAIN ~ 1 CENTRALIZED INFORMATION 
DESK SECTION 45 INCOMING 
NO.16 TRUNK CIRCUITS SS 
TOLL |4363-S],,_5_ 7] ADD 600.6 T.& DIAL EQUIPMENT = SS St Se qi t 
NO.9 | E-503 &70 RECORD TRUNK ANS.JKS p OO 
= 1 
SOUTH |4366-s|, , ,_ | ADO 2SUB-SECTS.£ 150 DIALING ee == — 
NO.5 €-500 [92°17 ENS IKS-ADD RINGING TONE fo CII) i A) A I) A Re 
West  |4376-S),_, | ADO.4SUB.SECTS. EXTEND 7600 MULT ADD oO 
NO.5 €-497 P77 core ae ADD RINGING TONE Het eterno 
DUNE HS on] STC Iitarmaa : 
No.1 [+504 fP"25"7| SMULTIPLE ANSWERING JACKS MO HE OL Ons en nn 
GABVANZA | 4358-5]. 5.17] AOD 2 SUBS. SECTS.230 ANS.JKS ae ay pee ee 
ot | e-502 [2° '7| HO DIALING TRKS & RINGING TONE On Oo 
S D1 SUB.SECT. 900 SUB. MULT ‘s 
VERMONT [4436-Sl5 95.17 5 Ss Se 


AD! ULT. 
NO.4 | £-50! Cae ee eens vane C0 


Fia. 4—Diacram SHowina Mertuop or MAINTAINING SCHEDULE FOR 
THE ENTIRE RECONSTRUCTION 


time of delivery and installation and its relation to the project 
as a whole. Fig. 4 shows a typical group of projects and il- 
lustrates the method of maintaining the schedule for the whole 
program. As items of material were, of course, duplicated in 
a great many of the specifications, a master chart was pre- 
pared showing the total quantities of each of the thousands of 
items required at specified dates. 

The largest single project consisted in the design and manu- 
facture of the 66-position special tandem switchboard and 
associated equipment to be located in Olive Office for the 
translation and distribution of calls from automatic stations 
to manual stations in the downtown area. This switchboard 
together with the switching circuits were designed in dete 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1641 


by the engineers in the general office of the telephone company, 
and all of the manufacturing and assembly work was performed 
in San Francisco. Extensive rearrangements of the Olive 
office building were necessary to provide space for this equip- 
ment and for retiring quarters for the large number of operators 


» required to give the necessary 24-hour continuous service. 


Fig. 5 shows the floor plan arrangement of this switchboard and 
associated operating room space. 

In the manual offices it was necessary to equip the regular 
subscriber positions with a dial for sending out the electrical 
impulses, and to provide outgoing trunks connecting directly 
with the automatic equipment in the adjacent office. There 


[en ce ye a ey ye a fad yo 


o 


ULTIMATE LOCKER 
SPACE 


OUVE STREET 


ALLEY 


NARROW STREET 


Fig. 5—PuLan or Seconp Fioor Otive Orricr, Los ANGELES, CAL. 


were approximately 375 subscriber switchboard positions in 
the manual system in the Los Angeles exchange that required 
the installation of this special equipment and associated wiring 
and this proved to be one of the most difficult parts of the work, 
because such work had to be performed on positions of switch- 
board that were in continuous operating service. I will refer 
to Fig. 6 and describe the switching circuit associated with the 
dials at the operators’ positions. Each operator on the sub- 
scribers’ switchboard is provided with 10 outgoing trunks ter- 
minating in the nearest automatic office on first selectors. 
These outgoing trunks are provided with twin jacks, one above 
the other, and electrically connected so that the dialing device 
can be associated with each of the trunk circuits to the distant 


1642 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


office. The plug connecting with the dial is inserted in the 
lower first jack while a call originated by a manual subscriber 
for an automatic station is connected to the upper first trunk 
jack by means of the regular A operator’s doubled-ended cord 
circuit. The operator then proceeds to dial the number re- 
quested and as soon as this number has been dialed, the operator 
moves the dial circuit plug to the lower second jack, thereby 
pre-selecting the trunk circuit for the next call for an auto- 
matic station. The operation of the.second and third selectors 
and final connector is the same as described later under ‘‘Auto- 
matic to Automatic Connections.” The circuit is so arranged 
that the manual A operator just referred to receives direct 
supervision for both the calling manual and the called for 
automatic station. At the end of the conversation, the lighting 
of a lamp associated with each end of the A cord cireuit indi- 


MANUAL SYSTEM AUTOMATIC SYSTEM 


Calling Answering Operators Outgoing Trunk Trunk = Inc. Called 


Subscriber Jack Cord Circuit Dial Trunks ofices i Ist Sel poe betw. 2nd Sel. 3rd Sel. Connector Subscriber 
Vee eas ic OHicehc. aes ae 


we H t ‘ 
OSE a easy, = Sia Sie 
Supervisory Superviso jlamp_ ~~ ' bead Gane beaed (tenns Rae ad 
Lamp PralCan| ae : 
val fe 

z+ Qi 

- —- | Other Trunks 

5 


Dial Calling 
Device 


Fie. 6—Meruop or EstasiisHinag A CoNnNECTION BY MEANS OF 
Dirat Cauitine Drvicr 


cates to the operator that the connection has been finished and 
all cords are to be cleared from the subscriber’s line and trunk 
jacks. The outgoing dial trunks are used in rotation and the 
actual number of the trunks connected by such lines to the 
distant office varies with the traffic requirements. 

Central office telephone installation work has generally been 
organized for individual projects usually confined to a partic- 
ular office building. The plan of scheduling the material and 
utilizing this material to its greatest advantage made it neces- 
sary to depart from the regular practises of the installing forces 
and to provide that all of the work should be treated as one 
project wherein the men trained for specific work were to be 
moved from one office to another as materials arrived and 
thereby facilitating the completion of the work regardless of 
irregularities in the arrival of materials for a particular office. 

This arrangement was one of the important factors in effect- 


‘ 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1643 


ing the final completion of the central office work April 30, 1918. 
The time intervening from the date until the beginning of the 
delivery of the directory and the formal announcement of 
consolidation on June 1, 1918 was required in placing thousands 
of test calls over all combinations of connections to make sure 
of positive operation. In a typical connection between an 
automatic and manual station there are 41 relays, and 79 
from manual to automatic, having movable parts controlling 
from one to ten electrical contacts, each of which must function 
in the proper sequence from the start to the completion of each 
telephone call. I do not wish to convey an impression that 
telephone circuits are inherently subject to failure because they 
are not. The characteristics and operating requirements for 
each relay, for instance, are known mathematically and what 
the relay can be depended upon to do foraspecific period of time. 
At regular intervals each type of relay is given its proper current 
adjustment using measuring instruments designed for that 
purpose. 

The installation of telephone cables and central office equip- 
ment of the manual or automatic type required the use of highly 
trained and skilled labor and the Telephone Company faced 
the difficulty of obtaining the large number of electricians and 
mechanics required to hold the schedule and training them 
for the special work. As it was, considerable overtime became 
necessary to maintain a working balance between the arrivals 
of material and the available labor. 

Among the larger items of expenditure, and one involving 
months of study and calculations in voice transmission were 
the additions and changes necessary in the cable trunking plant 
in order to maintain commercial standards on all local and 
long distance connections. These studies included the use 
of and application of loading coils to the former Home Company 
cable plant amounting to about 1000 coils and the addition and 
respacing of many of the coils in the portion of the Pacific 
Company cable plant. All together about 75,000,000 con- 
ductor-feet of various gages of underground telephone cables 
were ordered and installed to provide new routes and reinforce 
existing trunk groups required for the consolidated service. 

Prior to the consolidation, practically all of the subscribers 
having private branch exchanges maintained duplicate switch- 
boards and station apparatus. The problem, therefore, of 
consolidating this type of equipment offered no particular 

difficulty, as such consolidations could be and were effected by 


1644 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


grouping the trunks formerly serving the separate systems on 
the particular switchboard to be retained, adding thereto the 
amount of line and trunk facilities desired by the subscriber 
and eliminating the duplicate switchboard and stations not 
required. The net effect was to remove about 345 single- 
position private exchange switchboards from the system. In 
the case of several of the larger commercial companies, it was 
necessary to order complete multiple private branch exchange 
switchboards of the 640-line capacity and about 30 sections 
of such boards were placed in service as fast as the equipment 
could be engineered and manufactured. It will be interesting 
to note that the flow of traffic to and from private exchanges 
was not greatly disturbed from the existing paths by this plan 
of consolidating; a principle which was kept well in mind and 
taken advantage of wherever practicable. 

Where individual and party stations were duplicated, both 
stations were left connected until the new directories were 
delivered, at which time the subscriber was requested to use 
the telephone of the particular system that he had made appli- 
cation for and the other station was removed as soon as the 
construction forces could handle the work. Approximately 
13,000 duplicate stations have been removed. 

A considerable number of operators were required and for a 
while it looked very much as if the consolidation would have to 
be postponed because of the inability to obtain the needed 
force. Good service depends to a large extent on capable 
and efficient operators and you can appreciate the difficulty that 
confronted the operating department in the selection, employ 
and training of approximately 500 additional operators re- 
quired for handling the special transfer switchboard installed 
in the Olive Office building, and for the large number of added 
positions of switchboard in the various manual offices. A large 
operating school equipment was hurriedly manufactured and 
installed and training of operators was started about the first 
of the year 1918. The schedules also provided for the early 
installation of dials on the subscriber positions in the manual 
offices for advance training of the regular operating force. 
Special observation equipment was designed and furnished for 
practise work in placing test calls and later for supervision in 
determining and checking the accuracy of dialing the calls 
placed by the subscribers. By means of automatic recording 
devices the numbers called for by subscribers or instructors 
were compared with the numbers actually dialed and in this 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1645 


way the operating force was gradually brought to an efficient 
basis by the time the construction work was completed. 

Proceeding under the restrictions that each subscriber having 
duplicate service should determine for himself whether ‘to 
retain automatic or manual substation equipment, the Com- 
mercial Department carried on a vigorous campaign to obtain 
these subscriber’s choices and to arrange accordingly. I do not 
have the exact figures but I understand that of the 18,680 
duplicate stations about 5200 duplicates were retained and 
the balance were divided evenly between the two types. The 
expected result of this canvass had been forecasted and was 
an essential factor in engineering and in construction work. 

As a function of the commercial canvass the Directory De- 
partment was confronted with the necessity of recasting the 
entire directory scheme to fit the particular needs of a unified 
service. A great amount of thought was given to the deter- 
mination of the most efficient arrangement of listing and num- 
bering subscribers, and while this seems trivial yet a careless 
directory arrangement reflects on the quality of the telephone 
service and robs the public of valuable time. Many number 
changes were involved and a complete relisting of every sub- 
scriber’s name and number into one alphabetical list introduced 
great possibilities of errors. (It is a matter of passing interest 
that 165,000 copies of the directory were issued and distributed 
in Los Angeles and to other exchanges for long- and short-haul 
toll traffic and that over 441,000 pounds of paper were re- 
quired in the printing of the consolidation issue.) 

In the present unified plant, local calls are divided into four 
main groups and are obtained in the following ways: 

Calls from Automatic Stations to Automatic Stations are ob- 
tained in the same manner as under the former Home manage- 
ment, that is, by the subscriber dialing the number wanted as 
indicated by the directory listing. Such subscriber sets are 
provided with the familiar dialing device arranged to transmit 
from one to ten electrical impulses for each “pull” of the dial. 
In the automatic system most of the stations are reached by 
dialing five digits although there are a few thousand six digit 
numbers. The operation of the first digit of the five digit 
numbers selects the office district required, the second digit 
selects the particular thousand, the third digit selects the par- 
ticular hundred, while the fourth and fifth digits select the tens 
and unit respectively of the number desired. Referring to 
Fig. 3, the calling automatic subscriber upon removing the 


1646 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


receiver from the switchhook completes an electrical circuit 
through a Keith line switch, the chief function of which is 
to direct the simultaneous calls to a minimum number of 
trunks to first selectors. Each automatic line therefore termi- 
nates on a primary line switch having ten paths to as many 
first selectors, these trunks being multipled to other line 
switches, depending on the calling rate or traffic load of the 
particular group of lines. The operation of the first digit of 
the number wanted causes the mechanism of the first selector 
to step the brush terminals upward to one of the ten levels 
arbitrarily connecting to a particular 10,000-line unit. This 
selector is of the trunk-hunting type, that is, the subscriber, 
as noted above, having dialed, say, the digit 6, causes six electri- 
cal impulses to be transmitted through the selector mechanism 
through the stepping relay, raising the brushes to the sixth level. 
The selector then automatically begins a rotary movement 
and continues until an idle trunk is found. There are ten 
trunks over which this rotary trunk selection takes place and the 
traffic is so distributed over selector equipment that with very 
few exceptions an idle trunk will be found within this group 
of ten. The connection is then established through what.is 
termed repeater equipment (consisting of. coils and relays 
by the aid of which the calling impulses are repeated from the 
local to the distant office and talking battery is provided to 
the calling station) to a particular second selector in the distant 
office. The dialing of the second digit by the calling subscriber 
again operates the stepping mechanism to one of the ten levels 
corresponding to the thousands of the number wanted. Auto- 
matic rotary movement takes place, selecting an idle trunk to 
the third selector where the dialing and selecting of the hundreds 
is the same as for the first and second selectors. The con- 
nection now is established through to the connector which is 
similar in its operation to selectors with the exception that the 
tens digit steps the mechanism to the corresponding level while 
the units digit controls the rotary movement. to the particular 
unit required. The connector also supplies talking battery 
to the called subscriber and sends out the necessary ringing 
impulses to call either the individual or party subscriber de- 
sired or sends back the busy signal if the line called is in use. 
The restoring of the receivers to their switchhooks automati- 
cally returns all of the connecting equipment to normal 
position again for use on subsequent connections. 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1647 


Calls from Automatic Stations to Manual Stations are  ob- 
tained by operation of an arbitrarily assigned digit, the ninth 
digit or level being available in this case. Trunks from these 
first selector ninth levels lead to the nearest manual office 
and terminate by the aid of the familiar line and cutoff relay 
on an answering jack with a lamp signal before an A operator. 
Referring to Figs. 7 and 8, the A operator upon receiving a 


AUTOMATIC SYSTEM - MANUAL SYSTEM 
_$————eswane —~" 
Line ist Trunk between Inc. 
Sub Switch _ Selector d Repeater Offices __ line Cet. Sub,Cord Cct, Loaded Trunk Trunk Cct. Sub 
i Sia eas 


as at es | 
et dene ie ; 
a ay 


Sse 
—— ee ey Sas z 
HOLLYWOOD AUTOMATIC OFFICE HOLLYWOOD MANUAL OFFICE SOUTH OFFICE 


Fie. 7—EqQuipMent INvoLyED In A ConneEcTION BertwreEn A Hou.y- 
woop Orrick AUTOMATIC SUBSCRIBER AND A SourtH Orrics MANUAL 
SUBSCRIBER 


line lamp signal, plugs into the corresponding answering jack 
and-requests the subscriber to give the number (and office 
prefix) wanted as shown by the directory listings. The call is 
then completed within the office received or is trunked over the 
manual trunking system to the distant B operator in the same 
manner as described under calls manual to manual. In the 
downtown district where a considerable amount of traffic is 


AUTOMATIC SYSTEM SPECIAL MANUAL SYSTEM MANUAL SYSTEM 


Auto Line Ist Line between Incoming Manual. 
Sub Switch Selector Repeater Offices Line Cet Cord Cet. Trunk Cet Sub 
r a pares 


= (Called) 
ee LI ER 
! Siam 


SS 
HOLLYWOOD 
MANUAL OFFICE 


Fig. 8—Equipment INVOLVED IN A CONNECTION BETWEEN A SouTH 


Orrice AUTOMATIC SUBSCRIBER AND A HoLtLywoop Orrice Manuat | 
SUBSCRIBER 


SOUTH AUTOMATIC OFFICE 


involved, it was found impossible to add to the large number 
of A positions to the various manual units and it was necessary 
to install a special manual switchboard, shown in Fig. 5 in 
available space in the Olive office building. This special board 
contains only the necessary multipled terminating lines, out- 
going trunks and key and supervisory equipment necessary 
for establishing the connections between the automatic and 
manual system. Automatic calls therefore in this district are 
completed by the dialing of the digit 9 as before, bringing the 
line signal in on this special A switchboard where such con- 


1648 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


nections are completed as in regular manual practise over 
trunk lines assigned over order wires. 

Calls from Manual Stations to Manual Stations are obtained 
in the same manner as existed prior to the consolidation, that 
is, by the agency of the A and B operators and corresponding 
manual switchboards. Referring to Fig. 2, the calling manual 
subscriber upon lifting the receiver from the hook causes a lamp 
to light before an A operator in his district. This line termin- 
ates on the ordinary line and cutoff relays, the former operating 
as soon as the switchhook closes the circuit, causing the line 
lamp to burn. The A operator then plugs into the correspond- 
ing line jack with one end of a double-ended cord circuit, this 
operation .causing the cutoff relay to energize and thereby 
opening the circuit through the line relay and lamp. The 
operator then throws the listening key and requests the called 
for number. She then proceeds to complete the connection 


MANUAL SYSTEM AUTOMATIC SYSTEM 


Manual 


pet A be ae Inc.2nd 
Sub _Line Circuit Cord Circuit Dial Trunk Circuit Ist Sel. Repeater Trunk Sel. 3rd Sel a 
r x4 


Connector  -Sub 


corel (Called) 


Trunk between Offices pe 
= eee ge tee en 
HOLLYWOOD MANUAL SYSTEM PROSPECT AUTO OFFICE SOUTH AUTOMATIC. OFFICE 


Fig. 9—EeuripmMentT INVOLVED IN A CONNECTION BETWEEN A HOLLy- 
woop OrricE MANUAL SUBSCRIBER AND A SouTH Orrick AUTOMATIC 
SUBSCRIBER 


by plugging either directly into the subscriber multiple or by 
plugging into a trunk line leading to the distant office required 
and as assigned by the distant B operator over an order wire 
circuit. The distant trunk operator then plugs into the re- 
quired subscribers’ multiple and automatic ringing proceeds 
until the subscriber answers. Supervisory lamps associated 
with both the trunk cord and the double-ended A cord furnish 
the necessary indication to the operators of the establishment 
of the connection and end of the conversation. When both 
lamps associated with the double-ended A operator’s cord re- 
light, the connection is taken down and this operation gives a 
disconnect signal also to the distant trunk operator. 

Calls from Manual Stations to Automatic Stations are ob- 
tained by direct trunk circuits. An A operator receiving a 
manual subscriber’s request for a particular automatic number, 
as indicated by the directory listing, proceeds to dial the num- 


1919] WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 1649 


ber in the same manner as described above for an automatic 
subscriber. Each A operator is provided with a group of 
trunks, as shown by Fig. 6 and described in the first part of 
this paper, leading to the nearest automatic office and termina- 
ting directly on first selectors. 

Private Branch Exchange Calls originating from such ex- 
changes of the former Home Company were formerly operated 
and are still operated on a manual basis. Calls placed by ex- 
tension stations from these private exchanges are trunked to 
a manual switchboard in the Olive office building, this switch- 
board having the familiar subscriber multiple of all the private 
exchange trunk lines. The incoming private exchange trunk 
lines, however, are carried through Keith line switches, the 
function of which is to select a non-busy operator and to place 
the line lamp signal before that operator. This arrangement 


2) 250,000 al aT 
4 ee 
S 200,000 |! *\Actual Reeords | 
3 | . - 
3 i Total Calls | fs 
© 150,000 ) | 
2 | 
we T t ; tie to Manual 5 
3 100,000 SE estab i a 
= , |_ J-+=- = SSS 
a Le El Katomatie 
*} 50,000p J | 
aie 
oe 0 == are 4 
9 30 60 90 120 150 180 210. 240 


ELAPSED TIME IN DAYS FROM MAY 1, 1918 
Fic. 10—Curves SHOWING TENDENCY OF ORIGINATING CALLS BETWEEN 
Former Paciric anD HoME STATIONS 


is commonly known as the traffic distributor. This pre-selected 
operator then receives the request for either an automatic or 
manual number and if for the former, she dials the number as 
described above for manual A operators. If the called for 
number is for another private exchange station, the operator 
completes the connection in the multiple similar to a manual- 
to-manual connection and if the request is for a station in a 
manual office, it may be obtained by the use of order wires and 
trunks direct to the office required or over trunk lines to the 
special Olive office manual A board. All connections to and 
from the former Pacific manual private branch exchange sta- 
tions are completed in accordance with the above general 
methods of handling calls to and from manual stations 
Fig. 10 has been prepared to indicate the volumes of traffic 
expressed in calls that passed between the former automatic 
and manual stations as at the specified dates. The curve was 


1650 WISEMAN: TELEPHONE SYSTEMS [Feb. 7 


developed from the following records and immediately after 
the record of September 13, 1918. (Later records have since 
been taken and are shown by dots on the original curve.) 


Automatic Manual 
fe) to Total 
j £ Manual Automatic calls 
May 31 VOUS. scawreaPacs otters me 16,308 31,870 48,178 
(1 day before formal announce- 
ment) 

A fiigot eye 24 leon MONS ae cee eee i SR 71,883 70,921 142,804 
aL yl Oe a OSE. eee veka od. chemeue = 83,589 76,556 160,145 
AUsUSt los LOSI anh. dacs nas eee 95,059 80,285 « 175,344 
September 13; 1918.....8 J.85.. sc... 105,602 88,161 " 193,763 


So far as I know, no definite statement can be made as to 
the gains accruing to the subscribers at Los Angeles under the 
consolidated arrangement, because the most important factors 
are not capable of reduction to equated savings in dollars. 

Some of the major factors resulting in direct benefit are: 


1. Value to the subscribers resulting from telephone access 
to each and every subscriber in the Los Angeles exchange and 
to all long distance lines centering there. 

2. Rental savings resulting from the elimination of a large 
eae of duplicate stations and private exchange switch- 

oards. 

3. Elimination of the indirect economic loss due to confusion 
and community service inefficiency of separate telephone sys- 
tems. 


Some of the factors which tend to offset part of the savings 
are: , 


1. Added annual charges on the plant and equipment re- 
quired to provide means for universal service. There was 
very little elimination of duplicate plant investment primarily 
because each plant was designed to care for a definite develop- 
ment and volume of traffic. Consolidation obviously does not 
reduce traffic volume, but because the telephone field is con- 
siderably increased to every subscriber, the total volume of 
traffic in the consolidated plant is substantially increased. 

2. Added operating and maintenance costs. 


From a careful weighing of these factors it is manifest-that 
the consolidated plant offers substantial savings and benefits 
over the dual systems. The worth of a telephone system to 
any community lies, not only in its capacity for effecting 
good service but that such service shall be universal and 


available to the maximum possible number of local and dis- 
tant subscribers. . 


Presented at a Section Meeting of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, Pitisburgh, Pa., 
February 11, roto. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. E. 


SOME PROBLEMS IN THE OPERATION OF POWER 
PLANTS IN PARALLEL 


BY E. C. STONE 


ABSTRACT oF PApmr 


In order to operate two power plants satisfactorily in parallel, 
the transmission line which ties them together must have suffi- 
cient synchronizing power, as well as sufficient carrying capacity. 
The “‘synchronizing power”’ of a line depends upon its resistance 
and reactance, the bus voltages maintained at its ends, and the 
maximum kilovolt-amperes it must transmit. The ability of 
different lines to provide satisfactory parallel operation cannot 
be measured by any standard which does not take account of 
all of these factors. Limiting values for ‘‘synchronizing power’’ 
of lines under various operating conditions are given. 

The division of load between two plants in parallel is regulated 
by steam control; the diy sion of wattless current associated 
with the load depends upon the voltages generated and may 
be in proportion to the division of real load, when the difference 
in voltage at the two busses will vary with the load transmitted, 
or may be arbitrary so that regardless of the load transmitted, 
the voltages on the two busses will be maintained constant. 
The latter plan generally gives better operating conditions on 
the system as a whole, but creates demands for wattless currents 
at either or both plants in excess of their normal capacity, and in 
so doing, involves an additional cost. The excess wattless cross- 
current so created can be materially reduced by varying the volt- 
age with changes in load transmitted through the use of taps 
on the line transformers, by inserting additional reactance in the 
line at light loads, or, when the stations are tied together by 
several parallel lines, by cutting out one or more lines as the 
load decreases. 

The design of a transmission line involves a consideration of ~ 
load to be transmitted, voltage, reactance, resistance, losses, 
and charging current of the line, and of wattless generating 
capacity at the receiving end of the line. The wattless generat- 
ing capacity at the end of the line determines how many kilowatts 
will be transmitted for each ampere of line current, by fixing the 
power factor of the load transmitted and the voltage at the re- 
ceiving end of the line. When aline is to be designed for parallel- 
ing two plants, it must have sufficient ‘‘synchronizing power’ 
to hold the two plants together. 


HE advantages to be derived from the operation of all the 
power plants serving a territory in parallel are many and 
great. The maximum or peak capacity is increased because 
of the diversity of the load in different parts of the territory 
served; small plants with high operating costs are made avail- 
able for peak service only, without the injurious effects of 


— 1651 <2 i 


1652 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


interruption to service when loading them up and shutting 
them down; the strain of casrying sharp and sudden peak loads 
is distributed over the whole generating system; customers in 
all parts of the system are given the benefits in steady fre- 
quency and stability of power supply which come from drawing 
their power from a source of supply having a capacity vastly 
greater than their individual requirements. 

It is not possible, however, to merely synchronize all the 
power plants of a system together over any lines that may be 
available and obtain therefrom all the advantages of parallel 
operation without experiencing any difficulties. The steam 
governing devices of the various units at the different plants 
must be adjusted with respect to each other so as to properly 
divide the load at all times. The heavy concentration of 
power in short circuits which results from parallel operation 
requires that adequate circuit breakers and other protective 
devices must be installed. The transmission lines used for 
tying the plants together must have suitable characteristics and 
sufficient capacity. This paper deals with the latter subject. 

When a number of individual machines are operated in 
parallel in one power plant on a single bus, the impedance in 
the circuit connecting them is so small as to be quite negligible 
in its effect on the parallel operation of the machines. When 
however, two separate power plants are operated in parallel, 
the transmission line tying them together comes in between the 
busses, thereby increasing the impedance of the connecting 
circuit to many times that of a station bus and decreasing its 
carrying capacity correspondingly. The impedance and carry- 
ing capacity of a transmission line thus become very important 
factors in determining the manner in which the power plants 
which it ties together will operate in parallel. 

The action by which two alternating-current generators 
connected to a common bus are held in synchronism is com- 
monly understood. If one machine attempts a speed different 
from that of the other, a difference in phase immediately de- 
velops between their voltages, which causes a cross current 
to flow through the local circuit made up of their armature 
windings and leads and the bus section between them. Be- 
cause of the reactance in this circuit, the cross current is of 
such a phase as to transfer a part of the load carried by the 
lagging machine over to the leading machine. This in turn 
causes the former to speed up’and the latter to slow down, so 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1653 


that their voltages are brought back into phase and synchron- 
ism is maintained. 

When two power plants are operated in parallel, the action 
described above is modified by the insertion of the tie line in 
the local circuit between generators. The vector diagram for 
a given set of conditions as to plant voltages and line imped- 
ance, is shown in Fig. 1. When the two power plants are 
exactly in step so that their voltages E' and E, are in phase, 
the voltage across the circuit tying them together is e., the 
current I; and the power transmitted from station 1 is P». 
The station delivering power to the tie line will be designated 


Fig. 1—Vector DiacramM 


E = Voltage at Station 1. 

Ei\E£2E3 = Voltages at Station 2. 

e1e2e3 += Voltages across tie line. 

P1P2P3 = Power delivered to tie line from Station 1. 
R = Resistance of tie line. 

x = Reactance of tie line. 


Station 1 delivers power to line. 
Station 2 receives power from line 
X/R =1 E:2/E1 = 0.80 


as station 1 or the transmitting station, and the station re- 
ceiving power from the tie line will be designated as station 2 
or the receiving station. 

If station 2 speeds up so as to lead station 1 by the angle 
a,, the voltage on the tie line is increased to e, and the current 
to I, but since J, is at right angles to HL’, the power transmitted 
from station 1 to station 2 is zero. Thus station 2, by ad- 
vancing position from position E, to position E, has taken 
from station 1 an additional load equal to P,. On the other 
hand, if station 2 lags behind the angle a;, the current becomes 
I; and power P3, so that station 2 has then dropped an amount 
of load equal to P; — P2 which amount has been taken up by 


1654 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


station 1, loading up the tie line still further until a certain criti- 
cal angle of lag is reached beyond which the load transmitted 
over the tie line decreases instead of increases. 

The curves of Fig. 2 show how the amount of power trans- 
mitted—or load transferred—over tie lines having the same re- 
sistance, but different reactances, varies with variation in the 
phase angle between the voltages of the plants tied together. 
These curves represent the theoretical transmission of power, 
on the assumption that the line-copper losses are part of the 
load carried from the plant busses and are divided between 


} | $21.00 
$0.577 or 1.732 


Fa ae 
| -01364 or 2.748, “268 
-—--0.176 or 5.6717 
R 
oe VA, 


| 

0.200 | ae Y, 
POWER TRANSMITTED 

| FROM STATION 2 
& 0 TO STATION 1 


60° F 


Fig. 2—Powerr TRANSMISSION Over Tin Line 
Resistance and voltages constant. 
Line reactance and phase-angle between station voltages variable. 
Three-phase circuit. , 
@ = phase angle between Ei and Eo. 


8 =tan-! F/R 
XR XR 
=cos Bsin Bsina = —sina. 
Ex E2 Z? 


the plants in proportion to their bus voltages. This was 
done in order to show the real transfer of load that takes place 
between the two plants. These curves, and all other curves in 
this paper are calculated for three-phase transmission, the 
values of power being the total power transmitted and the 
values of voltage, the voltage between line wires of the circuit. 

The forces tending to pull paralleled plants out of phase are 
produced by the variations in the supply of power to the genera- 
tors and by the variations in the loads drawn from their busses. 
For example, assuming that the steam governing devices are 
set so as to make the two plants share the total load equally 


— 


1919 ] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1655 


at all times, one-half of any increase in the load on the bus of 
one station would have to be carried by the other. That this 
could be done, the station at whose bus the increase occurred 
would have to drop behind by a phase angle sufficiently large 
to permit of the necessary additional amount of power being 
transmitted over the tie line to meet the new condition. The 
higher the impedance of the tie line, the greater will be the 
phase angle required; and if the increase in load takes place 
suddenly, the lagging plant will at first drop too far behind 
because of its inertia, and will perform several ‘‘vibrations’’ 
before coming stable in its new position.. In practise, therefore, 
the phase angle is constantly varying, the degree of variation 
depending on the magnitude and rapidity of the load fluctua- 
tions and on the impedance of the tie line. If it varies too 
rapidly or over too wide a range, an unstable or “pumping’”’ 
condition will be created, which will cause swinging loads on 
the machines and bad voltage fluctuations, and may sufficiently 
increase the current in the tie line to open the line breakers and 
separate the plants. To obtain satisfactory parallel operation, 
therefore, the resistance and reactance of the tie line must be 
low enough to. permit of a sufficiently free exchange of power 
between plants so that under the most severe conditions of 
load fluctuations the phase angle between stations will never 
vary sufficiently to cause harmfully unstable conditions or to 
open line breakers. In general, practical limitations of carry- 
ing capacity of the conductor and of line losses limit the maxi- 
mum permissible phase angle to from 10 to 30 degrees. 

The ability of any line to hold two plants together in satis- 
factory parallel operation may be called its ‘Synchronizing ° 
Power,” which is defined as the change in the amount of power 
that the line will transmit for each degree change in phase dis- 
placement of the voltages of the stations it ties together. 
Mathematically, this means the rate of change in power trans- 
mitted with respect to change in phase angle, and is represented 
by the “slope” of the curves of Fig. 2. The formula is as 


follows: 
: EE, xX 


1000 * we *% COS %- 


Psi= 


where 
E, = voltage at transmitting station. 


Ey, =) voltage at receiving station, 


1656 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


X = thereactance of the tie line. 
Z = theimpedance of the tie line. 
a = the phase angle between H, and F,. 

Ps = synchronizing power in kilowatts. 

To be rigidly accurate, the X and Z used above should in- 
clude the armature windings and bus connections of the genera- 
tors at the plants, but as these generally have very low im- 
pedance compared to the impedance of the line, they can or- 
dinarily be neglected. 

On a given line, the greatest change in the amount of power 
transmitted for a given change in phase angle between the 
station voltages occurs when the phase angle is zero, while 


40m 
3022 
S = 
20 2 
cent|/Copper loss 1043 ) 
in Tie Line aS 

% 1 2 3 4 5 aa 

Xx 
=z oS 


Fig. 3—SyncuronizING Power Unprr NoRMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS 


Power factor of load transmitted taken as unity. 
Py, = EiE2, X/Z2 cosa 


the least change occurs when the angle is 90 degrees. (See 
Fig. 2). The synchronizing power of a given line is therefore 
a maximum when the phase angle is zero and zero when the 
phase angle is 90 degrees. Since the phase angle increases as 
the load transmitted increases, the synchronizing power de- 
creases as the load transmitted increases. 

The curves of Fig. 3 show the synchronizing power of lines 
having the same resistance with varying reactances, when 
carrying loads of from 0 to one-half the synchronizing power 
of the line. It will be seen that for a line of given resistance the 
synchronizing power is greatest when the reactance-resistance 
ratio of the line is unity and decreases rapidly as this ratio 
changes from unity value. 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1657 


While the synchronizing power of a line as defined above may 
be easily calculated, it is not so easy to determine the amount of 
synchronizing power that is necessary in a given case to secure 
satisfactory parallel operation. This will depend on many 
factors—among them the types of prime movers and their 
load-speed characteristics, and the character of the load de- 
livered from the busses of the two plants. Reciprocating 
engine plants will require higher synchronizing power than 
turbine plants. Loads having rapid and large fluctuations 
will require more synchronizing power than steady loads. In 
checking up a number of actual cases, it has been found that 
under the conditions of fluctuating power load as found in the 
Pittsburgh district, the least line synchronizing power which 
will give satisfactory parallel operation of large turbine plants, 
with the relatively steady load of large systems, is a synchroniz- 
ing power approximately equal to the capacity of the smaller 
plant to be paralleled, while with smaller plants, consisting 
partly of reciprocating engines and partly of turbines and the 
relatively high load fluctuations of the smaller systems, the 
tie line to give stable operation must have a synchronizing 
power equal to not less than 1.5 times the capacity au the 
smaller plant. 

Inasmuch as the synchronizing power of a tie line depends 
upon a number of factors as explained above, it is obvious that 
any accurate criterion of the ability of a given line to hold two 
plants together must take account of all these factors. For 
example, it is sometimes said that a line having a capacity 
equal to a certain percentage of that of the smaller plant to 
be paralleled will give satisfactory operation. Yet two lines 
may be designed for just this capacity at the same voltage with 
widely different synchronizing powers. For similar reasons 
it cannot be assumed that a line which develops not more than 
a certain copper loss will be satisfactory, for such a statement 
does not take account of all of the variables. 

Synchronizing power of the tie line becomes a limiting factor 
when the line voltage is low for the distance transmitted. 
When the value of volts per mile is relatively high, the syn- 
chronizing power will be found ample. 

Synchronizing power must be given equal consideration 
whether there are generators or loaded synchronous motors 
at the receiving end of the line. It is unimportant in connec- 
tion with synchronous condensers, however, since the energy 


1658 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


which they take is always a very small percentage of the maxi- 
mum power transmitted over the line. 

The division of load between two plants in parallel depends 
of course upon the governor adjustments on the steam end of 
the prime movers; the division of wattléss load associated 
with the energy load depends upon the voltages generated by 
the two plants and may be entirely different from the division 
of real load or energy supply. Thus the plant atone end of a 
line might supply all of the energy required while the plant at 
the other end might supply all of the wattless load. 

By suitable voltage adjustments the plant which supplies 
power to the tie line may be made always to supply the wattless 
component associated with that power—under which condition 
the difference in voltage at the two busses will vary with the 
load on the line, being zero at no-load and a maximum when 
the maximum load is transmitted. Ordinarily, however, this 
operation produces too wide a range of voltage at the station 
busses to be satisfactory, and it becomes necessary to regulate 
the voltages within a closer range. This is possible, since the 
difference in voltage which is developed between the two ends 
of a transmission line when power is transmitted over it, de- 
pends not only on the amount of power transmitted but also 
on the amount of wattless energy. Given a certain voltage 
difference to be maintained between the ends of the line, there 
is a certain amount of load which with the wattless component 
associated with it, will. just absorb that voltage difference. 
When the power transmitted is less than this value it becomes 
necessary in order to maintain the required voltage difference 
to set up a wattless cross current between the generators of 
the two stations, which current has the effect of lowering the 
power factor of the transmitting station and raising the 
power factor of the receiving station. When the power trans- 
mitted is more than the given value, the cross current must 
be in the opposite phase and has the opposite effect on the 
power factors of the two stations. The result is that the trans- 
mitting station has excess wattless current to take care of when 
the load on the tie line is light while the receiving station has 
excess wattless current to take care of when the load on the 
tie line is heavy. This is provided for by installing generators 
rated at a sufficiently low power factor or by installing syn- 
chronous condensers. At stations where the excessive cross 
current occurs only at periods of light load, more generators 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1659 


of normal power factor rating may be run at such periods than 
would be required by the energy load only—a method which 
is wasteful of coal, but may be more economical than the in- 
stallation of additional equipment to take care of off-peak 
wattless current. 

Fig. 4 shows how the wattless current in lines of different 
characteristics must be varied as the energy transmitted 
varies, in order to maintain constant bus voltages at both 
stations. Where the curves are below the horizontal zero 
line the wattless current in the tie line is lagging with respect 
to the voltage of the transmitting station and leading with 
respect to that of the receiving station. Where the curves 


0.300 — 
og Above Zero Line| Watt- 
imsiaicieniast zi le ss |Current eles by 
rac | | | Sta/tion receiving Power 
0.200 }-— | from~Tie-Lime} 
o | } | | | sah \ p | 
5 | ia | 
(0.100 | f l | >; A 
Ee eae alee | 
E,| | é | 
=i = at CA Prrstiels0 
$=567,, — a) Power opTie Line transmit- 
Sa ae | {ted a/Unity Power Facto 
is FR L173} / } 
£70.10 ies heed Fh /—Below, Zero-Line-Watt 
a hig” less Current supplied by 
z | we | Pass, Station delivering Power to 
a) | le Li : 
g 0.200 +—F of ; ! | Tie ie +L} 
$036 | +} ei had 
in J | 


08 | 
0.300 : 
0 0.040 0.080 0.120 0.160 0.200 


PR 
wey 


Fic. 4—Warriess Current vs. Pownr IN Tie Line 


are above the zero line, the wattless current is leading with 
respect to the voltage of the transmitting station and lagging 
with respect to the voltage of the receiving station. 
The important points brought out by the curves of Fig. 4 are: 
(1) The variation in wattless current for a given variation 
in load is very much greater where the reactance-resistance 
ratio of the line is low than where it is high. This means that 
the wattless cross current required to maintain constant bus 
voltages and the excess copper losses and wattless generating 
capacities arising therefrom increase very rapidly as the reac- 
tance-resistance ratio of the line decreases. 
_ (2) When the same voltage is maintained on the busses of 


4 


1660 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


both stations and load is transmitted over the tie line, the 
wattless cross current which is set up, always leads the voltage 
of the transmitting station and increases as the load trans- 
mitted increases. This means that the receiving station not 
only must supply all of the wattless current associated with 
the load received from the other station, but must also supply 
a certain amount of wattless cross current to the line in order 
to hold up the bus voltage. 

(3) In order that the lagging wattless current associated 
with a given load as well as the load itself may be transmitted 
by the tie line, the voltage at the receiving station must be 
lower than that of the transmitting station. 

(4) In view of the conditions shown by Fig. 4, it is necessary 
when laying out an installation in which constant voltages are 
to be maintained at the power station busses, to consider the 
conditions created when the minimum amount of power, as 
well as when the maximum amount is transmitted over the 
tie line. 

In this connection it is interesting to note that the maximum 
amount of power which can be transmitted over a given line 
is independent of the reactance when sufficient wattless current 
can be generated at the end of the line, and depends only on 
the resistance of the line. It is that amount of power which 
equals the square of the transmitting voltage divided by four 
times the resistance. The voltage at the receiving end to give 
the maximum power is equal to the impedance divided by 
twice the resistance, hence is one-half of the transmitting volt- 
age when there is no reactance, is equal to the transmitting 
voltage when the reactance is 1.732 times the resistance, and 
is greater than the transmitting voltage for a greater reactance. 
The very excessive line loss and wattless generating capacity 
required at the receiving end prohibit ever taking from a line 
the maximum amount of power that it can transmit. 

When it becomes necessary to maintain the same bus voltages 
‘at both stations with very light loads transmitted as are main- 
tained at full load, the wattless cross current may develop into 
an item of considerable cost. For this reason it becomes de- 
sirable to reduce it as much as possible. This can be done in 
two ways as follows: 

a. By varying the voltage delivered to the tie line at the 
transmitting station as the load varies. ? 

b. By varying the impedance of the tie line as the load varies. 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS. IN PARALLEL 1661 


The voltage delivered to the tie line is varied through the 
use of taps on the line transformers, or by means of an inductive 
regulator or synchronous booster. This method causes little rf 
variation in the synchronizing power of the tie lines, but in- 
volves considerable expense for special equipment. 

The impedance of the tie line is varied through the use of 
reactance external to the lines or, when the tie circuit consists 
of several lines in parallel, by varying the number of lines in 
service. Both of these methods decrease the synchroniznig 
power as the impedance is increased, but involve little or no 
cost for special equipment, and will be found of very real value 
in many cases. It often happens that by a simple switching 
operation some of the short-circuit limiting reactances at the 
power stations can be switched into the lines used for parallel- 
ing, so that the impedance of these lines can be materially in- 
creased at light load periods. Changing the number of lines 
in service is of course accomplished by the use of the switches 
regularly installed with the lines, and so requires no special 
equipment at all. 

The design of a line to transmit a given amount of power 
over a given distance involves a consideration of voltage, resis- 
tance, reactance, losses, and charging current of the line, and 
of wattless generating capacity in the form of synchronous 
condensers at the receiving end of the line. The selection of 
the proper voltage involves many factors outside of the scope 
of this paper, and will not be discussed. To obtain a minimum 
total cost of line at any given voltage, the annual cost of the 
copper losses in the line should equal the annual cost of the 
investment in copper; then, in order to obtain the minimum 
total cost of transmission, the proper size of synchronous con- 
denser should be installed at the end of the minimum cost line 
to give the minimum total cost of line and condenser per kilo- 
watt delivered at the end of the line. Thus the cost of copper 
and copper losses determine the resistance of the line, while 
the cost of synchronous condenser capacity in relation to the | 
cost of the line determines how many kilowatts will be trans- 
mitted for each ampere of line current, by fixing the power 
factor of the load transmitted, and what is equally important, 
the voltage at the receiving end of the line. The charging cur- 
rent due to the capacitance of the line produces the effect of 
approximately the equivalent number of kilovolt-amperes in 
synchronous condenser capacity located at the middle point 
of the line and supplied with no additional investment. 


1662 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL (Feb. 11 


When a line is to be designed for paralleling two plants, the 
minimum as well as the maximum amount of power to be 
transmitted, and the direction of transmission of each, must 
be determined from the characteristic curves of the loads sup- 
plied from the two busses, from the operating schedules desired 
of the prime movers at the respective stations, and to a lesser 
degree, from the load-speed characteristics of the machines and 
the fluctuating or steady nature of the load. The synchroniz- 


PR MSL a) AEE Bees 

77\\Total Cost Transmission | f 

Psyc ae a tee + — 

Relative Total 

Transmission Cost | 
Zs 1—_JSyn!Condenser Cap 

Kw.transmitted + 


1 


me POWER /TRANSMISSION|_|__| 
7oltage-Constant P.F.' onstant Voltage-Variable Power Factor 
=" 1 A 1 if 


Ged Relative Cost + |_| ; : 


Condenser Cap 
Exces: Wattless at no | 
Load |per Max. Kw] 


| transmitted | 
Rea NL pds al Sy rg ach c eu 
Ola a 7 Relative| Cost of 
(PALSY ee no Load] Wattless | 
1 2 3 4 2} 1 2 3 4 5 
oe x 
R x 


Fic. 5—Power Transmission Data 
Transmission voltage 1000 volts per mile. 
Cost of copper = Cost of copper loss. 


Synchronous condenser capacity and receiving voltage to give minimum total trans- 
mission cost. 


Power factor of load = 0.8. 
Minimum load = 0. 


ing power must also be given due consideration, and if constant 
bus voltages are to be maintained with a variable load trans- 
mitted between stations, the cost of the additional line loss 
and additional wattless generating capacity required because 
of the cross current, as well as the cost of the line and syn- 
chronous condenser capacity, must be considered in designing 
the line for minimum total cost of operation. | 
In Fig. 5, curves have been calculated on the basis just 
outlined to determine the minimum total cost of transmission 


a 
\ 


1919} STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1663 


of a constant amount of power at a fixed voltage per mile, 
and the synchronizing power of the line resulting therefrom 
for various values for the ratio of reactance to resistance of 
the line. The following figures have been assumed as a basis: 

Transmission voltage, 1000 volts per mile. 

Cost of copper, 22 cents per pound. 

Cost of synchronous condenser capacity, $5.00 per kv-a. 

Losses of condenser, 0.035 kw. per kv-a. of capacity. 

Annual cost of investment, 15 per cent. 

Cost of energy, 2 mills per kilowatt-hour. 

Power factor of load delivered from busses of both stations, 
80 per cent. 

Load factor, 50 per cent. 

-Range of load transmitted, 0 to maximum. 

The reactance-resistance ratio of the line is determined chiefly 
by the frequency, size-of conductors, and design of the step-up 
and step-down transformers. The inherent reactance of trans- 
formers goes up rapidly with their voltage, because of the in- 
creased spacing required between their high- and low-tension 
windings, and low reactance at high voltages is attained only 
by an abnormal and costly design. The reactance of a given 
line at given frequency, therefore, can only be reduced by 
splitting it up into a number of parallel lines having smaller 
conductors and providing abnormally designed transformers, 
both of which methods are very costly. On the other hand, 
the reactance of a line can be readily increased to almost any 
desired value for a few per cent of the cost of the line by the 
installation of reactance coils. It is therefore fortunate that 
good voltage regulation can be attained with high reactances. 

High voltage lines are generally designed for large blocks 
of power, making the combined reactance of the large conduc- 
tors and of the transformers inherently high. Low voltage 
lines, with relatively small conductors, and often no transform- 
ers, have inherently low reactance. 

On the left hand side of the curve sheet, Fig. 5, are shown 
the conditions where the bus voltage of the receiving station 
varies with the load. As the reactance-resistance ratio in- 
creases from 1 to 5.5, the total cost of transmission increases 
16 per cent, showing that high reactance means a slight in- 
crease in total cost of transmission, under the minimum cost 
conditions. ‘The synchronous condenser capacity goes up 
from 0.33 kv-a. per kilowatt transmitted, corresponding to 


1664 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


90 per cent power factor lagging in the line, to 1.06 kv-a. per 
kilowatt transmitted; corresponding to 95 per cent power 
factor leading in the line. Unity power factor obtains when 
the reactance-resistance ratio is 1.8. The cost of the condenser 
capacity varies from 9 per cent to 35 per cent of the cost of 
the line and line losses. 

On the right hand side of Fig. 5 are shown conditions when 
the bus voltages are held constant as the load on the line is 
varied from zero to the maximum for which the line is designed. 
The wattless cross current necessary to maintain constant bus 
voltages introduces an additional element of cost, so that the 
total cost is higher than before for all values of the reactance- 
resistance ratio of the line. Furthermore, the total cost in- 
creases, instead of decreases, as this ratio decreases. This:is 
because, with a given line resistance, the cross current required 
to maintain constant voltage increases rapidly as the reactance 
decreases, as is indicated by the curve showing the wattless 
cross current required with no power transmitted, which runs 
from zero for a reactance-resistance ratio of 5.7 up to 0.67 
kv-a. per kilowatt of line capacity when the ratio is unity. 
The minimum attainable cost under these conditions is how- 
ever very nearly reached when the reactance-resistance ratio 
is 2.5, so that the only advantage to be gained by a greater 
proportion of reactance is the raising of the voltage at the re- 
ceiving end of the line, a feature which is only of importance 
when power is transmitted in both directions. 

Under constant voltage conditions, more synchronous con- 
denser capacity is used, with the result of raising the voltage 
at the receiving station and cutting out sufficient wattless cross 
current to more than pay for the additional condenser capacity. 
The cost of the condenser capacity runs from 30 per cent to 40 
per cent of the cost of the line and line losses. 

The ratio of synchronizing power to maximum load trans- 
mitted over the specified tie line varies from approximately 6, 
when the reactance-resistance ratio is 1, down to 1.3 when the 


ratio is 5.7—slightly higher than before because of the higher 
receiving voltages. 


The curve giving values of aoe! may be called the aes 
aes 


sign curve. With the transmission voltage E, fixed, the resis- 
tance F of the line which will transmit a given amount of power 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1665 


P at minimum cost, or the amount of power P which can be 
transmitted at minimum cost per kilowatt over a line having a 
given resistance R can be obtained immediately from this 
curve. 

Comparing the curves under the condition of variable or 
constant bus voltage, it is found that for a reactance-resistance 
ratio in the line of 5.7, the constant bus voltages are obtained 
at practically no additional cost. As the ratio decreases, 
however, the cost of securing constant bus voltages increases, 
being 8 per cent of the total transmission cost for a ratio of 8, 
and 31 per cent for a ratio of 1. If the inherent reactance of 
a specified line is not high enough to give economical operation 
additional reactance in the form of reactance coils can be in- 
serted at a cost of only a few per cent of the cost of the line. 
Under the conditions assumed, therefore, constant bus voltages 
should be obtained for an increase of not more than 10 per cent 
of the total cost of transmission—which is a very low cost 
for the advantages to be gained thereby. 

The transmission voltage in relation to the distance of trans- 
mission has a very direct bearing on the line design problem. 
In the curves it has been assumed to be 1000 volts per mile of 
line. If the number of volts per mile is lower, more synchron- 
ous condenser capacity will be used and the synchronizing 
power will be decreased and may become the limiting factor 
of the design, especially when the power to be transmitted is 
a small part of the station capacity. In this case, it becomes 
necessary to use more copper than is required for the load, or 
to reduce the reactance, or to do both, in order to obtain suffi- 
cient synchronizing power. 

If the number of volts per mile is greater than 1000, less 
synchronous condenser capacity will be used and more syn- 
chronizing power will be obtained than is indicated in Fig. 5. 

In general, it will be found that where constant bus voltages 
are necessary, the best tie line will be the one which has the 
greatest reactance consistent with the necessary synchronizing 
power. Transmission with high reactance, however, necessi- 
tates an ample amount of wattless generating capacity at the 
receiving station, in order to hold up the voltage. Where 
this is not available, so that a considerable amount of wattless 
current must be supplied with the load from the transmitting 
station, high line reactance is impracticable and the cost of 
maintaining constant bus voltages is greatly increased. 


1666 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


In Figs. 6 and 7 are shown data worked out for specific cases, 
to determine how the wattless cross current could be reduced. 
In both cases it was necessary to maintain constant bus voltages 
at the two plants to be paralleled. In Fig. 6, loads varying 
from 0 to 15,000 kw. were.to be transmitted from one station 
to the other. In order to keep the excess wattless current— 
by which is meant the wattless current which either station 
would be called upon to supply in addition to that associated 
with the real load it was delivering—below the limit of 4000 
kv-a., it was necessary to provide four additional taps on the 


Solid Lines show Excess 
Wattless Current supplied 
by Plant receiving Power 
from Tie Line 
Transmitting 
Station Bus 


Dotted Lines show Excess 
Wattless Current supplied 
by Plant supplying Power to 
Tie Line 


WATTLESS KILOVOLT - AMPERES 
Co 
ro) 
fo} 
ro) 


Tie Line 


\ 


0) 4000 8000 “12000 16000 
KILOWATTS TRANSMITTED 


Fir. 6—Errecr or Varyine Bus Vouraces 
Transmission on four No. 0 lines in parallel. 
Resistance = 0.520hn. X/R = 1.33 
Power factor of load 0.8. Voltage £1 = 11,000. 
Synchronizing power = 2.25 times the capacity of plant to be tied in. 


line transformers and four additional oil switches at the trans- 
mitting station to give the voltages as shown. Fig. 7 shows 
how in a given case, where two lines tie the two plants together, 
the wattless cross current was reduced at light load periods 
by switching in a bus limiting reactance already installed, which 
happened to be just large enough to double the reactance-resist- 
ance ratio of the line. Fig. 7 also shows the effect of cutting 
out one of the two tie lines. 

Fig. 8 is a chart which was worked out to guide the system 
operators in regulating the cross current between the stations 
connected by two lines. If two lines are in service and the 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1667 


power factor drops below 45 per cent, one line is immediately 
cut out. This doubles the kilowatts transmitted by the re- 
maining line, but does not increase its current, so that by cutting 
out the other line approximately 180 amperes of cross current 
are eliminated. 

In concluding with a brief summary, it must be borne in 
mind that in designing a tie line to meet any specified condition 
many variables enter the problem. In general, costs of copper, 
steel, and coal go up and down together, so that absolute costs 
are not so important as relative costs of these items. The load 
factor of the power transmitted affects the overall costs of 


| Synchronizing Power | | | T | | 7 
-—_ Station Capacity So SS ee 
No. Lines a Poles | tine Salt eal 
10,000/7 7 ~~ 2 i). Jae Ff] | 
| 2 250 © 1.11| ish | 
ae E9005 eae eae oa oe ania ee I 
2.50 0.56|___| Capacity of 2 Lines 
go90—|—- = — ~$ - 4 — 2 Rape ee 
vas 
(7 2-Lines|f = 1/255} 
ae | 


ae | | 
|__| 2\Lines #-/2.50} 


LINE KV-A. 


Ca acity of 1 Line 


“— Kw-a.vs. Kw. transmitted 
Resistance“per Line = 4.80 ohms 
oe 


4000 .- 6000 8000 
KW. TRANSMITTED 


| oS 
| 
| 
| 
4 
| 


4 
Fia. 7—REGULATION oF WATTLESS CrosS CURRENT BY VARYING THE 
REACTANCE AND NuMBER oF Tik Lines IN SERVICE 


line losses, and therefore the amount of the copper used. The 
transmission voltage in relation to the transmission distance 
has a very direct bearing on the amount of synchronous con- 
denser capacity to be used, and on the synchronizing power of 
the line. Since the data and curves which have been shown 
are based upon a series of specific assumptions, which while 
sufficiently correct under the conditions at hand, might have 
to be materially changed to meet other conditions, the data 
presented are of interest in showing the relative weight of the 
different factors rather than in determining absolute values. 
It is hoped that in showing the effect of the different variables 
on the problem as a whole, a guide may be furnished to the 


1668 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


lines which should be followed in working out any specific 
case. With these limitations in mind, the following points 
may be emphasized: 

In order to operate two power plants satisfactorily in parallel 
the transmission line which ties them together must have 
sufficient “synchronizing power,” as well as sufficient carrying 
capacity to carry the maximum load to be transmitted between 
them. The synchronizing power of a given line depends upon 
its resistance and reactance, upon the bus voltages maintained 
at its ends, and upon the maximum kilovolt amperes it must 


; E 
| £2.0.85 
4000 Ey 
- a 
3000 £20.87 
=e 1 
yn 
Sno 
= 
[e) 
ot 
2 
1000 | 
320.85 
SD oat oaket td oleae ba Capacity ob Line spelee be Hrd 
s fp 
xt 
Eo 
160 t F-0.87 
as =35 | a 
0 20 60 80 100 


40 
PERCENT POWER FACTOR 


Fie. 8—System Opmrator’s WORKING DIAGRAM 
Performance of one tie line. 
R =4.8 ohms. X = 6.0 ohms. 


transmit. The ability of different lines to provide satisfactory 
parallel operation cannot be measured by any standard which 
does not take account of all of these factors. It has been 
found from the writer’s experience that a synchronizing power 
about equal to the kilowatt capacity of the smaller plant to be 
paralleled, for large turbine plants with load fluctuations of 
relatively small percentage of their capacity, and of 1.5 times 
the smaller plant capacity for mixed engine and turbine plants 

with relatively large load fluctuations, is about the least that 
a line can have to give satisfactory parallel operation. 

When the voltage per mile of transmission is high, line 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1669 


capacity, as determined by load and operating conditions at 
the two stations, is the limiting factor; when the voltage per 
mile is low, synchronizing power more often marks the limit, 
especially when the reactance is high and the load to be trans- 
mitted relatively small. The necessity for sufficient line 
synchronizing power applies equally whether generators or 
loaded synchronous motors are at the end of the line, but is 
unimportant in connection with synchronous condensers at the 
end of the line. 

The design of equipment for transmitting a block of power 
over a given distance at minimum cost must take into account 
the use of synchronous condenser capacity at the receiving end 
of the line. The condenser is effective in raising the receiving 
voltage as well as in controlling the transmission power factor, 
and materially reduces the amount of copper required in the 
line. The amount of condenser capacity which may be 
economically used depends on the power factor of the load, the 
relation between the cost of line capacity and condenser 
capacity, and the reactance-resistance ratio of the line. Where 
this ratio is high, sufficient condenser capacity may be justified 
to produce a considerable leading component in the tie line 
current. In a line of given resistance, with the receiving 
voltage unregulated, the total cost of transmission increases 
slightly with the increase in reactance. 

Where synchronous machines of sufficient capacity, either 
condensers or generators, are installed at both ends of the line, 
the bus voltage of both stations can be maintained constant as 
the load transmitted over the line varies, by the creation of a 
wattless cross current. This wattless current, however, 
involves an additional cost in copper loss and in the wattless 
generating capacity required at one or both stations to take 
care of it, which cost is small when the reactance-resistance 
ratio of the line is sufficiently high, but which rapidly increases 
as the reactance decreases, and for low line reactance becomes 
very important. This wattless current can be materially 
reduced under certain conditions, by varying the voltages at 
the ends of the line as the load varies through the use of trans- 
former taps, by inserting additional reactance in the line at 
light loads, or, when the stations are tied together by several 
parallel lines, by cutting out one or more lines as the load 


decreases. 
The increase in the cost of transmission with constant bus 


1670 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


voltages caused by this wattless cross current represents the cost 
of eliminating the regulation of the tie line. The wattless cross 
current decreases as the reactance-resistance ratio of the line 
increases, but the synchronizing power also decreases. Henceit 
will generally be found that the best design of transmission 
equipment for constant bus voltages is that which makes the 
reactance of the line as high as is permissible for the synchroniz- 
ing power required. With such a design, the cost of maintain- 
ing constant bus voltages—that is, of eliminating the regulation 
of the tie line—does not amount to more than a few per cent of 
the total cost of transmission, which is a very small price to pay 
for the operating advantages gained. It must be remembered, 
however, that to obtain constant bus voltages at this slight 
cost, the installation of sufficient wattless generating capacity 
at the receiving station is absolutely essential—a feature, 
unfortunately, that is too often lacking in existing systems. 


APPENDIX 


In what follows, the formulas are developed which were 
used in calculating the data presented in the foregoing paper. 
Referring to Fig. 9, 
Let E or E, = Voltage at transmitting station. 
E,or kE = Voltage at receiving station. 


Ey = Voltage across tie circuit. 

k = 1./E 

a = Angle between E and E, 

z = Impedance of tie circuit 

r = Resistance of tie circuit 

re = Reactance of tie circuit 

ep me = tan z/r 

P, = Power delivered to tie circuit by transmitting 
station in watts. 

W, = Wattless delivered to tie circuit by trans- 
mitting station in volt-amperes 

VA, = Total volt amperes delivered to tie circuit by 
transmitting station 

te = Power received from tie circuit by receiving 
station, in watts 

W, = Wattless received from tie circuit by receiving 
station in volt-amperes 

VA, = Total volt-amperes received from tie circuit by 


receiving station 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 1671 


ie = Synchronizing power of tie circuit, in watts 
I = Current in tie circuit, in amperes 
61, A. = Angles between voltages as shown in Fig. 9. 
rs 
3 


in cos(B-0)! 


1 

' 

! 

' 

SS. 1 
~~ ' 

_— 
es 
iene 


Fig. 9—VoutTaGeE AND CURRENT RevatTions WHEN Power 1s TRANs- 
MITTED Over Tin LINE 


From the triangle of voltages, 


H,+ Ez, +3 tan % (6. + 64) Ps lia k 


fees tan 34465 .6,). 1k (1) 
—k 
V6 (6.— 6@,) = tan ( Le - cotan --) (2) 
Ve (02 + 61) = % (180 — a) = 90— a/2 (3) 
Adding (2) and (3) 
6, = 90 — a/2 + tan- z+ cotan 0/2 (4) 
whence 
tan a/2 = aa cotan a/2 
tan (90 — 62) = eee 
1+ aa tan a/2 cotan a/2 
k— cosa 
£ sin @ (5) 
Therefore 
‘ —k 
cotan (180 — 62) = — tan (90 — 62) = ee (6) 


Subtracting (2) from (3) 


a x 1-—k a) 


1672 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL [Feb. 11 


whence 
tan oe + eee cotan ate 
t ieee ee we 1+k 2 
ae ( =f y = ke (leek tan sae cotan Le 
1l+k 2 2 
rene : k COS a (8) 
-sin @ 
Therefore 
pian eee OS (9) 


k sin a 


Again from the voltage triangle, 


Ol eum ean os ge: 
Ey S k H 3 sin 6, (10) 
whence 
kE sina 
Li pet Bia . , 
_ KE sin a © cos 8B sina ‘ 
and I, og Eo kE. ae (12) 
Now 
P, =E.1I,).cos(B— 4;) (13) 
kcos 8 sine 
ae 2 — 
ee _ an 6, °° (6B — @;) (14) 
pee k cos B sin a 
r sin 6; 
. (cos 6 cos 6; + sin 6 sin 6;) (15) 
= i?, ee (cos 8 sin a cotan 0; + sin asin B) 


(16) 
By substituting value of cotan 6; from (9) 
P, = E*/rk cos B 


(sin asin 8 + sin a cos 8 jean OOS ) 


ksin a 
(17) 
= H?/rk cos B 


cos 6 
k 


( sin asin 8 + — cos a cos B ) (18) 


= b?/r k cos? B (sina tan B + 1/k — cos a) (19) 


1919] STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 
Again, W, = E'.I,.sin(B— 06,) 
Sir k cos B sin a 
? sin 6, 
(sin 8 cos 6;— cos 6 sin 6;) 


ie k cos B 
r 


(sin a sin 6 cotan 6; — sin a cos £) 
Substituting value of cotan 6, from (9) 
W, = E?/rk cos B 


(sin a sin B {ee} — sin-a@ cos 8) 


= — E?/rksin B cos B 


sin @ 1 
eS ee OT re ) 


— E?/rk cos? B tan B 
i 1 
(By +e +) 


cos 8 sina 
VAg= Elo = Bh B .——— .e 


E? k 8 sin @ 
ar oe (1 + cotan? a)” 


Il 


E? : (kh? +1—2kcosa)”¥% 
See 0s NRRL GS aero ren prepree meeoe 


V A, = E*/reos B (1+ k?-—2kcosa)% 
Similarly, 
P, =E,I1.,cos(8— {180— 42} ) 
W,. =E,I,sin (8B — {180 — 62} ) 


A= teh, Seen See sin a 


1673 


(20) 
(21) 


(22) 


(23) 


(24) 


(28) 
(26) 
(27) 


(28) 


(29) - 


(30) 
(31) 


7’ sin (180—0,) 9? 


From which are obtained by substituting for cotan (180 — 02) 


. cosa—k : ; 
i ——_—— d in (6). 
its equal es ites obtained in (6) 


1674 STONE: POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL (Feb. 11 


P, = E*/rk cos? B (sinatan 8 + cosa — k) (33) 
ey Ds sin @ 

Ws = a8 cos? 8 tan a( fangs +k—- cos a.) (34) 

VA.= E*/rkcos 814+ k?-—2k cosa)” (35) 


Copper Loss in tie Circuit. It is obvious that the copper 
losses in the tie circuit are equal to the power delivered to one 
end of the tie circuit minus the power received-at the other end. 
That is, (36) 
Ifr= P,— P.= E*/rk cos? 6 (sina tan 6 + 1/k — cos a) 

— k?/rk cos? B (sin atan B + cosa — k) 


= E?/r k cos? B (k + 1/k — 2 cos a) (37) 
Synchronizing Power. It may be assumed that the elements 
of line loss in P; and P, are variable loads supplied from the 
busses of transmitting and receiving stations, respectively. On 
this basis, the power actually transferred from one station to 
the other for a given phase angle a between their voltages as 
obtained from (19) to (33) is found to be 


E?/r k cos? B sin atan 8B (38) 
or E?/r k sin B cos Bsina (39) 
The synchronizing power P,, is defined as the change in the 


amount of power transferred over the tie circuit for one degree 
change in phase between bus voltages. 


Therefore no +e (E?/r k sin B cos B sin a) (40) 
= E?/rk sin B cos B cos a) (41) 
ee. ' E,E xc r 
which is equivalent to age a, etna pepe Os (42) 


or EL, E,.2/22.cosa (43) 


Presented by publication only. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I.E. E. 


SOME NEW FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


BY H. B. DWIGHT 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


Formulas are presented and derived, which have not been 

previously published, for mutual inductance of coils with 
parallel axes, repulsion of coils with parallel axes, and self- 
inductance of long cylindrical coils. 
_ These formulas apply to practically all cases of reactance coils 
in common use. They are very convergent and accurate, and 
will give results to a given degree of accuracy with a minimum 
amount of labor. : 

For many engineering problems, precise accuracy is not 
required, and sets of curves are given from which approximate 
readings may be taken. 


PART I—MUTUAL INDUCTANCE OF COILS WITH PARALLEL AXES 


HE common method of mounting reactance coils is with 
parallel axes, that is, side by side, and it is desirable to 
have formulas which apply to coils in this position. The 
values of mutual inductance derived in the following paragraphs 
are useful for calculating the unbalance in voltage and the 
means for correcting it, when three coils are placed side by 
side and connected in a three-phase circuit. The formulas are 
also useful in the design of radio apparatus. The calculation 
is very exact for widely separated coils, and it has an accuracy 
within a small percentage for coils placed as close together as 
it is usual to mount reactance coils. For usual engineering 
problems where precise accuracy is not required, it is not 
necessary to calculate the results, but values may be read from 
the curves of Fig. 1, thus saving the labor of computation. 

A formula for the mutual inductance of two circles formed 
of one turn of infinitesimally thin wire has been given by S. 
Butterworth,* for the case when the axes of the circles are 
parallel, and when the distance between the centers of the 
circles is somewhat larger than their diameters. In order to 
obtain a formula suitable for commercial reactance coils of 
many turns, the author has integrated the above formula four — 


*Scientific Paper No. 320 of the Bureau of Standards, Washington, 
D. C., June, 1918, Eq. 10 A, and Philosophical Magazine, Vol. 31, 1916, 
page 443. 
we 1675 


1676 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


times over the rectangular section of a cylindrical coil, with the 
following result :— 
M, in henrys, 


2 1? a3 N? a fo C AC, ) 
7 een r ( F 1) (1+ 6a | 144a 


2 3 
+95 (1-3 —) 


7? 2s3 


oe 
Th los Lees c§ ) 
(Liste a paneer ea 


5 ab (1 Diss 30 uss 3 ) 


8 =r r? ra 8 rt §6©68 SS 
i en 169 c¢! Aq «¢8 1a 8 ) 
(1 + 75 —@ + 600--a + 2800 a* * 672,000 a? 
35 al 91 5 | 189’st 281. s® BA oe 
tp (1- Sot en ae tis) 


{185 g2 2167 coe abate 
(1+ 34 a? + 3520 at + 4704 ae 


2129 8 197 a 1 
+ are xiao a + oer eee ae) Tete: | 


where 7? = s? + b? anda = 144d = the mean radius of the coil. 
N is the number of turns in each coil. The two coils are 
alike and placed as in Fig 1. 

The dimensions are assumed to be given in inches; if they are 
given in centimeters, the factor 0.3937 should be omitted. In 
measuring the coil, each dimension should be taken as the 
number of wires or cables in that dimension times their pitch. 
The actual measured dimension over the copper should not be 
used, as it is slightly too small. 

It will be noted that formula (1) is indeterminate when b = 0 
and therefore r = s. For such a case, the following formula 
should be used: 


Ss a? at N? C? ¢* 
= 93987 5710? [( 1 Gat ot. i4dge ) 


9 (eee Ee ce 
+oe(+eetaatua) 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1677 


AATEC 17 a 169s ¢* Alec 
T G49 (14 15 @ * 600 a? * 2800 a® 
4 cle (6 ) 
672,000 a’ 
ie 8575 =-( 155 CF 4 2167% + c' Dd anc® 
512s! 84 a * 2520 af * 4704 oF 
2129 c8 197 c10 
+ 3136 x 180 a® * 1960 x 34560 a® ) Ssh ] 
(2) 
a” (eee 
an? PEER c 
4oxlo” ceaeenuas c / 
ot twee. 
Z M os tn Henrys 
ee 3 i Dimensions are tir laches 
. 3 W = number of turns in a coil 
PAC NE : 
79 sae we HHH 


42 4s VA 4 46 47 (40 %6“8 20 Bl PR £3 2H BS 
Ratio Vg 


Fig. 1—Murvuat InpuctTance or Reacrance CoILs with PARALLEL 
AXES 


This gives the mutual inductance of two flat disks in the same 
plane. 

An approximate formula for the mutual inductance of two 
reactance coils with parallel axes has been previously published 
by the writer.* This was derived by making a certain distor- 
tion of one of the coils which, as was stated, tended to make 
the result slightly too small. The results of this formula for 
one shape of coil are shown in Curve II, Fig. 2. In order to 
show that the results were accurate enough for engineering 


*Repulsion and Mutual Inductance of Reactors’, by H. B. Dwight, 
The Electrical World, p. 1148, June 16, 1917. 


1678 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


work, another formula was derived using a greater distortion 
which tended to make the results distinctly too large, as shown 
in Curve III. It is interesting to note that Curve I, which 
shows the result of the formula now given, lies just a little 
above Curve II. 

The new formula is more convenient to use than the older 
approximate formula, and gives more accurate results for any 
given position of the coils. Neither formula is very convergent 
for s/d less than about 1.2. 

The case outlined in Fig. 1, in which the two coils with 
parallel axes are alike and stand on the same plane, is the 
simplest for calculation. However, if the coils have parallel 
axes and are alike, and one stands on a plane a distance e 


42 /4 +6 78 20 k2. Bd 
Fratlo = 


Fig. 2—ComPariIson witH APPROXIMATE CURVES 


higher than the other, the formula for their mutual inductance 
is not very complicated. It is as follows: 


M, in henrys, 


e a? N? SI 08 ag SM ie 
0.3937 8 x 10° [ ( eg oe 


fat NS re AN 
(1 TPO cateek code gues soa ) 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1679 


ee) et) 
pete s+ =) 
(+35 + gr art se & + oper) 
Ee Gt) et) 
pe (eet) 

Sais Ug ae to) | 


She des OtA7-el AT et 2129. 
(1+ 84 a@ * 2520 a | 470d @ + 3136 x 180 a! 


197 gt? 
T {960 x 3456 7) = ete. | (3) 
where p? = s* + (b— e)? 
g@=s+e 
and r = §? + (b + e)? 


~This formula includes the case of two coaxial coils, when the 
coils are not near to each other. When the coils are coaxial, 
the mutual inductance is opposite in sign to the value when the 
coils are side by side. There is a position, when two coils with 
parallel axes are diagonally from each other, for which the 
mutual inductance is zero. 

The formula for the mutual inductance of two unequal coils 
with parallel axes, in any relative position, is similar to the 
above, but is, of course, more complicated. 

Example I. Find the voltage drop due to mutual inductance 
in each of three coils placed side by side in a row, and carrying 
three-phase, 60-cycle current, 400 amperes per phase, the data — 


- being as follows:— 


= 12.76 inches. 
—— ey Goes 


“ 


Mean radius of coils is 
Length of coils =.) 
Thickness of winding mol eae MANSY 
Number of turns ~ =a oo bee. 

Distance between centers = 45 ~ inches. 


1680 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


Let the three coils in a row be called A, B and C. For A 
and B, s = 45 inches. 
Mis = 0.00142 (0.0508 + 0.0061 + 0.0007 + 0.00008) 
= 8.2 X 10-* henry. 


or using Fig. 1, 9S. = — = 1.76 
b 30.87 _ 


Mag. 270025 -X< 10- TIA? 25.52 = 3 X10 henry, 


35x10-9 : 
it 
N 30x/o* —t—. 
N sessatas 
eH Ht 
8 + gant TE 
= cocenene c 
RN 25x! SEee eens 
> PEPE 
® @ 
g agiitas 
i< oD wo 3 a ACEH + 
eee id penne : +H tH + 
8 jcc se peegauean i : 4 
g ott += 
y rH SHH t + Ho 
AY = Vi Rent 4 
q 15x10 7 Bo gee t HH 
$ ne HH at 
© } 
ys r soSen ee at rt 
N aa ON Fe ret HH ae 
w -9 Ha pS: ot 
10x10 boas Too oud Beeeenee - 
\ N tht tt 
\ Cd | tot tH 
a Poe eet ; 
5x1079 we - —— 
Ferrer 
bees gece: ence! 
aga 


‘ CUP ASAE ES ETE VE ALE AED. BIS BE ESA 2G E 
Ratio Yg 


Fra. 3—Mecuanicat Force BETWEEN REAcTANcE CoILs WITH PARALLEL 
AXES 
Average force in pounds = F (from curves) I1,J2N2 cos @ where N is the number of turns 


in each coil and where @ is the phase angle between J; and Is which are in amperes. 
Using a spacing s = 90 inches 
Mac = 1.1 X 10-5 henry. 


Let the currents in the three coils A, B and (, which are 
120 deg. apart in phase, be 
Lg tS? Ca00 __amperes 
I; = — 200 + j 200 v/ 3 amperes 
and I, = — 200 — 7 200 3 amperes 


The drop in A due to mutual inductance is 
28K 607 Us Mas + Ic Mac) =—93- 4-10 volts. 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1681 


The drop in B due to mutual inductance is 
2m X 609 Ia Mas + Ic Mac) = 10.7 + 96.2 volts. 
The drop in C due to mutual inductance is 
2m X 609 Ia Mac + Is Msc) = 10.7 — 74.5 volts. 


PART II—REPULSION OF COILS WITH PARALLEL AXES 


The formula for calculating the mechanical force exerted 
between two equal reactance coils placed in the usual way, 
side by side with parallel axes, may be derived by differentia- 
ting the expression for the mutual inductance of the coils in the 
same position. Curves are given in Fig. 3 which should be 
more convenient in most cases than the formula, for solving 
problems. 

The differential with respect to s of formula (1) for mutual 
inductance, using absolute units, is equal to the mechanical 
force in dynes between the coils when one absampere is flowing 
in each coil, the currents being in phase. Changing the units, 
this gives the force in pounds for one ampere turn, which is 
equal to: 

F, in pounds, 


a 2 1? a? a ===) Lt oe t a) 
eet 4505610" b? [ r? ( s? r ( 6 a2 144 a4 


ez at ( 4s 5 $3 rt ) 


r r “st 
TOME vie Ey ee c$ ) 
Pi pe tomy gs T 960 a8 


Td 0° 8s 28 s3 43 21 8° r6 ) 
= (> 7 75 36 


ite eet A ALE 8 113 “ives ) 
(1 + a5 @ + G00 a + 2800 a? 7 672,000 a 


. 245 a ( 328 BIGG, O00 Os eday Cee, - 2 ) 
ae pe apt Rs Pa ide pig PY Gant 


155 2167 ot sa 28 
(1+ oa a= + 9520 at + 4704 a® ' 3136 x 180 a® 


197 clo | 
+ 960 x 3456 al ) eeielrr fipea®) 


1682 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


where r? = s? + 6? and a = %d = the mean radius of the 
coil. The dimensions may be given in either inches or centi- 
meters, since only ratios of dimensions appear. 

It results therefore, that if all the dimensions, including 
spacing, of a group of coils be increased by a certain ratio, but 
the currents be left the same, the mechanical force in pounds 
is not changed at all. However, large coils are generally 
subject to large forces, since they carry proportionately large 
currents. 

When different alternating currents J, and I:, at a phase 
angle 6, flow in the two coils, the average force in pounds is 


F I, I, N? cosé 


where J, and J, are the effective values of the currents in 
amperes and where N is the number of turns in each coil. 

As in the case of the expression for mutual inductance, 
formula (4) becomes indeterminate when 6 = 0 and therefore 
ry = s. Im such a case, which is that of two flat disks in the 
same plane, the following formula may be used: 


, Se. Seta Se aa tif 
F, in pounds, = 4.45 <x 107s! [ (3 + 6 a? ae 144 a ) 


Lee is oe cé 
ore || T Ts @ + 340 a sou ) 


875 at Lic 169 ct? 41 ¢é 
+ eq S(t+a+ aoe 800 ae 
118 c8 
+ 75-900 oats) 


4 25,725 a 156 e267 “et BAT es 


512.—s8 84 a? 2520 at | 4704 a® 


2129 ¢8 197 ¢10 
+ 3136x180 a® + 1960 x 3456 qi ) = ete | 
(5) 


The mechanical force between two coils side by side with 
parallel axes is a repulsion when the currents flow in the same 
direction around both coils, and it is an attraction when the 
currents are in opposite directions. 

The value of force as calculated above is the average force, 


nee, 


aa 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1683 


that is, the effective steady sustained pressure, due to-alterna- 
ting current. It is the same in value as the force due to direct 
current. At the peak of the alternating-current wave, when 
the currents are in phase, the force rises to double the above 
value, and it becomes zero when the momentary current 


_-beeomes zero. 


A comparison is shown in Fig. 4 between calculated values 
and a test curve.* The approximate data for the test curve 
are given in example IT. 

The approximate formula previously published by the author 
in the Electrical World of June 16, 1917, gives results which are 
slightly less than those of formula (4) which are more accurate. 
The curves have practically the same relative position as in 
Fig. 2. 

Example I[I—Find the average mechanical force acting on 
each of two coils carrying single-phase currents which are in 
phase, the conditions being as follows: 


Mean radius of coils =a = 12.76 inches. 
Length of coils =Deeet Sse ge 
Thickness of winding =c = 4.87 « 
Number of turns = Vet 114 

Current in amperes = J, = I, = 400 amperes. 


The coils are placed side by side, with the parallel axes 45 


inches apart. 
Force = 158 (0.0362 + 0.0065 + 0.0010 + 0.0001) 


= 6.89 pounds. 
Using the curves of Fig. 3, 
b 30.87 Te Re eS a 
pee Ng or Boe ete 


Foree-- = 3.3 < 10-**«K 400? x.114* = 6.8 pounds; 
Example III. Find the average mechanical force on each of 
three coils of the same size and spacing as those in Example II, 
placed side by side in a row, and carrying three-phase current, 
400 amperes per phase. In determining the average mechanical ; 
forces due to three-phase currents, the forces due to the pro- 
ducts of the instantaneous values of two alternating currents, 
which are 120 deg. out of phase, are calculated in the same way 
as the watts due to the products of the instantaneous values of 


*The test curve was published in an article on ‘ The Mechanical 
Stresses in Reactance Coils’ by W. M. Dann, The Electric Journal, page - 


206, April 1914. 


1684. DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


an alternating current and an alternating voltage which are 
out of phase. 

Let the three coils in a row.be called A, B, and C. The 
currents in them are 120 deg. apart, in phase. The average 
force on A caused by Is is 

6.89 cos 120 deg. = 3.44 pounds, 
the calculation being similar to Example II. 

To find the force on A caused by I,, formula (4) is used, the 
axial spacing being 90 in. ‘The average force on A caused by 
Ioas 

0.50 cos 120 deg. = 0.25 pounds. 
This is to be added to the force caused by J;, making a total 
average force on A of 3.69 pounds, tending to move it toward 
the center coil. Coil C is also under an average attraction of 


Force in Pounds 


SS 40 AS 50 
Axtal Spacing in Inches 


Fie. 4—Comparison or Cancura- Fie. 5—SrEctTIon or ReACTANCE 
TION WTIH TEST Coin 


3.69 pounds. Coil B is attracted by both A and C, and 
although there is a momentary force first in one direction and 
then in the other, the average force on B is zero. 

Since the above forces increase as the square of the current 
they attain large values at times of short circuit. 


Part III—SELF-INDUCTANCE OF LONG REACTANCE COILS 

Reactance coils, as generally manufactured, are cylindrical 
in shape and have an axial length practically as long as, or - 
longer than, their mean diameter. The radial thickness of the 
winding is usually considerable. The self-inductance of a thick 
coil with usual radial thickness of winding, may be as much as 
15 per cent less than the self-inductance, L,, of a very thin 
solenoid of the same mean diameter. The self-inductance of 
the above described thick coils may be calculated very precisely 


a 


ee! oe ie al =_—"'. = 


ee ee eid eel 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1685 


by formula (13) given below, which may be used to a fair degree 
of approximation for coils somewhat shorter than their mean 
diameter. Curves are given in Figs. 6 and 7 from which 
readings may be taken which will be correet within about one 
per cent for most shapes of reactance coils. 

An alternative method for determining the self-inductance of 
a cylindrical coil is to obtain the value of L, from Table XXI, 
Scientific Paper No. 169 of the Bureau of Standards, and 
obtain the correction for the thickness of the coils from Dr. 
E. B. Rosa’s equations (91) and (93) and Tables IX and X of 
the same paper. This method is especially useful for coils just 
shorter than their mean diameter, since other formulas are 
then not very convergent. 

As indicated in Fig. 5, all the dimensions of a coil should be 
measured to the pitch lines of the conductors. Thus the length 
of the coil should be taken as the number of conductors per 
layer multiplied by the pitch of the conductors. The exact 
dimensions over the copper are slightly too small and should 
not be used. 

In order to obtain. an expression for the self-inductance of a 
thick cylindrical coil, it is first necessary to know the mutual 
inductance of two coaxial and concentric thin solenoids of 
equal length. For long solenoids this has been given in a 
useful form by T. H. Havelock.* 

By using the form in elliptic integrals given in equation (4) 
of Havelock’s paper in the Philosophical Magazine, and by 
changing to the dimensions shown in Fig. 5, the expression for 
mutual inductance becomes: 


ee aes SS; = { (D? + d) B- (D? — d?) F} 


ae 
1 as a) 


1 é or 
— Fox (as 2 Wea OIS 


aay Ones 
+or(1+6pr+6 ote b7 jana 
abhenrys. (6) 


*The Philosophical Magazine, March 1908, Page 340, equation 25: 
and Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1, 1911, Page 56 


equation 38. 


\ 


1686 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


where d and D are the diameters of the two thin solenoids, 
where N is the number of turns on each solenoid, and where F 
and E are complete elliptic integrals of the first and second 
kinds, to modulus d/D. 

The two elliptic integrals can be expanded in terms of the 
complementary modulus k’ as follows:* 


B=1+ 5 k* (loch — 77) 


4 12 4 2 
F = logh p+ pk” ( loeh @ — 7) 
EO 4 2 2 
+ -srgr kM (losh  — pg — gz) t+. ones 
where bs l= = 3/1 


The expression for mutual inductance ean now be integrated 
twice over the section of the thick coil indicated in Fig. 5, and 
the following formula for the self-inductance of a long thick 
coil is obtained: 


Tie Tea a (8) 
a? d? N?2 [1-5 


where L, in henrys, te 0.3937 X 10°65 3937 X 10° 6 


isa ae | aR te 
+e fw * Toa BT } 


and where A L, in henrys, 


(9) 


_ od? NP oe: 1 @ 
0.3937 X10b6 | 38 a ¢ 3 a 
4d Leictig ePtaa as ve . 
+ oaae (eae (ee ean ee 
et a 
(doen - oa ) 


*Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1, oe E. B. Rosa and 
F. W. Grover, equation 3, page 8. 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1687 


aie Teng Tisd* 17 dé 
Soe iS hr Mig eEr hes 


15 - . a 7 
32 x 1536 68 
eee 13 d§ | 169 as 
di. 72 8 960 bt 7680 BF 
= 2167 ods 
32 x 2304 B88 att Es 
2b D 
+ aan ( beh 2 +0.14) | (10) 


In the above formulas, N is the number of turns of effective 
conductor in the coil, g is the number of wires or cables in 
parallel, and the dimensions are in inches. If the dimensions 
are in centimeters, the factor 0.3937 should be omitted, and if 
the inductance is to be given in abhenrys instead of henrys the 
factor 10° should be omitted. Note that 


logh m = the hyperbolic or natural logarithm of m 
= 2.3026 logiy m. 


The quantity L, is the self-inductance of an infinitely thin 
solenoid of diameter d. Formula (9) is the same as (79), 
Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1 or (214A), 
Scientific Paper No. 320 of the Bureau of Standards. The 
general term of the series may be obtained from either of these 
references. There are other formulas (See 11) which are more 
convergent than (9). The value of L, may also be accurately 
and conveniently found from Table XXI Bulletin of the 
Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1. 

The quantity A L, given by (10), is the change in the: induct- 
ance due to the radial thickness of the winding. Formula (10) 
should not be used for practical problems, because formula (13) 
to be given later, is more convergent, and therefore more 
convenient and accurate, for any coil with which (10) can be 
used. Formula (10) was published by the author in the 
Electrical World, Feb. 9, 1918, page 300. It gives the same 


esult, except for the term pie See as a method pub- 
ae y 32 xX 2304 08’ 


1688 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


lished by S. Butterworth in the Proceedings of the Physical 
Society of London, Vol. 27, 1915, page 371. 

It is assumed that the coil is wound with round wire or 
cable. The last term of (10) represents the effect of the air 
space between the wires. 

A very convergent formula for the self-inductance of an 
infinitely thin solenoid which has not been previously pub- 
lished, may be derived directly from (86) or (89), Bulletin of 
the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1, by making the dimen- 
sions of the two solenoids equal, thus obtaining the self- 
inductance of one solenoid instead of the mutual inductance 
of two. . Both (36) and (39) give the same result: 


een er 3087 105 X 2p a or 
+m Tae mt. | ap 
where mm = I ty 


This is much more convergent than (9). It is somewhat 
more convergent than (20 A), Scientific Paper No. 320 of the 


Bureau of Standards, since m = — is smaller than 


2 
im oF . When b = d,9 terms of (11) give six significant 
figures, but 13 terms of (20 A) are required to give this result. 

Formula (11) need not necessarily be used for obtaining the 
value of L., because formulas (76), (77), and (78), Bulletin of 
the Bureau of Standards, Vol. 8, No. 1, are extremely conver- 
gent, and very accurate values of L, can also be easily obtained 
from Table X XI of the same Bulletin. 

Series in m for thick coils can be derived (see formula 13) 
which are similar to those in d/b of formula (10), but which are 
much more convergent than they are, and which therefore 
supersede them for practical calculations. These series in m 
have not been previously published. The series in m will give 


r 
| 
. 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1689 


5 or 6 significant figures for the self nductance of a thick 
cylindrical coil whose length is as short as its diameter, but 
formula (10) is not nearly so accurate for such a short coil. 
That the two formulas (10) and (13) are equivalent may be 
shown by the fact that they give the same results for any 
problem for which they are both convergent. It is also proved 
by expanding the terms of one formula by the binomial theorem, 
and this is found to produce the other formula. ‘The derivation 
of (13) is as follows. 

It is first necessary to establish a proposition regarding the 
mutual inductance of two solenoids, similar to Maxwell’s 
proposition regarding two coils, in paragraph 700 of ‘‘Elec- 
tricity and Magnetism’’.* In the same manner as in the 
paragraph referred to, it may be shown that, if M, is the mutual 
inductance of the central solenoids of two cylindrical coils of — 
mean radii a; and a, and of thicknesses of winding c,; and ¢2, 
then the mutual inductance of the two thick coils is 


ee = OM, Conor. 
ie dA rl PE 
Cr ot M, Cr Cx" ot M, Co* O4 M, 


+a oat | B/S B datoar | B/S Oa, 


oa & C14 Co? oM, 
+ Codie O01 25/3 /5 Odi das" 


CY as 0° M, % (ORNs fo M, 
Be /3 [5 Oaroas | B/T das 


Soiree ae 


(12) 
This formula is most accurate for coils that are far apart, and 
it does not give good results for coils that are close together. 
It may be useful for giving extensions to present formulas for. 
mutual inductance of solenoids. 

If formula (17), Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards Vol. 8, 
No. 1, for the mutual inductance of two circles far apart, be 
integrated to give the mutual inductance of two coaxial sole- 
noids whose centers are far apart measured along the axis, 
terms are obtained which are of the same form as the second 
half of formula (38) of the above bulletin, which forms a series 
pee Ba ee ee 


*See also Scientific Paper No. 169 of the Bureau of Standards by E. B. 
Rosa and F, W. Grover, page 33. 


1690 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


in A/l. See formula (8) when s = 0. Now proposition (12) 
gives exactly the effect of the thicknesses c; and ¢, of the coils 
for the formula for coils far apart, and it is to be expected that 
it will give the effect of c, and c: for the same terms which 
appear in the last half of (38, Bulletin, Vol. 8, No. 1). 

This is found to be the case, and the series in c? and c* in the 
last half of (10), can be derived by means of (12). The latter 
method is much easier than the method of straight integration 
of (38, Bulletin Vol. 8, No. 1), since differentiation is in general 
a simpler process than integration, and fewer and smaller 
terms are required to be handled. 

Now it is noticeable that formula (36) of the Bulletin, Vol. 8, 
No. 1, contains the first line of (88) of the same bulletin. 
Therefore the terms in A/r of (86, Vol. 8, No. 1), give the same 
total result as the terms in A/I of (88, Vol. 8, No. 1). This 
may be proved definitely by expanding one set of terms by the 
binomial theorem, and they are found to produce the other set. _ 
Therefore, since proposition (12) applies to the terms in A/I of 
(38 Vol. 8, No. 1), it applies to the terms in A/r of (36, Vol. 8, 
No. 1). A similar statement applies to (89, Vol. 8, No. 1) 
since that formula is the same as (36, Vol. 8, No. 1) when the 
two solenoids are of equal length. 

The differentiation of (86) or (89) (Vol. 8, No. 1), is not 
difficult, and then proposition (12) can be applied. It is found 
by expanding some of the terms by the binomial theorem that 
when A = a 

mM = eM 
0A? == 0a? 


as would be expected, and this produces a certain simplification 
in the series. Terms from formula (10) extended are then 
included to give the effect of integrating the terms in a/A of 
(36) or (88) (Vol. 8, No. 1), and the following complete result 
is obtained: . 


ar? d2 N2 
0.3937 <X 10°6 


A L, in henrys = = 


ao 
oe 
2 


3876 


_ DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1691 


AOF <1 1 c / 23 4d 4547 
(Joen C 30) 556 ae (gp loeh =F — sone 


+... 4 


Ce d m 5 : m> 95 : PA UTE 
i cae \ er am + Tog" + jog-™ 


m? 


2135 4 4 11x 1961_,, 18 x 68,915 
512 2048 32,768 


jis 


t ax ‘ 1 36 — 160" 3 35" — ae 
143 X 10,625 mete} 
21 Xx 3641 11 x 367,621 


13 


an ite = 1040 


| 


at bes 13 
+ gan (Josh J + 0.14) | oe. 


d? 


where mM = FLIP 


This formula is to be used in conjunction with (8). It 
should be used instead of (10) for practical problems, since it 
is more convenient and accurate. It appears longer than (10), 
but that is merely because more terms have been worked out. 
In reality, fewer terms of (13), than of (10), are needed to 


1692, DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


obtain the self-inductance of a given coil to a certain number 
of significant figures. The terms which are not needed can 
easily be neglected. For most coils made, the terms in c%/d® 
will be found to be practically negligible, even for precision 
work. 

The last term of formula (13) represents the effect of the 
air and insulation space between the conductors. It is assumed 
that the coil is wound with round wire or cable. If square 
wire is used, the constant 0.14 in the last term should be 
omitted. Therefore, for uniform -current distribution over the 


18x/0° 


tay | f 4 
he eesibhepeya } : f 
L 4s én Henrys : <~ : 9.05 
5 Dimensions are in laches oe R Hi F 
10" ; z 30: 
pee Fs Corrections for Shape and PEGEEEE EEE eee SHEE fo? 
Spacing of Conductors are BESG0GUSRE RESES Se «Genes BOD = noues REP: eons i 
| not included FEE gg 8 ana gan : ieee 
14x107 - r 0-2 
nee sae! oa Hae 4 
3 ios 
9 a 
12x10 a as 05 
b _— 0.6 
d?N* T. 
Jox/o 08 
10 
Cc 
exo? a 
{ 
6x/o-$ - d 
“ 
Wy 
-s {H % 
4x10 r “4 
“a 
44 
4% 
, 0A 
2x«/o9 a 


o oO/ O2 es ogo 40 


+ patio” be 
Fie. 6—Snrur-Inpucrance or SHort Reacrancr Coins 


section of the coil, as, for example, with square wire with 
infinitely thin insulation, the last term becomes zero. For 
precise work, the constant 0:14, which is an average value, 
should be changed in accordance with Dr. E. B. Rosa’s results 
for various shapes of coils, given in the Bulletin of the Bureau 
of Standards, Vol. 3, 1907, page 37, and Vol. 8, No. 1, 1911; 
page 141. 

A set of curves showing the self-inductance of cylindrical 
coils of various shapes, is given in Figs. 6. and 7. This should 
be useful for many engineering problems where precise accuracy 


i" 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1693 


isnot required. The curves can give quicker and more accurate 
results for many cases than most approximate formulas. 

The values of inductance of long coils in which ¢ is almost as 
great as d, were calculated by a formula derived by the writer.* 
The values of inductance of coils considerably shorter than 
their mean diameter were derived from Tables C and D, by 
Prof. T. R. Lyle, Scientific Paper No. 320 of the Bureau of 
Standards, pages 569 and 570. 

Example IV. To find the self-inductance of a coil wound 
with 1000 turns of round wire in 10 layers of 100 turns each. 


24x/079, 2 
H 0 
0.05 
si T 
t 
t 
2x /079 t 
22x10 t t t f t t 7 om sags ol 
= 4 4 OlS 
Tope T a 25 
z 2) + aoe agee Z i a8 il $0 ane aaa EEE! == masGe OZ 
Ox/0 - — Ter To t oes: 
4 eee os 
a“n* aa 5550 5245] $524 USRE® oatl E5509 "onan t0EES p55== °="7- cages patel aes ==™ - 
i Pett <a Sadan na0=> ema adees snoes Sees ouaai seiceas He HE ag 
“9 ee ss | = : 
18/0 ; : : A = : : 
at ice coae t Ht ne 
: “ape 06 
9 t + Pepi = : 88 Bi! — Poet | 
09 area trast feat aeees BS ot oce gazes fuses eneessst=1 eusey fasta sseas tarat feesaeree H o.8 
-H 1.0 
mt 
i ; aa 1e 
/4x/0 ; sia - s 
of LS 
Lone © i tote] at 
2x10? H 
Tt I 
oa 
eee 
at f 
i rit HH TEER om BI 
10x1073 35 + - 
i HEE # HEH H 
a 
i + 
2 
8x10-9 = id 
: : - 2 
( ‘ 4 * Ratio Y 


Fig.;7—Serxr-Inpuctancr oF Lona Reacrance Colts 


The diameter of the insulated wire is p = 0.1 cm. and the 
diameter of the bare wire isw = 0.08cm. The mean diameter 
of the coil is d = 10 cm., the length is b = 10 cm., and the 
thickness is c = 1 cm. (Example I, Bulletin of the Bureau of 


Standards Vol. 4, No. 3, page 374.) 
i 
Jb 


By formula (11), n= 


*Formula (5), ‘‘Self Inductance of Long Reactance Coils’, by H. B. 


~ Dwight, The Electrical World, Feb. 9, 1918, page 300. 


1694. DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


aw? X10 X N? 
109 


and L,, in henrys, = [1.118034 — 0.424413 


— 0.005590 + 0.000559 — 0.000210 + 0.000059 
— 0.000022 + 0.000008 — 0.000003 } 


wr? x10 x N? 
= 10° ee 0.688422 


Table XXI, Scientific Paper No: 169, of the Bureau of Stand- 
ards, gives 


mw? X10 N? 


102 = 0.688423 


By formula (13), 


a -% 10K -N? 


Ais 103 


[~ 0.066667 + 0.003333 


+ 0.001880 — 0.000002 + {0.000745 — 0.000186 

+ 0.000060 — 0.000026 + 0.000012 — 0.000006 

+ 0.000003 — 0.000002} + {0.0000012 — 0.0000008 
+ 0.0000010 — 0.0000008 + 0.0000006 — 0.0000004 
+ 0.0000008 — 0.0000002} + 0.000231] 


Therctoreobet eae ae x 0.060624 henry. 


2 
By (8), L=L, + AL = 795 X 0.627798 = 0.061961 
henry. 

The value given by (9) and (10) is 0.06194 henry. 

The value given in the Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards, 
Vol. 4, No. 3, Exam. 1, page 374, is 0.061865 henry, which is 
less than 1/5 of 1 per cent different from the value given by 
(13). The result given in the above bulletin was obtained by 
Dr. E. B. Rosa’s formula (91) Scientific Paper No. 169, of the 
Bureau of Standards. This formula has the advantage that 
it is equally applicable to coils of all lengths, whereas (13) is 
not very convergent for coils which are shorter than their 
mean diameter. Where (13) is convergent, however, it is more 
accurate than the other formula, 


DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 1695 


Example V. Find the self-inductance of a coil of square 
wire with very thin insulation in which 
Cc 1 2 2 /3 
Tiber ee = 10° abhenrys. 
(Example 9, Scientific Paper No. 320 of the Bureau of Stand- 
ards, page 559). 
By formula (11), 


2 d2 N2 
L, = ~*~" (1.0307764 — 0.212066 — 0.004458 
+ 0.0000131 — 0.0000015 + 0.0000001] 
2 2 2 
- = X 0.8181357 


Table XXI, Scientific Paper No. 169 of the Bureau of Stand- 
ards, gives 
= 12 d2 N2 


L, = rh aie A 0.818136 


By formula (13), 


2 {2 2 
aL = *N" | _ 9 066667 + 0.003333 + 0.000940 


2 
~ 0.000001 + {0.000202 — 0.000015 + 0.000001} 
+ {0.000003} ] 
i sea nese x 0.062205 abhenrys. 


AL = — 0.995286 millihenry. 

The value given by formula (29 A), Scientific Paper No, 320 of 
the Bureau of Standards, is 

AL = — 0.99526 millihenry. 

Example VI. A problem relating to a coil which is more 
similar to usual current-limiting reactors may be of interest. 
Find the self-inductance of a coil of mean diameter d = 50 
inches, wound with 10 layers of cable, 75 turns per layer, two 
cables in parallel. The diameter of the cable is w = 0.5 in., 
and the distance from center to center of cables is p = 1 in. 


- Therefore, 
te siine —e8= 10 ins. g.=-2,and --N.=.3875. 


1696 DWIGHT: FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


By formula (11), 


w X50? X 875? - 60 
Jey, in henrysy = 70 3087 Hc 10% 10 ee 
— 0.8488 — 0.0040 + 0.0002] 
2° 5 OX Se 


0.38937 x 10° X 75 


By formula (13), 


a? X60? xX oto" 
0.3937 x 10° x 75 


+ 0.0031 + {0.0014 — 0.0002} + 0.0011] 


2 2 2 
Therefore, L = yT ax Oe XSto 5 X 10.7699 — 0.1146] 


0.07700 henry. 
The result, when calculated by (9) and (10) is the same. 


AL = xX [— 0.1833 + 0.0133 


Presented by publication only. 


Copyright 1919. By A. I. E. E. 


INHERENT LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 
POSSIBLE BY STATIONARY APPARATUS 


BY JOSEPH SLEPIAN 


ABSTRACT OF PAPER 


Expressions for electrostatic and electromagnetic energies, 
Joulian heat dissipation and power are given in complex quan- 
tities. The pure imaginary part of the expression for power in a 
static network is shown to be equal to 2 w times the difference 
between the mean electromagnetic energy and mean electro- 
static energy. Use is made of this new principle in considering 
the problems of power-factor correction and phase splitting. It 
is shown that in general for phase transforming by static appa- 
ratus both magnetic and electrostatic storage of energy are 
necessary, and it is shown how the minimum amounts of each 
are determined by the load. 

The symmetry of the coefficients in the general equations for 
the steady state in a static network is demonstrated, and it is 
shown that limitations upon voltage and current transforma- 
tions follow. The voltage regulation of any phase-splitting 
arrangement is considered. 


ONTINUED failures in attempts to construct networks 
of stationary apparatus, which shall have certain charac- 
teristics, lead to the conviction that such characteristics are 
unattainable by static means. Examples are power-factor 
correction without condensers, single-phase to balanced poly- 
phase transformations by condensers only or inductances only, 
or single-phase to polyphase transformations with inherent 
regulation for variable load. However convincing such 
failures may be, it is always satisfying to obtain general 
demonstrations of the impossibility of attainment of the 
characteristics desired, especially as the demonstrations 
generally reveal what characteristics can be obtained. 
Considering the requirements of energy storage in the trans- 
forming apparatus, the problems mentioned above fall into 
twoclasses. In the problem of balanced power-factor correction, 
the instantaneous power drawn from any one phase is exactly 
equal to the instantaneous power supplied to the other phases. 
The instantaneous power supplied to the power-factor correct- 
ing apparatus is always zero. Hence there is no a priorz reason 
for supposing a relation between the wattless power supplied 


1697 


1698 SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


by the apparatus and the electromagnetic energy stored up in 
the apparatus. In fact, there is no such relation when rotating 
machines are considered. The wattless power supplied by a 
synchronous condenser may be varied over a wide range with- 
out changing the kinetic energy or magnetic energy as deter- 
mined by the flux, which is stored in the machine. For purely 
static apparatus, however, such a relation does exist as is 
shown in III. Even when the wattless power it supplies is 
balanced, a static network must have a minimum of energy 
storage, and this minimum varies with the magnitude of the 
wattless load. 

In the problem of transformation from single phase to 
balanced polyphase, there is an obvious requirement for energy 
storage irrespective of the character of the transforming appa- 
ratus. The power supplied by the single-phase line has a 
double-frequency component and is pulsating. The power 
drawn by the balanced polyphase load, however, is continuous. 
Hence it is clear that the transforming apparatus must store 
up energy while the single-phase power is at its maximum, to 
be given out again while the single-phase power is at its mini- 
mum. This clearly calls for momentary energy storage, and 
therefore for a minimum mean energy storage dependent on 
the load. In rotating phase-converters, such as are in general 
use, the pulsations are in the kinetic energy of the rotor. The 
mean kinetic energy on the rotor is in general far in excess of 
the minimum mean energy called for by the nature of the 
transformation. This is because the heating limitations upon 
transforming electrical energy into mechanical are what 
determine the size of the rotor, rather than the energy consider- 
ations. If the heating limitations could be removed, the most 
economical rotating phase converter would be one in which the 
rotor would come to rest twice per cycle, and where the maxi-- 
mum velocity of the rotor would vary with the load. It is 
remarkable that networks of static apparatus can be devised 
which will effect the phase transformation with the minimum 
amount of energy storage called for above, provided that.the 
polyphase power factor exceeds 0.707. This is shown in 
section 38. In such networks the condensers are without 
charge, and the reactors without flux simultaneously twice 
every cycle. 

In all which follows, by static network is meant a network 
constructed of self and mutual inductors, condensers and 
resistors. — 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1699 


I. POWER AND ENERGY 

Power and energy in an alternating-current circuit are 
periodic and may be expanded into a Fourier series. If har- 
monies of current and voltage are absent, these Fourier develop- 
ments consist only of two terms, a constant and a double- 
frequency term. The constant may in particular be zero. 
Thus strictly speaking, it is erroneous to speak of power and 
energy as double-frequency quantities. Actually they consist 
respectively of two components, one of zero frequency and one 
of double frequency. These two components are easily 
expressed in terms of complex voltage and current. 

If FE = e; + j e2, a complex quantity, denotes an alternating 
e. m. f. in the usual way, the instantaneous e. m. f., e, is given 
by 

e = Real part of (./2 Ee!) = 1/2/2 (E ei! + & eset) 

where £ = e,— je. is the complex number conjugate to E, 
that is having the same real part but with pure imaginary part 
of opposite sign. 

Similarly, if J denotes an alternating current, its instan- 
taneous value 7 is given by: 


i = real part of (./2 I e-##!) = 4/2/2 (I ei! + f ede ) 


The instantaneous power / is given by the product of the 
instantaneous e. m. f. and the instantaneous current. Thus: 


p = 1/2 (E eet 4 F eiot) (I eiot + f ior) 
1/2(EI4+ EI &+t+ AI + ET 1) 
real part of (EF f + EI &+t) 


Thus the instantaneous power consists of a constant component, 
real part of E /, and a double-frequency component, real part 
of E I &i+'. : 

In the complex plane, the quantity EF / + HI + is repre- 
_ sented by a point describing synchronously the perimeter of a 
circle whose center is the point Ef, and whose radius is the 
absolute value of EJ. Since Ef and ETI have the same 
absolute values, the circle passes through the origin. 

It becomes clear at once from Fig. 1 that when E f is real 
and positive, the circle lies entirely to the right of the 7 axis, 
so that the power is always positive; when E / is pure imagi- 
nary, the circle has the j axis for a diameter so that the power 
is positive and negative respectively, half the time. 


l| 


l| 


1700- SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


By the angle of a vector in the complex plane is meant the 
angle which it makes with the real axis. In Fig. 1, @ is the 
angle of Ef. The angle of the product of two vectors is the 
sum of the angles of the two vectors respectively. The angle 
of the conjugate of a vector is the negative of the angle of the 
vector. Hence, the angle of Ef being the difference between 
angle of E and angle of J, is the angle of lag of J behind E. 
Hence: 


cos 6 = power factor. 


I 


Pure imaginary part of E f 
Real part of E [ 


In any balanced polyphase system, the e. m. fs. in the 
successive phases are given by E,aH,a?H,......: a” KE, 


tan § = 


Fre. 1 


where a is a primitive complex nth root of unity. If n = 3, 
a=—1/24 7 v3/2. 

It is readily seen that a is conjugate to a”, a? is conjugate 
to a”, ete. 

If the phases are carrying balanced currents, they will be 
given by I,aZI,a?I,...ar— TJ. 

To obtain the power we need the conjugates of the preceding 
quantities, and since the conjugate of a product is the product 
of Ahe conjugates we get for the conjugate values, f, a f, 
art he Sad: 

The instantaneous power in the successive phases is, there- 
fore, real part of (Ef + EI eet), real part of (a Eat f 
+aHal e'), real part of (a Ha"? f+ a? Ea? et), ete. 

Summing these up and noticing that 1+ a2+a!+... 
a’) = 0 we get for the total power, 

p = real part of (n EL). 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1701 


In a balanced polyphase system, the instantaneous power 
input is constant in time. 

The instantaneous magnetic energy contained in a system of 
circuits magnetically coupled is: 

bm = 1/2 (Li 4? ae Dg, 19? == 2 M4211 19 a5 Cenc) ey) 

where L1;, D2, My, etc. are the coefficients of self and mutual 
induction of the parts of the system. Substituting 

ty = V/2/2 (I, ei? + fy eet), ig = /2/2 (In eo! + Py eset), 

etc., 
ee ely fateh dae elp ae Lal) ac.) 
+ 1/2 (1/2 [Li Ly? + Leo Ie? +2 Me, 1, 


ees peso? 

+ 1/2 [Liy Peat Looe bg AD Ml pl lo pe oe ] €2se2) 

= T,, + real part of 1/2 [Li 7 + Loo I? +2 Mw I, I 
tier ius | ete 


flies = 1/2 OP telat s, Jods EN ao et get | +. . 2) 


therefore represents the mean magnetic energy. It is always 
real and positive. 
The instantaneous electrostatic energy in a group of con- 


2 2 
densers is ¢, = 1/2 es paige OE Las oe ) 
1 


op) 


gee fa ais {2/2 (I; ot + Py eset) dt 


z. ee if t) 
= Va/2 (4 ot + a ees 


jo —j 


Similarly for goq3.. .etc. Substituting in ?, 


i eae fine ) 
t. = 1/2(— fp 
Leelee pale ehe? * 
qe { 2 | le 
| hd a Ga ad EC -+jat ) 
oe (are aa "te a? : 


Ce I? 
= T, + real part of 1/2[ — 1/e: as = 16 =a 


. . ] eet 


1702. SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


oe I? iad, 


(oD) ww? 


= 1/2 (— t +... .) therefore rep- 
c 

presents the mean electrostatic energy. It is always real and 

positive. 

The instantaneous rate of heat generation in a system of 
resistors is d = 7, 7,2 +7. i22 +.... Substituting the equiv- 
alent complex quantities: 

d= (ey Li ty 4 fedede te) ee idee 


oe] et + [rite ere te Pe 8) 
= J) réal part.of 1/2 [ri J 74 le a ee 
Dery Ty fy Ke Tet + +. .%-sives> the “mean arate Sor 


energy dissipation into heat. It is always real and positive. 


II. THE RELATION BETWEEN POWER, ELECTROSTATIC AND 
MAGNETIC ENERGY AND HEAT GENERATION 


Suppose an arbitrary system of inductances, capacities and 
resistances given, having m terminals. Let Vi, Vo. ..Vn, ” 
complex numbers denote the potentials at these terminals, and 
I,, I:,. ..J, the currents at the terminals, taken positive 
when they flow into the system. Let Vnii, Vnys,. . . ete., be 
the potentials at the nodes or junctions of the branches of the 
network. Let J; be the current from the node k to the node I. 
Thus J,,; = — Ij. In what follows we shall include the n 
terminals among the nodes of the system. 

Consider the expression 


~ Vi (fer + fxg +... .). Since by Kirchhoff’s laws Ip, 
+ Ipg +... = 0 for every internal node, the whole must 

reduce'to- Vi iy 4-V3 fg +o eG 
2Vi (fia + Leo + « were) Veda + Vole + core ee 
(1) 


Take any branch a, joining two nodes, k and/. The current 
in the branch gives two terms in the above expression, namely: 


Vila + Vita = Vil — Vi fu = 4c Vi) Lu 


= (Vi-V_) fa 
But Ve- Vi = rola +9 wo Leela + Midi +e I. 
Leave, 
te Jts5 eh 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1703 


HenterV, — Ve =r Ie t,he el. foe Ma Tt. 


5 Later. 
+ Melee t+... .)—jo(ae 2 ) 
Now write similar equations for the other branches. The left- 
hand sides will add up to the left-hand side of (1). The 
right-hand sides will add up to D + 27 w (T,,— T, ) 
~ Hence: 


Vii+tVeh4+...V,.f, =D+2j0(Ta—T,) (2) 


Hence the real part of Vi fy + Velo +. 2s 0 Ve Ti is the 
Joulian heat generated per second, and the pure imaginary 
part is 27 w times the mean magnetic energy minus the mean 
electrostatic energy. 


III. APPLICATION OF THE RELATION, POWER FACTOR 
COMPENSATION 

The principle enunciated in II is frequently useful in deter- 
mining the possibilities of solution of certain problems, and the 
minimum amounts of magnetic and electrostatic energy 
storage necessary. 

Let us consider first the problem of power factor correction 
in a polyphase system by static means. Because of the possi- 
bility of introducing arbitrary quadrature e.m.fs. in series 
with any phase by means of transformers placed across the 
other phases, many of us have tried to compensate for lagging 
power factor by means of transformers only. The constant 
failure of the schemes tried has convinced most of us that the 
idea is inherently impossible, but it is satisfying to have a 
definite proof of this fact. 

The proposition is to insert a network between a polyphase 
supply and a lagging load so as to give unity power factor at 
the generator end. Sum up V / for all the terminals of the 
network. For the supply terminals, since cos 6 = 1, 2 V / is 
real; the coefficient of 7 is zero. For the load terminals since 
leading currents are supplied to the network @ is negative. 
Hence the coefficient of 7 in V f for a load terminal must be 
negative. Its value is the wattless power supplied to the load 
through that terminal. Thus V 7 summed up for all the 
terminals must have for the coefficient of 7 the negative of the 
wattless power supplied the load. Hence by equation (2) 

2 w (T.— T,,) = wattless power of load. 


1704. SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


Hence in any such network there must be electrostatic 
storage of energy. In fact the minimum amount possible is 


see times the wattless power of the load. 


IV. PHASE SPLITTING 


The use of condensers and reactances for changing from 
single phase to polyphase is well known. We shall here deter- 
mine the minimum amounts of condenser and reactance energy 
storage necessary for this purpose. The impossibility of 
supplying’a balanced polyphase load of lagging or unity power 
factor from a single-phase source by means of reactances alone 
will also be shown here. 

Suppose then a network inserted between a single-phase’ 
source and a polyphase load such that the polyphase is bal- 
anced. 


Summing up V 7 for the load terminals we get — n E, f, 
where E, is the polyphase voltage to neutral, and J, is the cur- 
rent per phase supplied to the load. Summing V / up for the 
supply terminals gives HL, /, where EZ, is the single-phase voltage 
and J, is the current taken from the supply. Hence for the 
network, 


SVif=H,f,—nkH,f, = D+ 25 w(T,— T.). (2’) 

The double-frequency component of power supplied by the 
single-phase source is real part of EH, J, &!; that withdrawn 
by the load is zero as shown in II. This double-frequency 
power must be supplying and removing energy from the 
magnetic and electrostatic fields in the network. The integral 
with respect to time of this double frequency component, real 


part of EH, I, &*! must give the double frequency com- 


2j) w 
ponent of the total energy stored. The mean value of all the 
- energy stored added to the double frequency component must 


never be less than zero as energy can never be negative. Hence 
we must have 


Tm + Tis not less than absolute value of 


be 
ee By T, 
_ 20(T'm + T.) is not less than absolute value of E, I;. 
Now absolute value of E, I, is the same as absolute value of 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1705 


wer , and this, of course, is not less than the real part of E, S;. 
Using the symbol > for “greater than or equals’’: 
2.0 (T', + T.) > absolute value of E, 1, > real part of Ey I, 
(3) 
From equation (2) 
2 w(T,, — T.) = imaginary part of FE, f,;— imaginary part 
of n FE, Le (4) 
Subtracting (4) from (3) 
4 wT, > absolute value of E, f;— imaginary part of E, 7, 


+ imaginary part of n E; T, (5) 
Adding (3) and (4) we get 
4.T,, > absolute value of E; f, + imaginary part of Ey f, 


— imaginary part of n E, f, (6) 

In equation (5) the first two terms on the right must clearly 
combine to give a positive quantity. If the polyphase load 
has a lagging, power factor, imaginary part of 
n HE» f, will be positive. Hence in this case the 
right hand side of E will be positive, and not 
roxy less than imaginary part of n E./,. Thus with 
a lagging polyphase load, the minimum condenser 

energy storage for which a network can be con- 


0 A structed is given by: 
Fic. 2 


B 


4 wT, = wattless power of load. (6) 


Actually, however, this limit cannot be reached, for to 
attain it we must make imaginary part of E, /; equal absolute 
value of E,/f,. Since, however, the real part of EL, f, is 
determined by the true polyphase power, this equality can be 
attained only as E, /; becomes infinite. (See Fig. 2). Equa- 
tion (6) shows that at the same time, 7’,, would have to become 


infinite. . 
Similarly for a leading polyphase load, the magnetic energy 


T,, cannot be less than — times the wattless polyphase 


power. To actually attain this value, however, would require 
zero single-phase power factor and infinite electrostatic energy. 

A case of special interest is where the single-phase power 
factor is unity. In this case the imaginary part of E, f, is zero, 
and the absolute value of E; /, equals the true single-phase 
F power. Hence (5) and (6) become: 


1706 SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


4aT, > Single-phase power + polyphase wattless power 
- (lagging). (5”’) 
4 wT,, > Single-phase power — polyphase wattless power 
Ae (lagging). (6””) 


Networks are well known, which effect phase splitting with 
the minimum of condenser and reactance energy storage indi- 
cated above. We now see that it is impossible to do better in 
this respect. 

When the polyphase load has a power factor less than 
cos 45 deg. then if network losses are negligible, equation (6’’) 
shows that reactance may be dispensed with while still keeping 
unity power factor on the single phase. 

If a phase splitting network employs the minimum amount 
of energy storage, the total instantaneous energy stored must 
be zero twice every cycle. When the inductance energy is 
zero, the inductance voltages are a maximum. When the 
condenser energy is zero, the condenser voltages are zero. 
Hence in such a network all the inductance voltages are in 
phase with each other and in quadrature with the condenser 
voltages. 


IV. THE RECIPROCAL RELATION 


Suppose a system of terminal potentials V,V2...V, 
applied to the terminals of a network produces the terminal 
currents J;, J... .I,. Suppose a different system of terminal 
potentials V,’, V2’,. ..V,’ produces the terminal currents 
MA te Sodus tt die. Lek 


Via a? te Va Tg ate Be ates eee 
ES ae Ee (7) 


Such reciprocal relations are well known in mathematical . 
physics. The proof as given below follows the lines of the 
proofs usually given. 


Using the notation of II, we have at once: 
avi Chav! belie! pela a o= Vale Veal! 
al Shs (8) 


Any branch @ joining the nodes k and | contributes two 
terms to the left hand member of (8), namely:V_ Ini’ + Vili’. 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1707 


Butix 
Ve Ted’ + Vilie’ = Velev’ — Vi ly = I! (Ve — Vi) 


pat E SERS Avy aie pes eee 


Orie 
foe, ] 
= Tale he. ie baa dela 42M alg ly 
: ted Fd hg 
+ M.cla I.+. . e) are (ee. 


Summing up for all the branches gives 

ZV: (Liet’ + Ip’ +. . = = feig {oA ey Ae’ Spe ls see 
+90 (Lealola’ +tist, Ii! 
+M.,1.1,'/+M,,I1,/I,+. . ) 


pelt BY f fy Le 
jw ( OF, Cy 


a 


sas) (9) 


Similarly, by summing up 2 V,! 1 + Ins +... .) first by 
nodes and then by branches, 
PON Pig lee eee Vy Ts +... Vn" Ty 
(8’) 
ay,’ ee Piles seal et! = tad adhe ait eibed §, Gaus 
+9 O Wisada Lo + doyle Ts 
+ Megle Te Modal 5 


+.%-.) 
. 1 Pela Fi aed By 
ryan Ca ‘2 Cy 

+...) (9’) 


Hence comparing (8) (9) (8’) and (9) we see that 
V ely! - V2 V2’ Seis wei s Ve dns oe, Vit, =F Vo! Le 

Se ge nd Be (7) 
From equation (7) follows at once the well known reciprocal 


properties of a network. For example; suppose we supply 
re a 


se 


1708 SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


one volt to the terminal 1 of a network keeping the other 
terminals at zero voltage. A certain current J, will flow at 
terminal 2. Now suppose we apply one volt at terminal 2 
keeping the other terminals at zero potential. A certain 
current I,’ will flow at terminal 1. Now substituting for Vi, 
V.,. ....V,, the valies:1, 0,.0,: ... 0,andgor Vir‘, Ve\ no) = Vee 
the values 0, 1, 0.. . . 0, in equation (7) we find: 
R=, 

That is, a volt placed at terminal 1 produces the same current 
at terminal 2 as one volt placed at terminal 2 would produce at 
terminal 1. 

In the next section we shall be concerned principally with 
four terminal networks in which the currents in pairs of 
terminals are constrained to be equal and opposite. For this 
special case, putting n = 4 in equation (7) and I; = — Nh, 
y= — Ih, 1,’ ==— 11) I’ =— Is’, we get: 


(Vi-— V3) Is’ + We-— Va) Ie’ = Wi’ — V3") Tv + (V2! — Va Vda 
Setting Vi— V3 = Ei, V2— Vs = Ee, Vi’ — V3’ = Ey’ 
and V,'—-V,’ = E.’. We find, 
By, dy! + Ey.d,! = Hi’ 1, + Ee’ I, (7’) 


From this equation we deduce at once this following recipro- 
eal relation. One volt difference of potential placed at one 
pair of terminals will circulate the same amount of current 
through a short circuit at the other pair of terminals as one 
volt difference of potential placed at the second pair will 
circulate through a short circuit at the first pair. 


V. THE GENERAL SINGLE-PHASE TRANSFORMING NETWORK 


Any network having four terminals may be used to receive 
current at some voltage at one pair of terminals and delivering 
current at some other voltage or phase at the other pair of 
terminals. We propose to investigate here what are the limita- 
tions on such transformations by purely static means. 

The solution in detail for the steady state in any network 
can always be obtained by means of Kirchhoff’s Laws general- 
ized for complex quantities. Given the currents J, and J, in 
the two pairs of termindls, which we shall now call the primary 
and secondary terminals, EH, and EH; the primary and secondary 
voltages may be calculated. Now the equations given by 
Kirchhoff’s laws are all linear in the unknowns. The process 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1709 


of solving them only involves linear operations. Hence H, and 
E, must be linear functions of J; and I>. Thus: 


Ek, == 1) I, + b I, 
Bob tt ASer. : (8) 

Here the quantities a, b, b’, c are complex numbers.. How- 
ever, it is easily seen that they are not independent. 

In fact, applying the reciprocal relation (7’) we find: 

Ey I,’ le 1.’ = al, I,’ a5 6 ToT,’ =i OT; I,’ + ¢ 1, I,’ 
and Ei,’ I, + yee = Gaband + Dal seis +- Diet aeds + Cus Ls 
Hence bale, ee + b’ JE Tbs — OWs' ts + b’ eds 
Hence b (I, Ihe — J hee I) — b’ We IE; = Jb Te) 

Therefore: b= 6" 

Thus the primary and secondary voltages and currents of 
any network of the kind we are considering always satisfy 
relations of the form: 

Ee (ay +43 2) I, + (b; +4 be) T, 
Ky = (6b, + f be) Ip + (Oz 27 Coy To (8’) 

What is the significance of the real and pure imaginary parts 
of the coefficients in (8’). Forming the power expression we 
have: : 

Ey if. ao E, Ia a [a1 I, qi = by (I. 1 ata I, 7.) = C11. Ty] 
+ j[a2 1; ti + be Le I, ait Is) + 21, T,] 

Since the two brackets are real, the first must equal D the 
rate of generation of Joulian heat. If there are no losses in 
the network the first bracket must be zero, and the coefficients 
a, b, c must be pure imaginary. 

Since we are interested in the inherent limitations upon the 
transformation possibilities of an ideal network, that is, one 
in which the losses are zero, we shall assume in all that follows 
that a, 6, and care pure imaginary. * 


a=jA 
b=jB 
C= 96 


where A BC are real. The network equations then are: 


Peep Ad aj DT, 
E,=jBI,+jC1, ; : (8’’) 


1710 SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 


Let us first consider the possibility of a constant potential 
constant potential transformation. Given EH, constant, we 
require EH, to be independent of the load, I. 

Eliminating J, in (8’’) we obtain: 


(9) 


»= B/ABL + (> SES )L 


jA 


E, can be independent of J, only if BX - AC =0. This is 
the condition for perfect coupling. Furthermore, the coeffi- 
cient of Fisreal. Hence we conclude, in any constant potential 
to constant potential transformation without losses, the trans- 
formed potential must agree in phase with the primary poten- 
tial. 

Next consider a constant potential constant current trans- 
formation. Solving (8’’) for I, we get: 


. jg A 
I= -jBE. + (2477) (10) 
I, is independent of E, only if A = 0. Furthermore the 
coefficient of #,, is pure imaginary. Hence in any constant 
potential constant current transformation without losses the 
secondary current is in quadrature with the primary voltage. 
Let us now discuss the problem of determining a network 
such that for a given secondary load the secondary voltage 
shall be in quadrature with the primary voltage, and the pri- 
mary power factor shall have a predetermined value. ; 
The load can be given in terms of its admittance, y. = gs 
—jb.. The primary power factor can be determined by 
giving the apparent primary admittance, I,E; = y: = gi—7 by 
Since there are no losses in the network we must have g; = g2 
= g. 
What restrictions do the above conditions impose upon A, 
B, C? Substituting J, = gg —j bi) Ey, I, = —(g — j be) Es, 
and HE, = 7 EH, in (8’’), we'get: 


E,=j(g-jJoJNAH, 4+97(—-g4+ 7b) I BE, 
JE, =j-jb) BE, +3 (-g+jb)jCK 
Simplifying: 
1=bA+gb+jgA-—b.B) 
lim g B= b: Chg (by B= gC) 


SLEPIAN: LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS 1711 


Separating the real and imaginary parts of these two equations, 
we get: 

=bA+g9B 

gA—b.B 

gB—b.C 

=b,B+ gC 

Solving we find: 


I 


oe a 
I 


b: Ea 
LS oo ne = 35 
byb. + g? $ bb+ 9 L b,b2 4+ 9 


Thus we see that A, B, and C are completely determined by 
the conditions imposed on the network. But A, B, C deter- 
mine entirely the secondary voltage in terms of the secondary 
current. Hence we conclude, all networks without losses 
which effect phase quadrature for a given load with given 
primary power factor have the same inherent regulation of 
secondary voltage as the secondary load is varied. 


REFERENCES 


The relation between wattless power and electrostatic and 
magnetic energies given in IJ, was discovered independently 
by the author. Since this paper was submitted to the Institute 
the same relation was proved in a different manner by J. B. 
Pomey, Revue Generale de l’electricite, Vol. III, 9, pp. 815-3819, 
March 2, 1918. 

The relation has subsequently been generalized by the 
author to include rotating commutatorless machines, with 
many interesting conclusions. 

Examples of reciprocal relations such as are given in IV may 
be found in Maxwell, ‘Electricity and Magnetism’, third 
edition, pp. 105 and 405. 

April 15, 1919. 


Savitz bot Tees! Sisto! agg hq’ 
a Mid tx aaee bs i 


CE 1 if; apiael 


Se Sea ee 


Presented at a joint meeting of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers and the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers, Calcutta, India, January 
2, 1919. 


Copyright 1919 by A. I. E. E. 


STARTING CONDITIONS OF SYNCHRONOUS 
MACHINES 


BY ALFRED HAY AND F. N. MOWDAWALLA 


INTRODUCTION 

es view of the growing popularity and importance of the syn- 

chronous motor as one of the standard types of motor 
available for power distribution purposes, and its increasing use 
as a means of improving the power factor of a load, no apol- 
ogy seems necessary for a paper containing a detailed study 
of the behavior of such a motor during what has always 
been regarded as a somewhat critical period—viz., the per- 
iod when the motor is being accelerated from rest to syn- 
chronous speed. The subject is by no means a new one, and 
has already been dealt with by several writers, not, however, 
in a manner sufficiently thorough and exhaustive to make fur- 
ther contributions to it superfluous, and one of the main objects 
of the present paper is to explain a number of hitherto some- 
what obscure points, and to draw attention to others which 
have not previously been noticed. 


REVIEW OF PREVIOUS WORK ON THE SUBJECT 


The earliest paper specially devoted to astudy of the starting 
conditions in synchronous machines appears to be one read in 
1912 before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers by 
C. J. Fechheimer.’ In this the author, after some general 
introductory remarks, gives an account of experiments made > 
to determine (1) the relation connecting the starting torque 
with the impressed potential difference under various con- 
ditions and (2) the variation of torque, current and power factor 
with speed, while the rotor is accelerated from rest, a constant 
potential difference being maintained across the stator ter- 
minals. Theexperimental results are embodied in an interesting 
series of curves. Among the questions discussed by the au- 
thor are the desirability or otherwise of keeping the field 


1. C. J. Fechheimer, Trans. A. I. E. E. Vou, XXXI, 1912, p. 529, 


1713— 


1714 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan, 2 


circuit open during the acceleration period, and the tendency 
of certain synchronous machines to run in the neighborhood 
of half the speed of synchronism. Fechheimer’s paper gave 
rise to a very interesting discussion. 

In 1913 E. Rosenberg’ read a paper before the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers, on Synchronizing machines in which he 
considered, among other things, the occurrences during the 
starting period, and discussed in some detail the behavior 
of the machine towards the end of the acceleration period, just 
before it is pulled into synchronism. It may be mentioned 
that in the discussion on Fechheimer’s paper, it was stated by 
B. G. Lamme that it was “‘difficult to see just what is going on 
in the motor at the instant it pulls into synchronism.” So far 
as the authors are aware,Rosenberg’s was the first attempt to 
furnish a detailed explanation of the action in question. 

Thenext contribution to thesubject isone by F. D. Newbury, 
in the form of a paper read before the American Institute of 
Electrical EngineersinJune 1913.° The main interest of this 
paper lies in the oscillographic records which are given of the 
starting period. 

In December 1917 the authors of the present paper piiblished: 
in the Journal of the Indian Institute of Science, an account 
of some experimental investigations of the occurrences during 
the starting period of a synchronous machine, and a full 
theoretical discussion of the type of induction motor whose 
stator is supplied with polyphase currents, and whose rotor is 
provided with a single-magnetic-axis winding. As willbe seen 
later the theoretical results obtained explain in a satisfactory 
manner certain striking peculiarities exhibited by the machine 
during the starting period. 

The most recent addition to the literature of the subject 
is an article by Theo. Schou in the Electrical World of April 
‘6th, 1918 (Vol. 71, p. 714). Inthis article the author points 
out that a satisfactory selfstarting synchronous motor should 
partake of the characteristics of both an induction motor: 
and an alternator, and should present features of design 
intermediate between these two classes of machines. He 
accordingly advocates the use of a shorter air gap and longer 


4 


2. EK. Rosenberg, ‘‘Self-synchronizing Machines.” J ournal of the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, Vol. 51, p. 62 (1913). 


3. Transactions of the Ameriean Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Vol. 32, p. 1509. 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1715 


polar arc than are customary in alternators of standard design. 
He further suggests the use of materials having a pronounced 
skin effect for the squirrel-cage windings of  self-starting 
synchronous motors* and points out the advantages of frac- 
tional-pitch windings in reducing the troubles arising from 
dead points. 


TORQUES CONCERNED IN ACCELERATING THE MOTOR AND IN 
PULLING IT INTO SYNCHRONISM 

The self-starting synchronous motor is accelerated and fin- 

ally pulled into synchronism by the action of a number of 


N 


(c) 


Fig. 1—Fuiux Disrarisutions ror DirreRENT RELATIVE Posttions or 
STATOR FreLtpD AND MAGNET Poues 


torques, differing widely from each other, and the resultant 
effect of which will largely depend on their relative importance. 
Cases may arise where, owing to the preponderance of a 
certain type of component torque, it may be impossible to get 
the machine to run up to synchronous speed. Again, the 
torques concerned in the initial acceleration of the rotor are 
quite distinct from the torque which finally pulls it into syn- 
chronism. ‘The authors are of opinion that no really clear 
understanding of the occurrences during the starting period is 
attainable without a detailed study of the various torques which 
act on the rotor during that period. It will accordingly be 
necessary to consider the nature of the various torques 
concerned. These torques may be classified as follows: 


4. The utilization of the skin effect in the rotor conductors of induction 
motors was patented by H. M. Hobart in 1900. 


1716 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


1. Torque due to varying magnetic reluctance (synchronous 
torque.) 

2. Torque due to hysteresis. 

3. Torque due to starting squirrel-cage or damping coils if 
present. 

4. Torque due to currents induced in the field winding, if 
this winding is closed. 

5. Torque due to eddy currents. 


1. Torqu—E DUE TO VARYING MAGNETIC RELUCTANCE 


It is a well known general principle of electromagnetism that 
any electromagnetic system which includes a movable member 
tends to assume a configuration which corresponds to minimum 
reluctance and therefore maximum flux. Displacements of 
the movable member from the position of minimum reluc- 
tance call into play forces tending to restore it to that posi- 
tion. The application of this general principle to the special 
case of a salient pole rotor, which is acted on by the rotating 
field of thestator, will be easily understood by reference to Fig. 
1. In this figure, three different positions of one of the 
rotor poles are shown relatively to the stator polar surfaces. 
The center of the stator polar surface is in each case marked 
with the letter N. In Fig. 1B, the relative positions of the 
rotor and stator polar surfaces correspond to minimum reluc- 
tance, and from the symmetry of flux distribution it is 
immediately obvious that there is no tangential pull on the 
rotor. In Fig. 1A, the rotor pole is shown displaced from the 
position of minimum reluctancein one direction, and in Fig. 1c 
in the opposite direction. If we bear in mind that the dyn- 
amical stresses correspond to a tension along the lines of 
force and a pressure at right angles to them, it is easy to see 
that in Fig. 14 there is a tangential force acting on the pole from 
right to left, while in Fig. 1c it acts from left to right. If we 
now suppose that the stator polar surfaces travel past the pole 
ina direction from left to right, then the successive positions 
will be those shown in Fig. 1. For every displacement of the 
stator polar surface to one side of a rotor pole, there will be 
an equal displacement to the other side, and the forces corres- 
ponding to equal displacements in opposite directions will be 
equal and opposite. Thus the rotating field will exert an 
alternating torque on the rotor, and the positive and negative 
half-waves of this torque will be ous The frequency of 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDI TIONS 1717 


the torque will be equal to twice the supply frequency multi- 
plied by the motor slip, and so long as the motor slips, the 
mean value of the alternating torque due to varying magnetic 
reluctance will be zero. The only effect of this torque is to 
throw the rotor into forced vibrations, having a frequency 
equal to that of the torque. Owing to the large moment of 
inertia of the rotor the vibrations will be imperceptible for large 
values of the slip, 7. e., during the greater part of the accel- 
eration period. When, however, the slip has become suffi- 
ciently smalland in consequence the frequency of the torque 
sufficiently low, the amplitude of the rotor oscillations will 
become marked, and will increase with decreasing slip. 

Summing up, we see that the torque due to variable mag- 
netic reluctanee is for all speeds below synchronism an alterna- 
ting torque consisting of equal positive and negative half-waves, 
and hence having a zero mean algebraic value. It is there- 
fore quite inoperative so far as steady acceleration of the 
rotor is concerned, and only produces equal periodic accelera- 
tions and retardations, i.e., it causes oscillations of the 
rotor. ‘The period of these oscillations is determined by the 
rotor slip, and steadily increases with decreasing slip. At 
the same time, the amplitude of the oscillation increases. 

The graph of the varying magnetic reluctance torque ex- 
pressed as a function of the speed is shown in Fig. 2A. For all 
speeds below synchronism its mean value is zero, while at syn- 
chronism it is capable of assuming any positive or negative 
value between definite limits. Since the speed of synchronism 
is the only speed at which this torque has a value differing 
from zero, we may conveniently refer to it as the synchronous 
torque. 


2. ToRQUE DUE To HYSTERESIS 


In dealing with the torque due to varying magnetic re- 
luctance, we have neglected the effect of hysteresis. It now 
becomes necessary to take this into account. Owing to hys- 
teresis the rotor will tend to retain more or less strongly the 
effects of previous magnetizations. Thus referring to Figs. 
1A and 1c, if hysteresis were absent, the magnitudes of the 
torques in these two cases would be equal. Owing, how- 
ever, to the fact that in the position of the rotating field 
corresponding to Fig. 1A the magnetization of the rotor is 
increasing from a lower to a higher value, while in position Fig. 
1c it is decreasing from a higher to a lower value, the actual 


1718 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


flux in Fig. 1c will be higher than that in Fig. 1A. The same 
applies to each pair of corresponding or equidistant posi- 
tions on opposite sides of the position of maximum flux shown 


Fic. 2—Torqur-Sprrep Curves 


in Fig. 1B. For any such pair of positions, the driving torque 
is greater than the retarding torque. The effect of hyster- 
esis is thus seen to be the production of a disparity between the 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1719 


positive and negative half-waves of the varying magnetic 
reluctance torque, the positive half-waves being uniformly 
larger than the negative ones. This effect is equivalent to 
raising the magnetic reluctance torque waves above the axis 
of time, 2. e., to the addition of a steady driving torque to 
the alternating magnetic reluctance torque. The torque 
due to hysteresis is thus seen to be a steady driving torque 
and is instrumental in producing acceleration of the rotor. It 
is to be noted that, assuming the flux per pole to remain con- 
stant during the acceleration period, the hysteresis torque 
has the same value for all speeds below synchronism. If the 
speed were made to pass through synchronism to higher vaules, 
the hysteresis torque would undergo reversal at synchronism. 

The graph of the hysteresis torque as a function of the 
speed is shown in Fig. 2B. 


3. TORQUE DUE TO STARTING SQUIRREL-CAGE OR 
DAMPING COILS IF PRESENT 


Little need be said about this torque, which may be called 
the induction motor torque, as everybody is familiar with 
the relation connecting the torque and speed of an induc- 
tion motor. The squirrel-cage of a self-starting synchronous 
machine forms the rotor winding of an induction motor 
whose stator windings are represented by the armature; the 
relation connecting torque and speed will be of precisely 
the same nature as in an induction motor. . 

The graph of this torque as a function of the speed is of the 
well-known form shown in Fig. 2c. 

The method of varying the torque-speed curve of an induc- 
tion motor by the introduction of resistance into the rotor is 
also well known. The effect of introducing resistance is to 
cause a shearing of the torque speed curves backwards 
towards the origin, the maximum torque remaining un- 
affected in value, but occurring at a lower speed. If a 
very powerful torque is necessary at starting, it is advisable 
to use a high-resistance squirrel-cage. On the other hand, with 
such asquirrel cage the speed to which the motor finally settles 
down corresponds to a large slip, and this, as will be seen 
later on, makes it more difficult to pull the rotor into syn- 
chronism. The ideal arrangement would be one in which the 
squirrel-cage resistance at starting is such as to give maximum 
torque, the resistance then automatically decreasing with 


1720 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


increase of speed in such a manner that at each speed maxi- 
mum torque is maintained, until finally the lowest possible 
resistance is reached, corresponding to a very small slip. 
The use of the skin effect in conductors for automatically 
decreasing the rotor resistance with increasing speed has 
recently been proposed by Theo. Schou.? 


4. TorQUE DUE TO CURRENTS INDUCED IN FIELD WIND- 
ING, IF THIS WINDING IS CLOSED 


If the field winding be closed, the currents induced in it will 
give rise to a torque, and a careful study of the nature of this 
torque is essential to a clear understanding of the occurrences 
during ‘the starting period. The armature of the machine 
may again be regarded as forming the stator winding of an 
induction motor, of which the rotor winding is represented by 
the field coils. There is, however, this very important 
difference between the starting squirrel-cage and the field wind- 
ing: the currents induced in the squirrel-cage are capable, 
according to their distribution in space, of giving rise to a field 
whose magnetic axes may occupy any positions whatsoever 
relatively to the center lines of the field poles; but the cur- 
rents induced in the field winding can only producea field whose 
magnetic axes are coincident with the center lines of the field 
poles. This is conveniently expressed by saying that the field 
winding is a “‘single magnetic axis’ winding; because it can 
only produce a field having a single definite set of magnetic 
axes, namely, those corresponding to the center lines of the sal- 
ient poles. Now a motor having a polyphase stator, but a 
single-phase or single-magnetic-axis rotor, exhibits certain strik- 
ing peculiarities which differentiate it sharply from a motor in 
which both stator and rotor windings are polyphase. The 
earliest reference to this type of motor which the authors have 
been able to find occurs ina paper by H. Gorges®. Since such 
motors are not ordinarily used in practise, their characteristics 
do not seem to be very generally known, and have only occa- 
sionally been referred to. A complete analytical theory of 
this type of motor is given in the Appendix. The torque-speed 
curve of such a motor is shown in Fig. 2p, and its most strik- 
ing characteristic is the torque reversal which occurs over 


5. Loe. cit. 


6. H. Gorges: “Ueber Drehstrommotoren mit Moinindertae Tour- 
enzahl, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, Vol. 17, p. 517 (1896.) 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1721 


a certain range of speed in the neighborhood of _half- 
synchronism. The analytical theory of this motor, is some- 
what complicated, but the following general explanation 
based on a paper published in 1898 by F. Eichberg’ may 
be useful. The currents induced in the single-phase rotor 
winding by the rotating field of the stator give rise to a field 
which, relatively to the rotor core, is a simple alternating or 
oscillating field. By a well-known transformation this oscill- 
ating field may be replaced by two equal and (relatively 
to the rotor core) oppositely rotating fields, the crest value 
of each rotating field being half the maximum crest value 
of the oscillating field. Now if the slip of the motor be s and 
if its speed of synchronism be denoted by n, the frequency of 
the rotor currents will be sf, where f is the frequency of sup- 
ply, and the speed of its component rotating fields relatively 
to the rotor core will be sn, the speed of the rotor in space 
being (1— s) . Regarding the direction of rotation of the 
rotor as positive, the speed of one of the rotating fields re- 
latively to the rotor core is + s n, while that of the other is 
—smn. Hence the speeds of the rotor rotating fields in 
space are sn + (1—s)n =n, and—sn+(1—s)n=(1- 
2s)n. The interaction between the stator field, and the first 
rotating component of the rotor field, whose speed m in space 
is the same as that of the stator field, gives rise to a torque in 
every respect similar to that of an ordinary induction motor 
with polyphase windings on both stator and rotor. The 
second rotating component of the rotor field, whose speed in 
space is (1— 2s) n, is clearly incapable of reacting with the 
stator field in such a manner as to give rise to a resultant 
torque; for, owing to the difference of speed, the relative 
position of the fields is constantly changing, periodically 
passing through a succession of cycles during each of which 
the average algebraic value of the torque is zero. Although 
incapable of torque production by interaction with the stator 
field, the second rotating component of the rotor field is capable 
of giving rise to a torque by different kind of action. In 
sweeping across the stator conductors, it induces in them 
e.m.fs. of frequency (1—2s)f, and these produce currents 
of the same frequency in the stator windings and the cir- 
cuit external to them (represented by the mains and every- 

7. F. Eichberg, Zeitschrift fur Elektrotechnik (Wein), Vol. 16, p. 578 
(1898). 


1722 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


thing connected across them, generators, motors, lamps, 
etc.). Since the total impedance external to the stator wind- 
ings is extremely small in comparison with that of the 
windings themselves, the result, so far as the currents of fre- 
quency (1 — 2's) f are concerned, is nearly the same as if the 
stator windings were short-circuited. The currents give rise to 
arotating field whose speed (1 — 2s) n in space is the same as 
that of the inducing rotor field, and the interaction of these 
two fields whose relative space position is invariable, results in 
the production of a torque. To fix ideas, we may think of 
the second component of the rotor field as produced by a poly- 
phase winding on the rotor supplied with suitable polyphase 
currents having a frequency s f, and of the rotating field 
due to this as inducing currents of frequency (1 — 2s) f in 
the stator windings. The arrangement would then be equiv- 
alent to a polyphase motor whose primary is represented by 
the rotor and whose secondary is represented by the stator. 
The slip of this imaginary motor would be (1 — 2s) and so 
long as s is less than 1%, the slip and torque would be posi- 
tive. Zero slip would occur at s = 4, 7. ¢., at half the speed 
of synchronism. Beyond this point the slip and torque would 
assume negative values. 

The resultant torque of the motor would be obtained by 
taking the algebraic sum of the torques due to the two oppos- 
itely rotating components of the oscillating rotor field. This 
torque is represented by the full line curve in Fig. 2p, the 
dotted and chain-dotted curves corresponding to the com- 
ponent torques due to the two rotating components of the 
rotor field. 

If we suppose that the torque arising from the current in the 
field winding is large in comparison with the other torques act- 
ing on the rotor, so that the dominant effect is that due 
to the field winding, then it is evident that the torque reversal 
which occurs at half-synchronous speed will tend to make the 
machine run in the neighborhood of that speed, and it will 
then be impossible to run the machine up to full synchronism. 

In the discussions which have taken place regarding the 
tendency of the machine to settle down to a speed in the 
neighborhood of half-synchronism, erroneous views have fre- 
quently been expressed. Some engineers appear to hold the 
opinion that the machine locks into exact half-synchronism. 
As we have seen, the speed to which it settles down, although 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1723 


near half-synchronism, is not definite, and may, according to 
the special circumstances of each case, be anywhere in the 
neighborhood of that speed. It isno more correct to say that 
the machine locks into half-synchronism, than it would be to say 
that an ordinary induction motor locks into full synchronism. 


5. TORQUE DUE TO EDDY CURRENTS 


If the field structure is laminated throughout, the torque 
due to eddy-currents will be insignificant. The case is other- 
wise, however, with solid field poles in which large eddy- 
currents may arise. If we were to imagine the rotor replaced 
by a solid cylinder of conducting material, then the rotating 
field of the stator would give rise to rotating eddy-current 
sheets in the conducting cylinder, and the axes of such cur- 
rent sheets* would follow-the axes of the rotating stator 
field. There would in this case be perfect freedom of motion 
of the axes of the current sheets relatively to the rotor, and 
this condition is closely approximated to in an ordinary 
squirrel-cage winding. If we next suppose that the conduct- 
ing cylinder is cut up into a number of sectors by radial bar- 
riers of insulating material, then the freedom of motion of 
the axes of the current sheets relatively to the rotor would be 
largely destroyed, and these axes could only swing through an 
angular distance not exceeding the angular width of a sector. 
Now this is approximately the case corresponding to a salient 
pole rotor with solid poles. In such a rotor, owing to the 
restriction imposed on the free development of eddy cur- 
rents by the relatively large spaces between the field poles, the 
axes of the eddy currents can only travel through a relatively 
short distance. If the axes could not travel at all, the ar- 
rangement would be identical with that of a rotor having a 
single magnetic axis winding; while if the axes could travel with 
perfect freedom, it would be identical with that of a squirrel- 
cage rotor. Hence we see that the torque due to eddy cur- 
rents in the solid field cores will partake partly of the nature 
of the torque due to a single-magnetic-axis rotor winding, and 
partly of that due to an ordinary polyphase rotor. The single- 
magnetic—axis effect is, however, in many cases found to pre- 
dominate, and considerable difficulty may then be exper- 
DR ON ke A De eh Se ets Se 


8. By the axes of the current sheets are meant the lines along which 


‘the current density is zero or the lines with which all the individual cur- 
~ rent filaments are linked. 


™ 


1724 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


ienced in getting the rotor to pass well beyond half-synch- 
ronous speed. 


PULLING INTO SYNCHRONISM 


Of the various torques concerned in accelerating the rotor 
from rest to synchronism, three, namely the induction motor, 
the single-magnetic-axis and the eddy current torque, are 
functions of the speed, and may hence conveniently be refer- 
red to as the speed torques. .Let us suppose that by the 
action of the speed and hysteresis torques the rotor has been 
brought to a speed not far removed from synchronism. Since 
in the neighborhood of synchronism, the speed torques rapidly 
decrease with decreasing slip—as shown in Fig. 2—and assume 
zero values at synchronism, it is evident that these torques 
would never be able to bring the rotor up to full synchronism; 
and the hysteresis torque is generally much too weak to 
effect this. The rotor is finally pulled into synchronism by 
the varying magnetic reluctance torque, and is maintained at 
synchronous speed by the same torque, all the other torques 
vanishing at that speed. As already explained, the varying 
magnetic reluctance torque may for this reason be conven- 
iently termed the synchronous torque, and we shall in what 
follows refer to it as such. 

We have already seen that the synchronous torque is an al- 
ternating torque having a zero mean value for all speeds other 
than that of synchronism, and is thus incapable of exerting 
any steady driving or accelerating effect so long as the speed 
of the rotor is below synchronism. The frequency of thesyn- 
chronous torque is given by 2 s f., and the forced oscillations of 
the rotor to which the synchronous torque gives rise have the 
same frequency as the torque itself. Now the rotor speed 
oscillations call into play a further alternating or oscillating 
torque, owing to the fact that the speed torques change with 
the speed of the rotor. The speed torques may for small val- 
ues of the slip be taken to be proportional to the slip, and 
hence their changes to be proportional to the changes in the 
speed. The effect is the same as if we were to substitute for the 
fluctuating speed torques a constant torque equal to the sum of 
the mean values of the speed torques, together with an oscillat- 
ing torque whose amplitude is proportional to that of the 
speed fluctuations. 


ae 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1725 


For the sake of simplicity we shall assume the speed fluct- 
uations to obey the simple harmonic law. They may then 
be graphically represented in a vector diagram by the projec- 
tions on the vertical axis of the vector O V in Fig. 3, this vector 
rotating at s f, revolutions per second. The instantaneous 
projection of O V gives the difference between the instan- 
taneous speed and the mean speed. Since the oscillating 


“component of the speed torques may, as we have seen, in 


the neighborhood of synchronism be taken to be propor- 
tional at every instant to the difference between the instan- 
taneous and the mean speed, and since increase of speed pro- 
duces decrease of speed torques, it is evident that the oscil- 
lating or fluctuating component of the speed torques may be 
represented by a vector O F in direct phase opposition toO V. 
Next, if we assume that the alternating synchronous torque 
is also a simple harmonic function of the time, then the 
resultant of the synchronous torque and the oscillating com- 
ponent of the speed torques will give us the alternating 
torque which gives rise to the periodic accelerations and retar- 
dations of the rotor. The phase of this resultant torque is 
easily determined; for since its zero value must occur at the 
instant of maximum speed, it is evident that the vector O R, 
which represents the resultant torque, must be 90 deg. 
ahead of OV, as shown in Fig. 3. Lastly, the synchronous 
torque vector O'S is obtained by subtracting from the result- 
ant accelerating torque O F the oscillating component O F of 
the speed torques. The angular velocity of all the vectors in 
the diagram of Fig. 3 is directly proportional to the slip, 
being, in fact, equal to 4 7 sf. 

Let w denote the excess of the instantaneous rotor speed 
over the mean speed (corresponding to the vertical projection 
of O V in Fig. 3), and let y stand for the instantaneous result- 
ant accelerating torque (vertical projection of O Rk). Then, 
if K is the moment of inertia of the rotor, 


dw 
eae ae? 

or 
dw=1/Kydt 


and hence, taking as the origin of time the instant at which 
w 1s zero, 


w=1/K f{ ydt, 


1726 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA:STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


from which it is seen that the amplitude of the speed fluct- 
uation O V is proportional to the time-integral over a quarter- 
period of the resultant accelerating torque; or, since the 
period of this torque varies inversely as the slip, O V is 


proportional to saept 


By means of the vector diagram of Fig. 3 we can easily 
show that the amplitude of the speed fluctuations must increase 


Fig. 3—Vector Dracram or Sprep FLucruaTIoNs AND TORQUES 


with decreasing rotor slip. For, assuming the diagram to rep- 
resent the conditions prevailing at a given mean speed, if the 
mean speed increases, O R must decrease; for if it were to re- 
main constant, then owing to the increase of its period due to 
the decrease of slip, its time-integral over a quarter-period 
would be increased, and O V, which is proportional to this 
time integral, would increase. This again would cause O F 
(GS R),-which is proportional to O V, to increase; but since 
the length O S is constant, an increase of S R could only 
be brought about by a decrease of O R (as shown by the dot- 
ted lines O S’ and FR’ S’ in the figure). It follows a fortiori 
that OR could not increase with increase of mean speed. 

We thus see that as the mean speed of the rotor grad- 
ually increases, the vector O V undergoes steady elongation, 
the vector OF = SR a similar steady elongation(O F is 
proportional to O V ) and the vector OR a steady contrac- 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1727 


tion. The vector OS remains fixed in magnitude, but grad- 
ually approachesO V. At the same time the angular velocity 
of all the vectors in the diagram steadily decreases. If we 
were to consider the actual paths traced out by the extremities 
of the vectors during the last few cycles preceding synchron- 
ism, we should find that V traces out a spiral path opening 
outwards, F a similar path, R a spiral path contracting 
inwards, while S continues to move in its original circular 
path. Just before synchronism is reached, O V is moving 
with extreme slowness and O S is only very slightly in advance 
of it. As OV, having passed through the horizontal position, 
moves into the first quadrant, its projection gradually in- 
creases until the value of this projection when added to the mean 
rotor speed gives the speed of synchronism. At this instant 
all the torques have disappeared with the exception of the 
synchronous torque. 

It is clear that at the instant when synchronism is first 
reached the synchronous torque cannot be less than the total 
torque resisting the motion. For, if such were the case, then 
balance of the total driving and resisting torques must have 
taken place at some instant preceding synchronism, and such 
balance would have prevented any further increase of speed, 
i. e., it would have prevented the rotor from reaching syn- 
chronism. Hence at the instant when synchronism is reached, 
the synchronous torque must either equal or exceed the 
total resisting torque. In the first case, the rotor will steadily 
maintain synchronous speed. In the second, further accele- 
ration will take place, and the rotor will settle down to the 
steady speed of synchronism only after a number of oscilla- 
tions, the final position which it takes up relatively to the stator 
poles being such that the synchronous torque arising from the 
displacement of the magnetic axes of the stator and rotor is 
exactly equal to the total resisting torque. Whether the rotor 
~ comes up to synchronous speed quietly without oscillations, or 
whether such oscillations take place before it finally settles 
down to the steady speed of synchronism, the running will cor- 
respond to stable conditions. For in either case a momentary 
increase of speed results in decrease of driving torque, and a 
momentary decrease of speed in increase of driving torque. 
The momentary changes in the driving torque which arise dur- 
ing speed fluctuations, are due partly to changes in the syn- 
chronous torque, which tend to check such fluctuations, and 


1728 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


partly to the reappearance of the speed and hysteresis torques, 
which have a similar effect. 


OPEN VERSUS CLOSED FIELD WINDINGS AT STARTING 


The advisability or otherwise of closing the field wind- 
ings at starting has been repeatedly discussed. The danger 
of breaking down the insulation by the high voltage induced in 
the field windings when the stator circuits are first connected 
to the mains must betakeninto account. Although this danger 
is entirely avoided by short-circuiting the windings before the 
stator is connected to the mains, there is no doubt that, from 
the point of view of initial torque and rapidity of start- 
ing, it is inadvisable to have the field circuit closed. The effect 
of closing field windings is similar to that of reducing the 
resistance of the squirrel-cage or eddy current path,—a 
procedure which is well-known to lower the initial torque. 
Again, as the neighborhood of half-synchronism is approached, 
the powerful single-axis rotor effect may seriously affect the 
acceleration of the rotor, and may frequently entirely pre- 
vent the machine from attaining any speed greatly exceed- 
ing that of half-synchronism. In order therefore to increase 
the acceleration of the rotor during the early stages of the 
starting process, the field should be kept open; any risk of © 
breaking down the insulation may be guarded against by the 
use of a suitable field break-up switch. 

Now although it is advisable to keep the field circuit open 
during the initial stages of the starting operation it by no 
- means follows that it would be equally advantageous to keep 
it open until the machine has been pulled into synchronism. 
The slip with which the rotor ultimately tends to run under 
the action of the speed torques will depend on the resistance 
of the circuits in which the currents giving rise to the speed 
torques circulate. By lowering this resistance the torque will 
be momentarily raised and the speed increased. Now closing 
the field circuit would be equivalent to such reduction of 
resistance, so that the short-circuiting of the field during the 
final stages of the starting operation will cause the mean 
rotor speed to approach more closely to the speed of syn- 
chronism than would otherwise be the case. There is thusa 
distinct advantage in closing the field circuit during the final 
stages of the starting operation, after the rotor speed has 
reached a value not differing greatly from synchronism. 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1729 


Cases may in fact arise where a machine with its field open 
might refuse: to pull into synchronism, but could be made 
to do so by closing the field circuit. This conclusion has 
been verified experimentally. A certain machine was started 
with its field open, the rotor potential difference being 
so low that the rotor settled down to a speed below synchron- 
ism, and refused to pull into synchronism. The moment, 
however, that the field circuit was closed, the rotor locked 
into synchronism. 


OSCILLATIONS IN STATOR CURRENT DURING THE PERIOD 
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING SYNCHRONISM 


It is wellknown thatas the speed of synchronism is ap- 
proached violent fluctuations in the stator current gradually 
become noticeable. These are indicated in Fig. 5 of Rosen- 
berg’s paper, and are easily accounted for. So long as the 
speed is below synchronism, the field poles are slipping past 
the stator poles, and periodic fluctuations are taking place in 
the reluctance accompanied by corresponding fluctuations 
of reactance which throw the stator current into oscillations. 
The frequency of these oscillations being 2sf (since the © 
reluctance returns to the same instantaneous value after 
the pole has moved through a distance equal to the pole- 
pitch) they are not noticeable at low speeds, and only become 
apparent when the slip has become sufficiently small. 


SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 


(a) Relations Connecting Stator Potential Difference with 
Stator Current, Stator Input and Power-Factor, Rotor Speed 
and Field HE. M. F. when Field is. Open-Circwited. The ex- 
periments embodied in the series of curves given were 
carried out on a four-pole, five-kw. three-phase converter 
designed for a continuous current voltage of 100-130 volts at 
a speed of 750 rev. per min. This machine had laminated main 
poles, was fitted with commutating poles, but had no special 
starting devices. While the experiments about to be des- 
cribed were being carried out, the brushes were entirely removed 
from the commutator. Before each set of readings the ma- 
chine was allowed torun light for asufficiently long time to get 
the bearings into a steady state. 

In the first set of experiments, the results of which are ex- 
hibited graphically in Figs. 4 and 5, a number of gradually 
increasing potential differences were applied to the rotor slip 


1730 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


rings, and after the speed corresponding to any given potential 
difference had settled down toa constant value, readings of 
the speed, current, power, etc., were taken when the potential 
difference had been raised sufficiently to enable the machine 
to lock into synchronism, it was still further increased, and 
then a second series of readings, corresponding to decreasing 
values of the potential difference was obtained. In the 
illustrations both the ascending and descending branches of 
the various curves are given. 

Fig. 4 shows the relations connecting speed and field e. m. f. 
with stator potential difference. Below a potential difference 
of about 15 volts across the slip rings the machine would not 
run at all. The speed then gradually increased with the poten- 
tial difference, the increase becoming much slower beyond 
a certain point, and at a slip ring-potential difference of about 
45 volts the machine was able to lock into synchronism. 
During the descending set of readings, synchronism was main- 
tained down to a voltage of about 35 volts. Below this point 
the speeds obtained with given voltages were found to be uni- 
formly higher than those corresponding to the ascending branch 
of the curve. Since, as shown by Fig. 5, the power supplied 
to the machine was found to be lower for decreasing values of 
the potential difference. in spite of the higher value of the 
speed, it is to be inferred that for decreasing values of the 
potential difference the resisting torque was uniformly less. 
This would indicate a decrease in the frictional resistances, 
probably due to the temperature of the bearings being higher 
during the descending set of readings than during the ascending 
set. 

The changes in the field e. m. f. are related to those in the 
speed. The field e. m. f. may be regarded as proportional 
to the product of two factors, namely the maximum flux per 
pole and the slip. At first the field e. m.f. rises with in- 
crease of potential difference, indicating that the increase 
of flux is more important than the decrease of slip. Beyond 
a certain point the decrease of slip is more important than 
the increase of flux, and the field e. m. f. begins to decrease. 
It does not vanish at synchronism, indicating that there is 
- either swaying or pulsation of the flux which enters the main 
poles. Since for descending values of the potential differ- 
ence the speed is uniformly higher and hence the slip lower 
than for ascending values, we should expect the field e. m. f. 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1731 


to be uniformly lower in the former case, and the curve 
of field e. m. f. shows that such is the case. 

Tig. 5 shows the relations connecting stator current, stator 
power and power-factor with potential difference. The differ- 
ence between the ascending and descending branches of the 
power or input curve has already been referred to. It must 
be remembered that when the machine is not running syn- 
chronously, its behavior is similar to that of an induction motor. 
Hence, owing to the lower resisting torque during the descend- 


400 =800 


TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 
Field on Open-circuit 


8 
ee 


300 


& 
S 
+ 


REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 


8 
8 
ia, 


Fig. 4—Curves CoNNECTING SPEED AND Fietp E.M.F. wire Stator 
P.D, wHen FireLp 1s OPEN-CIRCUITED 


ing set of readings we should expect a smaller current and 
also a lower power-factor (as is at once evident from considera- 
tion of the circle diagram) than during the ascending set; and 
the curves of Fig. 5 fully confirm this. 

(b) Relations Connecting Stator Potential Difference with 
Speed and Field Current, when the Field Crrcmt is Closed. 
Figs. 6 and 7 give the connection between potential differ- 
ence and speed when the field circuit is closed through vari- 
ous resistances, and in Fig. 6 the curve corresponding to the 
field on open-circuit, previously shown in Fig. 4, is repeated 
for the sake of comparison. 

When the field was on dead short-circuit, the machine re- 
fused to run up to anything like synchronous speed, and 


1732 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


seemed to approach asymptotically a speed somewhat above 
half-synchronism.’ The explanation of this fact has already 
been given (reference may be made in this connection to Fig. 
2D). 

ae curves of Fig. 7 show that by the introduction of a suit- 
able amount of resistance into the field circuit the tendency of 
the machine to settle down to a speed in the-neighborhood of 


0.4 800 


*0.2 400 
’ 1 a 
01 200 7 op 2 
TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 
Field on ent 
10 20 30 40 50 


Fig. 5—Curves Connecting Stator Input, CurRENT AND POWER 
Factor with Stator P.D. wHen Fievtp Is Oprn-CIRcUITED 


half-synchronism may be overcome, and that the machine 
may be made to lock into synchronism. This result may 
be explained.as follows. Considering the complete torque- 
speed curve of an induction machine over the entire range 
of slip, positive and negative, we may regard the point of zero 
slip as dividing this curve into two branches, one of which 
corresponds to positive values of the slip, and the other to neg- 
ative values. If we now suppose resistance to be introduced 
into the rotor circuit, then as is well known, the result is to 
produce a shearing of the two branches of the torque speed 
curve in opposite directions from the point of zero slip. 
Referring now to the torque speed curves of Fig. 2D, it must 
be noticed that the point of zero slip for the chain-dotted curve 

9. Incidentally the fact that the machine reached a speed in excess of 


half-synehronism definitely disposes of the erroneous view previously 
referred to that the machine tends to lock into exact half-synchronism, 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1733 


corresponds to half-synchronism, while for the dotted curve 
the point of zero slip is at full synchronism. From this it fol- 
lows that the introduction of resistance will in the region 
- between half and full synchronism cause a shearing of the 
dotted and chain-dotted curves in opposite directions, the 
dotted curve being sheared from left to right, while the chain- 
dotted one is sheared from right to left. It is easy to see that 
this will cause a rise of the minimum in the resultant curve 
(the full line curve of Fig. 2p), and if the resistance remains 


at 


800 j | 


600 | 4 
| f / Field on Open-circuit 
| Ve | 


ia, 


400 


Field Short-circuited” 


REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 


a 


TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 


10 20 30 40 50 


Fie. 6—Curves ConnecTING SpeEp wits P.D. wen Fintp Is(a) OpEN- 
4 CIRCUITED, AND (b) SHoRT-CIRCUITED 


sufficiently large the minimum resultant torque will assume a 
positive value, so that the driving torque will be positive 
over the entire range of speed from zero to synchronism. 
The shearing of the dotted and chain-dotted curves in 
opposite directions in the region between half and full syn- 
chronism is, however, only one of the causes concerned in 
suppressing the negative portion of the resultant torque-speed 
*curve, and besides this there is another cause. The dotted 
curve is the torque-speed curve of an induction motor whose 
stator is supplied at constant potential difference and frequency ; 
whereas the chain-dotted curve is the curve of an imagi- 
nary induction motor whose stator is supplied at variable 


- 


1734 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


$8v0 
a 
a ee b 
H { 
1 aA 
q i} 
600 cae r . 
tt ‘ 
ri 1 t-760w Res. ' 
= bs | H 
= |) 1.450w Res aa 
= a H 3 
x ; ’ — 
ie it | alk 
Ai 400 al t ! nn 
S UAT 
5 
3 ak | 
re 
ec 
4 
TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 


10 20 30° 40 50 
P. D. 


Fig. 7—Curves ConnecTING SPEED WITH P.D. WHEN FIELD Is CLOSED 
THROUGH EXTERNAL RESISTANCE 


potential difference and variable frequency, the potential 


difference being proportional to the frequency. Now the 
introduction of resistance into the field windings is equiv- 


0.8 800 


06 * 600}— *. - - 


REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 


02 ' 200 


0) 
49 20 ) 40 ~ 50 


Fig. 8—Curvis ConnecTING SPEED AND FIrLpD CURRENT wits P. D. 
WHEN FIELD 1S SHORT-CIRCUITED 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CON DITIONS 1735 


alent to the introduction of resistance into the primary 
winding of the imaginary motor (since the primary winding 
of this imaginary motor is represented by the field winding) and 
is thus equivalent to a reduction of the potential difference 
across its terminals. This will result in a reduction of all the 
ordinates of the chain-dotted curve. While therefore, the in- 
troduction of resistance into the field circuit results in a 
simple shearing of the dotted curves from right to left unac- 
companied by any change in the values of the ordinates, the 
effect on the chain-dotted curve is a two-fold one, namely 
a shearing from left to right accompanied by a shrinkage of 


15 60 


from 
nism 
10.040 


KILOWATTS 
CURRENT 


EST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 


He 
~ |Return fron’ : INO 
Synchronism Field on Short-circuit 


10 20 30 40 50 
PD 


Fie. 9—Curves Connecting Stator InpuT, CURRENT AND PowER 
Factor with P.D. wHEeN FIELD 18s SHORT-CIRCUITED 


the ordinates. This shrinkage of the ordinates will further 
help to suppress the negative portion of the resultant curve. 
It will be noticed that in the curves of Fig. 6 which refer to 
the open-circuit and short-circuit conditions of the field, there 
are no discontinuities in the speed curves (except that which 
occurs at the instant of breaking from synchronism in the 
case of the open-circuit curve); whereas the curves of Fig. 7 
show two well-marked discontinuities (one on each of the 
curves), in addition to the discontinuities at break from syn- 
chronism. ‘These discontinuities are readily accounted for by 
considering the shape of the resultant or full-line torque- 
speed curve of Fig. 2p. In the cases to which Fig. 7 refers the 
resultant torque-speed curve lies, as already explained, wholly 
above the axis of speed, all its ordinates being positive; but 


1736 HAY AND MOWDAW ALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


the curve has two maxima separated by a minimum. It is the 
existence of this minimum which causes the discontinuities in 
the speed curves. Stability of running can only be secured 
by working on a portion of the torque-speed curve which 
has a downward slope from left to right. With increasing 
potential difference and speed the point on the (varying) torque- 
speed curve corresponding to the stable running condition for 
the given potential difference gets displaced further and 
further to the right, 1 until finally it reaches the minimum point 


800 


Dp 
So 
i=) 


a 
So 
o 


1 Short-cireuit —1 


REVOLUTLONS PER MINUTE 


———s 


3 
iS) 


| 


TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVER ER 


49 20 30 40 50 60 
AMPERES 


= 


Fig. 10—Curves Connecting Srrrp with STatTor CURRENT UNDER ~ 
Various ConpDiITIONS 


on the curve. An increase of potential difference beyond the 
value corresponding to this minimum point results in a pas- 
sage into the unstable region which lies between the minimum 
and the second maximum, and no stable running is possible in 
this region. It is only after the speed has passed beyond the 
second maximum of the torque-speed curve that stability can 
again be reached. The point where the discontinuity occurs 
along the ascending branch gives approximately the speed 
corresponding to minimum torque; while the discontinuity on 
the descending branch marks approximately the second maxi- 
mum of torque. The first maximum of torque would corres- 


pond roughly to the lowest speed at which the machine will 
run. 


oT, 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1737 


In Fig. 8 are shown the relations connecting speed and poten- 
tial difference, and field current and potential difference, 
with the field on dead short circuit. Each curve is shown as 
having three branches. Two of these correspond to the values 
obtained by first increasing the speed to a certain value and 
then decreasing it. The third branch, marked ‘‘Return from 
synchronism” was obtained by first open-circuiting the field 
and raising the potential difference to a valuesufficient to enable 
the machine to lock into synchronism, then short-circuiting the 
field and taking a set of readings while the potential difference 


800 


LN-Field & Interpole Windings on Open-circuit 
600 : | - a 


i 
uw ' 
5 /-Field on Open-circuit; Interpole Winding Short-circuited 
— L ue + 
= ; 
ir 
a fs Field Short-cireuited ; Interpole Winding on Open-cireuit 
a ; 
s * a 
Ez 
3 
S) Field & Interpole Windings Short-circuited 
ra ms 

200 
TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS CONVERTER 


10 20 30 40 50 60 
AMPERES 


Fic. 11—Curves Connectinc SPEED wiTH STATOR CURRENT UNDER 
Various CONDITIONS 


was being decreased. The first two branches of the speed 
curve are identical with those shown in Fig. 6. The rela- 
tions connecting current and power factor with potential dif- 


_ ference are given by Fig. 9, 


Returning to Fig. 6, it will be seen that the machine starts 


‘with a lower potential difference when the field is short- 


circuited than when it is on open circuit; and this might at 
first sight appear to contradict the statement previously 
made regarding the advantage of starting with the field circuit 
open. Such, however, is not the case; for the real basis of 
comparison is not the potential difference applied to the 
stator, but the current taken by it. The relation connecting 


4 


1738 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


speed with current for the various arrangements tried is shown 
in Fig. 10, and it will be seen at once that the machine 
starts up with a considerably lower current when the field is 
open-circuited. If the field is closed through a resistance, 
there will be a certain value of this resistance which gives the 
best initial results, but even with this value the current dur- 
ing the intermediate stages rises to a higher value than when 
the field is open-circuited.. On the other hand, it will be no- 
ticed that with the field closed through a resistance high enough 
to allow of the machine being pulled into synchronism, a higher 
value of speed is reached with a given current than with 
the field on open circuit. 

As the-machine experimented on was provided with inter- 
poles, it was thought desirable to try the effect of short-circuit- 
ing the interpole winding. In Fig. 11 are given four curves, 
two of which are for the sake of comparison reproduced from 
Fig. 10. It will be seen that the worst results are obtained 
with both main and inter-pole fields short-circuited, and 
that the short-circuiting of the interpole windings alone 
does not produce any very marked effect, and is not suf- 
ficient to prevent the machine from running up to syn- 
chronism. 


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS REACHED 


1. During the initial stages of the starting period the 
field should be kept open. If the induced voltage exceeds the 
limit of safety, a field break-up switch should be provided. - 

Closing the field circuit not only largely increases the cur- 
rent during the initial stages of the starting period, but may 
entirely prevent the machine from running up to synchronous 
speed. This is due to the single-magnetic-axis effect of 
the field winding. - 


2. If the field is kept closed and the machine only reaches 
a speed in the neighborhood of half-synchronism, there is no 
tendency to lock into exact half-synchronism. 

3. There is a distinct advantage in short-circuiting the field 
after the field has reached a value not differing greatly from 


synchronism. This will greatly facilitate the final locking into 
synchronism. 


a 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1739 


APPENDIX 


ANALYTICAL THEORY OF POLYPHASE INDUCTION MoToR 
HAVING SINGLE-PHASE WINDING ON THE ROTOR 


The type of motor under consideration is one whose stator 
is provided with a polyphase winding, but whose rotor carries 
only a single-phase or single-magnetic-axis winding. We may 
speak of the stator winding as the primary and of the rotor 
winding as the secondary winding of the machine. We may 
further suppose that the rotor carries a supplementary single- 
phase winding whose magnetic axes are coincident with those 
of the secondary winding and which we may conveniently 
speak of as the tertiary winding. The secondary winding may 
be taken to correspond to the solid masses of the field poles of 
a synchronous machine in which eddy currents are induced by 
the rotating field; while the tertiary winding may be taken to 
represent the field winding of the synchronous machine. 

Owing to the extreme complexity of the problem, it becomes 
necessary to make the following simplifying assumptions:— 

(1) We shall suppose that the stator winding of the machine 
is so arranged that each phase when traversed by a current 


gives rise to a simple sine distribution of magnetic flux in space. 


(2) We shall neglect the effect of variations in the perme- 
ability. 

(3) The time-variations of certain of the quantities concerned 
will be supposed to follow the sine law. 

It is obvious that during the rotation of the machine the 
mutual inductance of the secondary with any one phase of the 
primary winding will undergo periodic fluctuations, and from 
supposition (1) it follows—as can be easily shown—that such 
fluctuations will obey the sine law if the speed of rotation is 
constant. Let M, denote the maximum value of the mutual 
inductance of the secondary and a certain phase of the primary 
winding. Then if m., m, and m, denote the instantaneous 


‘mutual inductances of the three phases with the secondary at 


time t we may write, since the space displacement of the three 
oscillating magnetic flux waves due to the armature current is 
120 electrical degrees, 

Woe of Aas S) wt + al 


ms = Mosin| G—S)wtta +2 | 


1740, HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


Vie 
n= Mosin| G- Sweet Se 


where w = 2m X frequency of armature current, and s = slip 


synchronous speed — rotor speed ) 


of rotor = ( synchronous speed 


Let the currents in the three primary phases be represented 
by 
iqo= Igsnwt 


i= ie sin(wt+ =") 


tose ells sin (wt + =r) 


If we provisionally assume that both the secondary and 
tertiary circuits are open, so that they are incapable of reacting 
on the primary circuits, then in order to maintain the currents 
ia, 14 and i, in the three phases of the primary we must provide 
impressed e. m. f’s. which are given by 

ég = Zil,sin (wt + 01) 


ey = Z:Insin( wt +3 + A) 


ec = Zs Insin (wt + = + 6:) 


In the above expressions, Z; denotes the equivalent imped- 
ance of each phase when the three windings are supplied with 
currents differing 120 deg. in phase. If r; = resistance of each 
phase, and L, = true self-inductance of each phase (2. e., flux 
linkage with phase when unit current is flowing through it and 
when remaining two phases are devoid of current), then 

Zi = Vre + (8/2 w Ly)? 

The fact that the equivalent reactance of a phase is 3/2 times 
its true reactance is due to mutual inductance between phases, 
and is a consequence of the assumption that the flux distribution 
in space due to any one phase follows the sine law. 

‘The angle 6; in the above expressions is such that tan 6; 

_ 8/2wl, 
tec: 


The total instantaneous flux linked with the secondary due 


al ie 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1741 


to the primary currents i,, 7, and 1,18 
P= Mata + mst, + M1, = 8/2 My Im cos (Swt— a) 
This flux gives rise to an e. m. f. in the secondary of amount 


é =— ae 3 Sw My Insin (S wt a) 


We shall now assume that the secondary is closed, and that 
the e. m. f. é: is allowed to produce a current in it. 

Let re, Ly be the resistance and self-inductance respectively 
of the secondary. Its impedance is then 


= V7? + (s w Lp)? 
and the e. m. f. e: gives rise to a secondary current 


= a iyi Tesi (swt— a— G2) 
225 


sw Le 
T2 


where tan 6, = 


For the sake of simplicity, we shall put 


3/2swM, 
£2 


kp = 


so that we may write 
4/2 = k/2I, sin (swt— a— 62) 

The secondary current reacts on the inducing primary cir- 
cuits, and gives rise to magnetic fluxes linked with them. The 
flux linkage with the first phase, whose instantaneous mutual 
inductance with the secondary is ma, is given by m, %2, and the 
e. m. f. to which this flux gives rise is 


a we (m, 1) = 


222 {M,sin[(1— s)wt+a]k.I, sin (swt— a— @2)} = 
(1/2—s)wMokoIn sin[(l—2s)wt+2a-+ 0] 
— L/2 wM ke ype sin (w t— 02) 
Similar expressions (with suitable changes of time-phase) 
hold good for the remaining two phases. 
It will be noticed that each of these e. m. fs. consists of two 


components of different frequency. If we wished to maintain 


the original currents 7., 1, and 7, unaltered, then in addition to 
the original impressed e. m. fs., ¢., ¢, and e, we should have to 


1742 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


provide e. m. fs., equal and opposite in phase to those induced 
in the primaries by the secondary current 72. Now since these 
latter e. m. fs. consist of two components, one [such as 
— 1/2 w My k2Imsin (wt— 62) 

in the first phase of the primary of fundamental frequency], and 
the other [such as (1/2 —s) w M,k.I,sin[ (1—2s)wt 
+ 2 a+6,]in the first phase] of afrequency which is a function 
of the slip, the sourceof impressed e. m. f. would have to be 
capable of a continuous variation of wave-shape in order that 
the currents 7,, 7, and 7, might remain unaltered. It is needless 
to point out that such special continuous variation of wave- 
shape could not be secured in practise. We shall therefore 
make an assumption which is much more likely to conform to 
actual conditions. We shall suppose that the source of im- 
pressed e. m. f. continues to supply a pure sine wave, but that 
the excitation of this source is varied so that it not only pro- 
vides the original e. m. fs. e,, e, and e, but, in addition, any 
other sine-wave components of fundamental frequency which 
may be necessary to balance fundamental frequency e. m. fs 
[such as the e. m. f.— 1/2 w Mo ko Imsin (wt— 02) in the first 
phase] induced in the primaries by the secondary. The re- 
maining components in the induced e. m. fs. whose frequency | 
differs from the fundamental, and which are not balanced by 
corresponding components in the impressed e.m.f. waves, 
give rise to additional primary currents whose magnitude we 
proceed to determine. 

For the sake of simplicity, we shall assume the impedance 
of the source of impressed e. m. f. to be negligible in comparison 
with the impedance of the primaries of the machine under 
consideration, so that the total impedance of the circuits on 
which the induced e. m. fs. of frequency other than the funda- 
mental act will be represented by the impedance of the pri- 
maries. The equivalent reactance of each phase of the pri- 
mary corresponding to e. m. fs. such as (1/2— s) w My ke In 
sin[ (1— 2s) wt-+2a + @,]in the first phase, is 3/2 (1 — 2 s) 
W Ta. 


Hence the corresponding current in the first phase is given by 
awit (1/2— s) w Moko In 
1 Vrv + [8/2 1 — 2s) w Li? 

sin[(1— 2s)wt+2a+ 6.— 6] 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1743 


If for the sake of simplicity we put 


(1/2 —s) w My 


ky = 
23 


then 
te = ki koImsin{| 1—2s)wt+2a+ 6.— 43] 

Similar expressions hold good, with suitable changes of time- 
phase, for the corresponding currents in the remaining two 
phases. 

Before proceeding further, it will be convenient to collect all 
the results so far obtained. 

In the first phase of the primary, we have the following com- 
ponents of impressed e. m. f.:— 


€, = 2/1, sin (wt + 61) (1) 
and @,’ = 1/2 w Mo ke Im sin (wt— 2) (2) 
where 

a= Vr? + (3/2 w [,)? (3) 

Ue 
k= ee (5) 

PA 
Zo = Vr? + (s w Le)? (6) 
ey gee (7) 

2 


Next, in the first phase of the primary we have the current 


components 
i, =IRnsinwt (8) 
and ig’ = ki keT, sin [(A—2s8)wt+2a-+ 0.— 03] 
(9) 
where 
ae (1/2 — s)w Mo (10) 
&3 
gg = Vre + (8/2 1 — 28) w Lil? : (11) | 
tan 63 = SRW esei (12) 


Again, considering the secondary, we have in the induced 


e. m. f. 
@ = 3/2sw MoI, sin (swt— a) (13) 


1744 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


which gives rise to the secondary current 
iy = ke Im sin (s wt— a— 62) (14) 

We may now proceed with our investigation. 

In addition to the e. m. f. e:. in the secondary, which is due to 
the original currents i,, 7, and 7, in the primaries, and which 
produces the current i2, we now have another e. m. f., due to 
currents of the type 7,’, in the primaries. This second e. m. f., 
as in the case of é€2, may be shown to be 

eo’ = 3/2swMokikoT,sin (swt— a— 62+ 63) (15) 

If we were to provide an e. m. f. in the secondary equal and 
opposite to e,’ this latter e. m. f. would be neutralized, and the 
only currents in the primaries and the secondary would be 
those already considered_and given by (8), (9) and (14). 

Since, however, no such neutralization actually takes place, 
the e. m. f. e:’ is free to act, and gives rise to a current in the 
secondary. 

to’ = ki ko I, sin (swt— 2.6, + 63) (16) 

This current, in turn, reacts on the primary, and, proceeding 
as before, we can show that it induces in the first phase of the 
primary ane. m. f. given by 
(1/2— s)wMok,k2I,sin{ (l—2s)wi+2a+2 6.— 03] 

= 1/2 w My i ke? T,, sin (w t— 2 A. + 03) 


This e. m. f. is seen to consist of two terms of different fre- .— 


quency. We shall assume, as before, that the term of funda- 
mental frequency is balanced by an equal and opposite com- 
pa 
ait =1/2wM, kk I,, sin (wt— 2 0, + @3) (17) 
in the sanpreesed e. m. f. wave of the primary, while the other 
term, being unbalanced, gives rise to a current in the first phase 
of the primary 
te! =k? ke I, sin [ (L— 2 8) Ot eT Ea a (18) 
Again, the current 7,’’, like 7, and 7,’, induces an e. ne f. in 
the secondary, given by 
é2'’ = 3/2sw Mok?kF 1, sin (swt—- a—26.+26;) (19) 
The e. m. f. e:’’ gives rise to a secondary current 
ia!’ = ky ks In sin (8 wt— a— 3 02 + 2 6,) (20) 
The current in its turn, reacts on the primary, inducing in the 
first phase an e. m. f. 
(1/2 —s)wMok?k3T,sin[(l— 2s) wt +2a+3 0, — 2 O53] 


— 1/2 w Mok: ks’ I, sin (wt— 8 02 +2 63), 


the fundamental frequency component of which we shall. _ 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1745 


assume, as before, to be balanced by a component in the im- 
pressed e. m. f. equal to 
€a’’’ = 1/2w Mok? ki I, sin (wt— 3 6. + 8 63) (21) 
while the other component is left free to produce in the first 
phase of the primary a current 
ta’ =k ki Insin[ 1—2s)wt+2a+3 6.—3 63] (22) 
Proceeding in this way, we ultimately obtain, for each of the 
quantities under consideration—primary impressed e. m.f., 
primary current, secondary induced e.m.f., and secondary 
current—an infinite series of terms. 
For the sake of simplicity, we shall put 
ke ki k/2 (23) 
and 6 = 0.— 63 (24) 
Considering first the primary impressed e. m. f. the first phase 
we see from (1), (2), (17) and (21), that this is given by 
2,1, sin (wt— 0;) +1/2w My keInsin (wt— 62) +k sin 
(wt— 6.— 0) +k? sin (wt— 0.— 2 0) + k;sin 
(wt— 0.—386)4]..... 


Similar expressions, with suitable time-phase differences, 
hold good for the impressed e. m. fs., in the other two phases. — 
Taking next the primary current in the first phase, and using 
(8), (9), (18) and (22), we find that this current is given by the 
infinite series. 
I, sinwt+kI, {sn[(Q—2s)wt+2a+ 6] +ksin 
[d-—2s)wt+2a4+2 6 
+ksin[(—2s)wit+2a+3 6] +} 
(26) 
Similarly, using (13), (15) and (19), we find for the secondary 
induced e. m. f. 
3/2s w MoI» (sin (swt— a) +ksin (swt— a— 0) 
+ksin(swit- a—206) +] (27) 
Lastly, using (14), (16) and (20), we obtain the secondary 
current. 
ks Im [sin (s wt— a— 02) +k sin (swt-— a— 6.— 6) 
\ <+k,8in (swi= a— 02-28) 4 | (28) 
Each of the four expressions (25), (26), (27) and (28) involves 
an infinite series of the type. 


1746 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 
z=sng+ksin(g + 0) + sin (¢ + 2 8) 
+k sin (go +3 60) + 
This series may be summed as follows: 


Putting sin g = a (ei0 — je) 


and sin (g + 7 @) = les (getné)—e*(etn FP) ] 
where 7? = — 1, we may write 


y= sy {ef [1 +k e*9 +k? e*27° 4+ kh e*879 4...) — e*78 


fhe sit. ke er 28 4] t 
PEN. ( of - See) 
~ 24 \ 1— ke Leer se 


which, after a number of transformations, may be reduced to 
the simple form 


sin g — ksin (g + @) 


~ = = keos 6)? + (sin 6 
If we put 
a = /(1— k cos 0)? + (ksin 6)? (29) 
and - tans p= ee (30) 
then, after a further transformation, we may write 
= =‘1/asin (g + B) (31) 


Primary P. D. Applying this result to (25), we find for the 
primary impressed e. m. f. in the first phase. 


1/2 wM, ke iz 
a 


2: 1m sin (wt + 6;) + sin (wt— 62— 8) 


This may be thrown into the form 


E sin (wt + ¢) (32) 
where : 


B= 1a] [n+ 2eMebe con 0, + 9) | 


, f ¥ me 
ae [ sew, Bas sin (02 + A | (33) 


nse 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1747 
and 


3/2 w Li — sin (0, + 8) 


SE di eS 5 5 34 
eh tg, 2p) Se 


1/2 w M, ko 
a 


Primary Current. Similarly, using (31) in (26), we obtain 

for the primary current in the first phase 
I, {jsnwt+k/asm[d—2s)wt+2a+64+4 B]} (35) 

It will be noticed that, with a pure sine wave of impressed 
e. m. f., the primary current wave is a distorted one. 

Secondary Current. Proceeding in a similar manner with (27) 
and (28), we obtain the following expressions for the secondary 
induced e. m. f. and secondary current :— 

Secondary induced e. m. f. 


3/2sw M, 
of a 


= FF sin (swt+a-— B) (36) 

Secondary current 

= [,k2/asin (swt— a— @.— 8) (37) 

Both the above waves are pure sine waves. 

Tertiary E. M.F. Wenext proceed to determine the e. m. f. 
induced in the open tertiary circuit. This e. m. f. is the result- 
ant of the two e. m. fs. induced, by the primary and secondary 
currents. Let m.’, m,’ and m,’ denote the instantaneous 
mutual inductances between the tertiary and the three phases 
of the primary. Then we may write 

m,’ = Misin[(1— s)wt+al] 


my = Msi] (8) w+ a + 2 | 


Me = sin] dwt to + AF | 


The total instantaneous flux linkage with the tertiary due to 
the joint action of the currents in the three phases of the 


primary is 
Mi Imnsin{ (l—-s)wt+ a] {sin wt +k/asin[ (1— 2s) wt 


| 5 
+2a+ 6]} + Milnsin [o-gwrtas 2F | 


1748 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2 


Tv 


sin (wt + = =) + basin] a—2ewes 2 27 


+2a+ | bat Tasin] = 9 eta t AE | 


: 4 
sin (wt + <) + k/asin] 2) t+ $F 


+2a+8]| 


This, after simple transformations, is reducible to the form 
3/2 M,Imncos (swt— a) 
+ 3/2 k/a M,Incos(swt— a— B); 
and the tertiary e. m. f. due to this flux is 
3/2sw M1, sin (swt— a) 
+ 3/2sw Mi, I, k/asin (swt— a— B) 
Next, if we denote by M.the mutual inductance between the 
tertiary and the secondary, the flux linkage with the tertiary 
due to the current in the secondary is 
Me Imk2/asin (swt— a— @.— B) 
and the tertiary e. m. f. due to it is 
— sw My I, k./a cos (swt—- a— 6.— 8B) 
Thus the total tertiary e. m. f. is given by 
swI, {3/2 M, sin (swt— a) : 
+ 3/2 M,k/asin (swt— a— B)— Myk:/a 
cos (swt— a— 0.— B)} 
This may be exhibited in the form 
e; = H3sin (swt— a—j) (38) 
where 
By = Insw { [8/2 re (1+ k/acos 6B) — Mz k:/a 
sin (0. + 6) 2 + [38/2 M, “te sin 8 + Mz k:/a 
cos (A, + 8) 2 }* (39) 
and 
1/a [8/2k M, sm B + kz, Mz cos (0, + 8) | 
8/2 M, (1 + k/acos B)— M,k./asin (6, + 6) ‘4°) 
Primary Power. We shall next consider the power impressed _ 
‘on the primary. Since the variable frequency component in 
the primary current wave (35) is incapable of contributing to 
the power, the only effective component is that of fundamental 


tangy = 


\ pe lia ad 
N Gi 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1749 


frequency, and this yields an amount of power in the first phase 
given by 
1/2 HE f,, cos @ 
so that the total primary power in all three phases is 
3/2 H In cos © (41) 
Power Factor. Ther. m.s. value of the primary curreng (35) 
being 
bec ai eae a 
VE V1 + (k/a) 
the volt-amperes per phase are given by 
| 1/21, Vit Kay 
so that the power factor of the primary is 


COs Y 
V1 + (k/a)? 

Mechanical Power. We shall now consider the total mechani- 
cal power transmitted to the rotor of the machine. If the losses 
due to hysteresis and eddy-currents are neglected, the mechani- 
cal power is easily obtained by subtracting the primary and 
secondary copper losses from the total primary power. A 
consideration of the mechanical power is, it is needless to point 
out, of very great interest in connection with the self-starting 
qualities of the machine. 

Torque. The value of the torque exerted by the rotor is 
easily determined from the mechanical power by dividing the 
latter by the angular velocity. 

Up to the present, we have supposed the tertiary to be on 
open circuit. If now we imagine it to be closed, tertiary cur- 
rents will appear which will react on both primaries and second- 
ary. ‘The same general principle as that already used might be 
employed for investigating the reactions of the various circuits 
on each other. But if we are concerned only with the general 
nature of the results obtained, it is simpler to suppose the 
secondary and tertiary circuits replaced by a single equivalent 
secondary. Thus the general law of variation of the tertiary 
current will be the same as that of the secondary, which we 
have already investigated. 

The method used in the above investigation is, it will be 


(42) 


observed identical in principle with Lord Kelvin’s method of 


electrical images as applied to problems in electrostatics. It 
may possibly be found to be of great use in connection with 
certain types of alternating-current problems, 


ae 


1750 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS [Jan. 2~ 


We shall apply the above theory to the study of a particular 
case which corresponds approximately to a certain synchronous 
machine for which experimental results are available. The 


200 LY peer 
,~ Primary Power 
V4 f x 
pes 
i . 
\ 7A Primary P. D. 
V 
150° 6 Fi 
4 
i 
a H 
= a Yr ve 2 Ye! 
oben as A / 
oO <= oa Re i | 
es = a \ / 
100 £4 ot T 
6 hee 
i abo tee Seek | / . 
= ro) SSA : 
= tan Bee SNE 1| I 
Z aur Brea fa call 
4 So Nene Wes f ‘ H 
z <x er y oe A 1 
= ra) - Sa EAS Ze \ 
= 77) | aay x | \ \ 
= “a oe X \ 
© 50 2 —— '- . — 
:. Torque “ is \ 
ew {| / \ 
= ‘\ : 
by a = \ 
ah Ah 
& & Mt 
asx Wi 
e 0 0 ii V 
re \ - 
c \sTertiary E. M. F. oa 
Zz ~ 
a | -| | 
a \ NS yy 
2 \ = re. 
Oo ' es 
a 
> a 
z% 50 { 
a 1 
) 
z \ 
S 1 
pry 
a 


~ 


ae 
Al 
~! 
~ 
~ 
g 
ay 
3S 
st 
a + 
oe 
nS \ 
’ 
¢ 
, 
’ 
¢ 
, 


aH 
zh le heal a 


0 100 200 300 400 500 
REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 
Fic. 12—Curves Connecting Primary P. D., PRIMARY Powmr, SECOND- 


ARY CURRENT, TERTIARY E. M. F. AND TorQuE WitH SPEED WHEN THE 
Primary CurRENT 18 MAINTAINED at A CONSTANT VALUE 


following numerical values (at a frequency of 12.5) have been 
assumed for the various constants:— 
r, = 0.006 72 =0.004 wM, = .048 wM, = 4.2 ; 
wli=0.05138 whl,=0.046 I, = 48.3 w M, = 2.3 
By the aid of the formulas established above, values of the 
primary p.d., primary current, secondary current, tertiary 
e.m.f., primary power, mechanical power, torque, power 
factor and phase angle were calculated for various values of s 


1919] HA Y AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1751 
and a constant value of 48.3 for I, Since all the variables 
mye ving I,, are directly proportional to it, we can immedi- 
ately find their values for any other value of I m Accordingly 

we can find the values corresponding to those values of J om fon 


150 
3 = uae os 
= N \ At \ 
Ae NS “ Lt \ 
100 \ ag a i i, \ Primary Power! 
‘ \ 
{ \ | ‘1 \ Ms 
t ii . het Primary Current 
ee a \ \ 
1 i i eS \ y 
\i \ \ \ 
50 —} i \ ‘ 
\ 5 \ 
AWA a i ‘ 
i Me 
1 
5 ae 
Y \ 
0 Nh 
: Bes : 
‘Torque \ Tertiary E,M.F E 
x at 
\ 7 
50 ; 
aol 
100 i : 
Secondary eae 
50 
0 100 200 


300 
REVOLUTIONS PER MINUTE 


Fic. 13—Curves Connectinc Primary CURRENT, Primary Power, 
SECONDARY CURRENT, TERTIARY E. M. 


F. AND Torqus WITH SPEED 
Wuewn THE Primary P. D. 1s MAINTAINED CoNnsTANT 


For primary current curve multiply vertical sc 
“ “ 


ale readings by 2 

“ power “ “ “ “ “ 10 

“ secondary current S ee i Ms § ts: 
“ tertiary e. m. fs “ “ “ “ “ “ 4 
“ torque “ “ “ “ “ “ 10 


various values of which yield a constant value for the primary 
current. This will give us the variations of the quantities 
with s when the primary current is maintained constant. ‘The 
values so calculated are given in Table I, and some of them are 


1752 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


200 


TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE |!° 
Stator, Current = 48,3 Amp.;~-12.5 
| x___1 Field on Open-circuit 


va 


ie Total Power 


supplied to Stator 


=e 


vs 
ined 
ts) 
a 
o 


| “\\Stator P. D. 
— Ye 


VOLTS FOR STATOR P.D. 


Open-circuit Field 
| EMF 


VOLTS FOR FIELD E.M.F. & WATT 
oO 
S 


L 
aa 


—_—" 


, 100 200 300 400 500 
SPEED 


Fra. 14—Sraror P. D., Stator Power and Rotor E. M. F. CuRvES 


CorRESPONDING TO A Constant SratTor CurRENT OF 48.3 AMPERES AT 
A FREQUENCY OF 12.5 


TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE 
Stator Current=48.3 Amp,;~=12.5 
Field Short-circuited 


SEM saucer 
allied 


0 100 200 300 400 500 

i SPEED V 

Fie. 15—Srator P. D., Stator Pownr anp Roror Current CURVES 

CoRRESPONDING TO A Constant STaToR CURRENT or 48.3 AMPERES AT 
A FREQUENCY OF 12.5 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1753 


plotted in Fig. 12. Similarly, we may obtain the values of the 
variables for different values of s when the values of J, are so 
chosen as to yield a constant value of the primary p.d. We 
thus obtain the results given in Table II, which corresponds to 
a constant primary line P. D. of volts, and from which the 
curves of Fig. 13 have been plotted. 

The theoretical curves of Figs. 12 and 13 may be compared 
with the experimental curves shown in Figs. 14, 15 and 16. It 
will be noticed that the general shapes of the curves correspond 


1000 400 —— Stator Current | 100 
> “4 


Total Power supplied : 
“ to Stator ; 


75 


2 2 AEs Field| 2 
500 = 200 MP po 50g 
= = = 
=< 
250 100 ao 25 
, TEST ON SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE 
Stator P.D=15 Volts; ~=25 
_ Field on Open-circuit 
i 
? 9 100 200 300 400 500 


SPEED 


Fig. 16—Sratror Current, Stator Pownr anp Rovor E. M. F. CURVES 
CoRRESPONDING TO A ConsTaAntT VALUE or THE STaToR P. D. = 15 
Vouts AT A FREQUENCY OF 25 


in the two cases, and that the peculiarities of shape are satis- 
factorily accounted for by theory. The experimental curves, 
however, do not exhibit such very pronounced peaks and 
valleys as do the theoretical ones. In this connection it must 
be remembered that the theoretical curves are based on a 
number of assumptions which are not quite realized in practise. 
Among others, the assumption has been made that the primary 
p. d. retains its pure sine wave form, and remains unaffected by 
_ the variable frequency component of the primary current. In 
actual experiments, the generator was a machine of smaller 
output than the. synchronous motor, and its e.m.f. would . 


certainly suffer distortion. 
: 2 ! 


1754 HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS (Jan. 2 


TABLE I. 
r1 = 0.008; wLi = 0.0513; re = 0.004; w Le = 0.046; w Mo = 0.043; w Mi = 4.2; 
w M2 =2.3; frequency = 12.5. 
Primary Current Maintained Constant at 48.3 amperes. 


Speed |Primary |Secondary] Tertiary] Power | Power Phase | Mechan- 


7 p.m. |terminal | current. | e. m.f. | supplied | factor. | angle.* ical - 107 
Pe D; 3 to 7 power c. g. S. 
primary.! ‘ units. 
0 2.34 92.2 125 75.9 0.388 | 67°26’ 0 
25 2.42 91.8 113 82.3 0.405 | 66° 5’ 6.6 25.05 
50 2.60 91.0 100 92.5 0.426 | 64°47’ 17.4 33.2 
75 2.78 89.2 86.8 103.7 0.446 | 63°31’ 29.8 37.9 
100 3.29 84.3 70.6 124 0.451 | 63°11’ 53.8 51.4 
105 3.47 81.9 G57 128 0.441 | 63°49’ 59.4 54.0 
110 3.70 78.5 60.2 131 0.422 | 65° 3/ 64.1 55.6 
aah, 3.96 73.7 55.8 127 0.384 | 67°24’ 63.6 52.8 
120 4.16 68.3 59.9 108.5 0.312 | 71°49” 47.8 38.0 
122.5 4.18 66.7 67.9 95.9 0.275 | 74° 4’ 36.1 28.2 
125 4.10 66.7 tis 77.6 0.226 | 76°55’ Li8 13.6 
127.5 3.92 68.8 86.1 59.7 0.1821). 79°30. at 2 OS 
130 3.67 Tus 91.2 45.7 0.149 | 81°26’ | — 17.2 1. —12.6 
135 3.13 80.0 93.4 35.4 Q:135) | 82°14" —sSoh a" eae er 
140 2.75 85.2 91.2 41.1 0.179 | 79°42’ | — 29.9 | —20.4 
145 2.56 87.9 88.1 52.0 0.243 | 75°57"-| — 20.9 | —13.8 
150 2.50 89.8 85.1 63.4 0.303 | -72°29/ | — 40°54 | — 656 
162.5 2.61 89.8 77.3 88.1 0.403 | 66°14’ 13.8 8.1 
7S 2.86 88.7 69.2 110 0.457 | 62°98’ 36.1 19.7 
187.5 3,23 86.4 60.9 131 0.483-| 61° 5’ 58.8 29.9 
200 3.71 82.3 52.4 153 0.492 | 60°31’ 83.5 39.9 
212.5 4.36 74.9 43.1 173 0.474 | 61°42’ 108.3 48.7 
220 4.85 67.9 36.7 181 0.455 | 63°33/ 120.3 52.2 
225 5.21 61.3 31.9 181 0.515 | 65°30’ 123.5 52.4 
230 5.58 53.0 26.4 174 0.373 | 68° 6’ 120.8 50.1 
235 5.93 42.6 20.3 157 0.317 | 71°31’ 108.2 44.0 
240 6.23 29.9 13.5 129 0.248 | 75°39/ 83.6 33.3 
245 6.42 15.5 6.5 89.2 0.166 | 80°26’ 46.2 18.0 
250 6.46 0 0 42.1 0.078 | 85°32 0) 0 
255 6.33 15,3 Sao) — 5.2 |—0.0098| 90°34” | — 48.73 | —18/6 
260 6.08 29.2 9.7 — 45.6 |—0.0897] 95° 9’ | — 91.0 | —33.4 
265 5.74 41.2 12.9 —-75.6-|—0.157) 99° 3’-] —194.4 |) S448 
270 5.37 51.0 15.4 = 94.7°}—0,211 | 102°0" |) —147 4 |) =5220 
275 5.00 | 58.8 ‘i ear —105 —0.251 | 104°34’".| —161.0 | —55.9 
280 4.66 65.0 19.8 —109 —0.281 | 106°18’ | —168.2 | —57.4 
287.5 4.20 71.8 22.9 —108 —0.308 | 107°58’ | —171.0° | —56.8 
300 3.62 79.2 28.3 — 98.3 | —0.325 | 108°57’ | —165.4 | —52.6 
325 2.82 86.1 39.8 — 71.3 | —0.303 | 107°37'| —242.9 —42.0 
350 2.55 89.2 51.5 = 04:7 |—=0.256 | 104950") | =1 9805 hie Seep 
400 2.21 91.4 76.1 — 30.9 |—0.167 | 99°36’ | —106.4 —25.4 
450 2.09 92.3 | 100.5 | — 17.1 |—0.098 | 95°38’ | — 93.9 —19.8 
500 2.03 92.7 124.8 — 8.4 |—0.0496} 92°51’ — 84.8 | —16.2 


*Angle of lag of primary current behind primary p. d. 


1919] HAY AND MOWDAWALLA: STARTING CONDITIONS 1755 


TABLE.II. 


ri = 0.006; wLi = 0.0513; rz: = 0.004; w Le = 0.046; w MM, = 0.043; w MM = 4.2; 
w M2 = 2.3; frequency = 12.5. 


Primary P. D. Maintained Constant at 10 Volts. 


Torque 
Speed, |Primary |Secondary] Tertiary] Power Power Phase | Mechan- in 
2p.m. | current | current | e.m.f. | supplied | factor. | angle.* ical 107 
to power. Cugase 
primary. units. 
0 206 394 534 1385 0.388 | 67°26’ 0 
25 199 378.5 465 1400 0.405 | 66° 5’ 112 426 
50 186 350.5 386 1370 0.426 | 64°47’ 258 493 
75 174 321 312 1340 0.446 | 63°31’ 386 492 
100 147 256 214 1146 0.451 |- 63°11" 496 474 
105 139 “236 189 1060 0.441 | 63°49’ 492 448 
110 130.4 212 163 952 0)422)| 1652.3" 467 405 
ALG 122 186 141 812 0.384 | 67°24’ 405 337 
120 116 164 144 625 0.312 | 71°49’ 276 219 
122.5 115.6 160 163 550 0.275 | 74° 4’ 207 161 
125 118 163 190 462 0.226 |_76°55’ 106 81 
127.5 123 176 220 389 0.182 | 79°30’} — 8 - 
130 132 197 249 340 0.149 | 81°26’ | — 128 — 93.9 
135_- 154 255 298 361 0.185.) 82°14’.| — 327 —231.5 
140 176 310 332 545 0.179 | 79°42’ | — 395 —270 
145 189 343 344 793 0.243 | 75°57’ | — 319 —210 
150 193 357 340 1013 0.303 | 72°22’ |-— 166 —106 
162.5 185 344 296 1290 0.403 | 66°14’ 203 119 
175 169 310 241 1335 0.457 | 62°48’ 440 240 
187.5 150 267.5 189 1250 0.483 | 61° 5’ 563 287 
200 130 222 141 1110 0.492 | 60°31’ 608 290 
212.5 111 172 99 910.5 0.474 | 61°42’ 571 256 
220 99.6 140 76 769 0.445 | 63°33/ 512 222 
225 92.8 118 61 666 0.415 | 65°30’ 456 194 
230 86.5 95 47.4 559 0.373-| 68° 6’ 388 161 
235 81.4 TET 34 447 0.317 | 71°31’ 307 125 
240 77.5 48.1 7B Wee 6 3 32 0.248 | 75°39’ 215 85.6 
245 cote 24.1 10.2 217 0.166 | 80°26’ 112 43.8 
250 — 74.8 0 0 101 0.078 | 85°32’ 0 0 
255 - 76.3 24.1 Sd — 13 —0.0098] 90°34’ | — 120 — 45 
260 79.4 48 16 —123 —0.0897| 95° 9’ | — 246 — 90.4 
265 84.1 a tot 22.5 —229 =OFLGT |) G9RMS oN 877 —136 
270 89.9 96.9 28.7 — 328 —0.211 | 102°10’ | — 509 —180 
275 96.5 118 35.3 —420 —0.251 | 104°34’ | — 644 —223 
280 104 135.5 42.4 —504 —0.281 | 106°18’ | — 775 —264 
287.5 115 171 54.5 —614 —0.308 | 107°58’ | — 969 —3 22 
300 1335 219 78.2 —750 —0.325 | 108°57’ | —1260 —402 
325 — 171 306 141 —898 —0.303 | 107°37’ | —1800 —529 
350 189 349 202 —838 —0.256 | 104°50’ | —1970 —537 
400 218 413 344 —630 —0.167} 99°36’ | —2170 —518 
450 231 442 481 —393 —0.098 | 95°38’ | —2140 —454 
500 238 456 614 —204 —0.050 | 92°51’ | —2055 —392 


= a 1 # - 
*Angle of lag of primary current behind primary p. d. 


1756 STARTING CONDITIONS [January 2 


DISCUSSION ON “STARTING CONDITIONS OF SYNCHRONOUS 
MACHINES (HAY AND MOWDAWALLA), CALCUTTA, INDIA, 
JANUARY 2, 1919. 


Quentin Graham: In considering the various torques 
which act upon the rotor during the starting and synchroniz- 
ing periods the authors have confined themselves to those 
torques which are active when the field winding is either 
open-circuited or short-circuited. They have not considered 
the conditions which exist when the field is excited before 
synchronism is reached. In this.case there is another torque 
to be taken into account which is the predominant one during 
the period of pulling into synchronism. 

When the motor is running in synchronism its torque, 
due to the interaction between the ampere turns of the field 
winding and those of the armature winding, depends upon 
the position of the poles relative to the revolving m. m. f. 
of the armature. The torque rises from zero to a maximum 
as the relative shift of the rotor passes through one half a 
pole pitch. This is the limit of stable operation as a synchron- 
ous motor. With a further relative shift of the rotor the 
torque falls off to zero and then goes through a negative half 
cycle. The complete cycle extends over two pole pitches. 
Now if we have the machine running as an induction motor 
with a small slip and then excite the field winding the rotor 
will be subjected to this cycle of torque every time it 
slips one pair of poles. The result is that the rotor is 
made to oscillate about its mean position at slip frequency. 
It will be noticed that the frequency of oscillation of an 
open-circuited or short-circuited rotor, due to the non- 
uniformity of the magnetic circuit, is twice slip frequency 
as has been brought out in the paper. 

The diagram and the analysis given by Messrs. Hay and 
Mowdawalla for the case of a rotor oscillating at twice slip 
frequency is applicable to the case of the excited rotor which 
oscillates at slip frequency. It has been shown by Rosenberg, 
in the article to which reference is made in the present paper, 
that the torque due to the excited field is usually large com- 
pared to the torque component which is dependent upon the 
oscillating speed for its existence. Or, referring to Fig. 3, 
of the present paper, the vector O S should be large in com- 
parison with the vector O F if the diagram is to be used to 
represent conditions when the field is excited. This would 
justify the neglecting of the torque represented by the vector © 
O F in calculating the pulling-in ability of a machine as has 
been done by Rosenberg. 

The pulling into synchronism with a fully excited field is 
of particular interest since it is this condition which nearly 
always exists in practical work. The motor is brought up 
to within a few percent of synchronous speed as an induction 
‘motor and if it is carrying an appreciable load it will not be 


1920} DISCUSSION 1757 


able to pull into step of its own accord. The field must then 
be excited in order to cause the rotor to come up to synchronous 
Speed. From the analysis which the authors have given it 
can be seen that if the motor does not pull in to step during the 
first half cycle of positive or accelerating torque it will not 
pull in at all. That is, during the following half cycle of 
torque it will be retarded an equal amount and will therefore 
pas to oscillate in speed but will not reach synchronous 
speed. - 

It may be deduced also that the certainty of pulling in to 
step depends upon the position of the rotor poles relative 
to the stator m.m.f. wave at the instant that the field is 
excited. If the rotor is in such a position that it must pass 
through the whole of the accelerating half cycle of torque 
before entering the zone of retarding torque the likelihood of — 
its reaching synchronous speed is greater than if the field were 
excited a little later so that only a part of the accelerating 
wave is passed through before retardation commences. It is 
somewhat analogous to the rise in flux in a transformer that 
is switched on to the line, the maximum flux reached being 
dependent on the point of the voltage wave at which the 
switch is closed. Experiments have proved that the pulling- 
in ability of a motor does vary considerably with the point 
on the slip cycle at which the field is closed. 

The conclusion which the authors reach that the field should 
be kept open-circuited during the early part of the starting 
period is open to question. While it is true that the starting 
torque is higher with open-circuited than with short-cir- 
cuited field, as shown by theory and confirmed by experiment, 
the difference between the two is not very great in motors 
having well designed starting windings. Furthermore the 
complicated construction which would result from applying 
field break-up switches to revolving field synchronous 
motors would more than offset the gain in starting torque. 
Closing the field circuit during starting has been found to be 
the most practicable method. 


Aw t 


334 7 a Hie ces. 3! 


ds Mose Dssse taste? Dat 
titeiinicacas peated ibs tink 


Sc ras tA he 


T be . 4 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDING APRIL 30, 1919 


The Board of Directors of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers presents herewith to the membership its Thirty-fifth Annual Re- 
port, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1919. A general balance sheet 
showing the condition of the Institute’s finances on April 30, 1919, 
together with other detailed financial statements, is included herein. 


’ Directors’ Meetings.—The Board of Directors held ten regular meetings 
during the year; seven of these were held-in New York, one in Atlantic 
City in June, one in Philadelphia in December, and one in Boston in 
March. 

The practise has been continued of printing from month to month in 
Section I of the Institute PROCEEDINGS information regarding the more 
important activities of the Institute which have been under consideration 
of the Board of Directors, the committees, and the various officers. 


Annual Meeting—The Annual Business Meeting was held at Institute 
headquarters, New York, on May 17, 1918. The Annual Report of the 
Board of Directors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1918, was presented 
as published in full in the June 1918 issue of the PROCEEDINGS. The 
Tellers Committee presented its report upon the election of officers for 
the year beginning August 1, 1918. 

Directly following the business meeting came the ceremony of the 
presentation of the Edison Medal to Colonel John J. Carty. 


Annual Convention.—The Thirty-fourth Annual Convention was held 
at Atlantic City on June 26 to 28, 1918. This was strictly a business 
meeting at which 15 technical papers were presented at five sessions. 
Several meetings of the Section Delegates were held. Major General 
Black delivered an address on ‘‘Engineers and the War.” 


October Meeting.—The 342nd Institute meeting, scheduled to be held 
at Philadelphia, October 11 and. 12, 1918, was cancelled on account of 
the influenza epidemic. Presentation of the technical papers was post- 
poned until the meeting of December 13, 1918. 


New York Meeting.—The 343rd Institute meeting was held in New 
York on November 8, 1918 under auspices of the Industrial and Do- 
mestic Power Committee. 

Toronto Meeting.—The 344th Institute meeting was held in Toronto, 


Ontario on November 22 and 23, 1918. Three technical papers were 
presented on power installations and developments in Ontario and Quebec. 


1759 


1760 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


Philadelphia Meeting.——The 345th Institute meeting was held in 
Philadelphia on December 13,1918. Two technical papers were presented 
and two addresses on Research. 


New York Meeting.—The 346th Institute meeting was held in New 
York on January 10, 1919. The evening was devoted to an address by 
Major General Squier on aeronautics. 


Mid-Winter Convention.—The Seventh Mid-Winter Convention was 
held in New York on February 19 to 21, 1919. Attendance exceeded 
1300. Four technical sessions were held and fifteen papers presented. 
The first session was held jointly with the A.I. M. E. A complete report 
of this convention was published in the March 1919 PROCEEDINGS. 


Boston Meeting.—The 348th Institute meeting was held at Boston 
on March 14, 1919.- Morning, afternoon and evening sessions were held 
at which three technical papers and several addresses were presented on 
widely divergent topics. 


New York Meeting.—The 349th Institute meeting was a joint meeting 
with the Illuminating Engineering Society held at New York on April 
11, 1919. One paper was presented on the subject of Lighting Codes. 


Meetings and Papers Committee.—The Meetings and Papers Commit- 
tee has held meetings every month at the time and place of the regular 
meetings of the Institute held during the past year as referred to above. 
At these Committee meetings the programs of the Institute meetings 
were planned and the various papers offered for presentation and the 
policy of the Committee were discussed. The policy of the Committee 
has been to continue the practise of holding some meetings outside of 
New York; one was held in: Toronto in November, one in Philadelphia 
in December, and one in Boston in March. 

At the beginning of the fiscal year the Committee found that owing 
to the war activities of the membership it was very difficult to get good 
papers, but with the cessation of war activities a considerable number 
of desirable papers were offered. After completing plans for all the meet- 
ings through and including November 1919, a considerable number of 
papers is still available. In fact there is material available for some Sec- 
tion meetings, which the Committee would like to encourage in order 
that certain papers well worthy of presentation may be presented at an 
earlier date than would be the case if they had to wait for the regular 
Institute meetings. 

A Pacific Coast Convention, to be held in Los Angeles in September 
1919, has been authorized. 


Technical Activities—The Board of Directors’ Committee on Tech- 
nical Activities was appointed for the purpose of co-relating the work 
of the various Technical Committees and to bring about the adoption 
of programs of work for the Committees to undertake, which might prove 
of advantage to the Institute. In the past the Technical Committees 
have been mainly concerned with securing papers for meetings and with 
few exceptions there have been no other activities. It has been realized 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1761 


for a long time that there were other fields that the Technical Com- 


_mittees could work in to the advantage of the Institute. Some commit- 


tees had.already undertaken programs mainly with the object of preparing 
statements of existing successful practise for the guidance of people in- 


_ terested in various industries, but in the past it has not always been 


possible to carry out such programs, as there was no system for insuring 
the continuity of such action. The Board’s Committee has communi- 
cated with the Chairmen of Technical Committees during the year and 
there has been an increase in the amount of work undertaken by these 
committees. The Industrial Power Committee has had for sometime a 
large program which is being worked out, and the other committees have 
started work along somewhat similar lines, such as the Iron and Steel 
Committee, which is preparing to summarize the successful practise of 
the Iron and Steel Industry with regard to electrical installations; the 
Marine Committee which has been engaged in preparing proposed in- 
stallation rules for which there is at present a great need, and others 
of the Committees are engaged on similar useful programs which will 
be presented to the Institute either in the form of papers or reports. 

The Annual Reports of the sixteen technical committees of the In- 
stitute will be presented at the Annual Convention of the Institute in 
June 1919, and will probably be printed in the July or August issues of 
the PROCEEDINGS. 


Editing Committee.—The Editing Committee has jurisdiction over the 
publication of the annual TRANSACTIONS and has been engaged with 
Volume XX XVII covering the year 1918. This volume will be published 
in two parts, Part I is completed and Part II is now in the bindery. The 
volume contains approximately 2000 pages’ and 87 plates of half-tone 
illustrations, comprising papers and discussions presented at Institute 
meetings during the year. 


Sections Committee.—The year ending May lst witnessed the crest 
of the wave of American activity in the great war. It is then not sur- 
prising that it should include the slight resulting depression in attendance 
at the meetings of the various sections of the Institute indicated in the 
table below. 

Whether drawn from the lessons of the hour regarding the value of 
co-operation or led by some other inspiration, the tendency in section 
affairs during the year has been that of continued development in the 
direction of affiliation with the sections of other technical societies. This 
has resulted not only in the highly desirable objective of greater co-opera- 
tion and unity among engineers, but has also placed the engineer in higher 
standing with his community by his greater participation in civic and 
municipal affairs in those centers where such affiliation has been under- 


taken. 
The Sections Committee, encouraged by the well established policy 


of the Institute which has long aimed to develop this co-operation, ap- 


pointed at their conference at Atlantic City last June, a committee to 
study existing methods and formulate suggestions for the guidance of 
all sections so located as to make such affiliation profitable. 


1762 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


This committee, now working in conjunction with the general committee 
on the development of Institute activities, should be able to tender a 
helpful report at the meeting of the sections delegates next month. The 
sections at Atlanta, Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Louis, Spokane, Indian- 
apolis, Philadelphia, Portland, Ore., and San Francisco, now well estab- 
lished in this plan of affiliation should find numerous additions to their 
ranks as time progresses. 

The activities of the Student Branches have continued to be materially 
modified by the war conditions, notably by the organization of the 
Students Army Training Corps. A considerable number of the Branches 
have been inactive during the greater portion of the year, but since 
January 1, many have reorganized and are now active; all will probably 
resume normal activity by next Fall. 

Two new Branches were authorized during the year at the University 
of Pennsylvania and Drexel Institute. 


i} 
For Fiscal Year Ending 


May 1| May 1} May 1| May 1} May 1.| May 1} May 1 
1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 


SECTIONS 
Number of Sections......... 29 30 31 32 32 34 34 
Number of Section meetings 
Meld SA ieee Aavekane nes uae ce 244 233 246 251 265 245 217 
Total Attendance.......... 22,825 | 22,626 | 23,507 | 28,553 | 31,299 | 34,614 | 25,837 
BRANCHES * 
Number of Branches....... 47 47 52 54 59 59 61 
Number of Branch meetings 
OT ..« reves Metduerele's Seabees 357 306 328 360 368 268 156 
METEN AATCC. fe ecvactne «aie eee 11,808 | 11,617 | 12,712 | 15,166 | 16,107 | 10,683 | 6,441 


Standards Committee——The Standards Committee has held during 
the year six regular monthly meetings, one special meeting, and a joint 
meeting with the U. S. National Reorganization of Work. 

In order to expedite the work of the Committee, the entire system of 
subcommittees has been reorganized so that all detail consideration of 
changes in standards and other technical affairs is now referred in each 
case to a specific sub-committee. Action by the Standards Committee 
is taken only after receiving recommendations from a subcommittee. A 
large amount of detail discussion has thus been eliminated. There are at 
present twenty-four of these sub-committees. 

Revision of the General Form of the Standardization Rules.—A large 
share of the time of the Standards Committee during the past year has 
been devoted to a consideration of changes in the form and arrangement 
of the Standardization Rules. This matter has been in the hands of the. 
Subcommittee on the Form but not the Substance for some time past and a. 


el 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1763 


general system of revision by which the Standardization Rules are divided 
into chapters was reported and has been adopted. 

Changes in Substance of the Present Rules——It is hoped to complete 
the full text of this revision of the form of the Standardization Rules 
this year. A few minor changes of substance will be included. 

A revised chapter covering Lighting and Illumination and based on the 
latest rules of the Illuminating Engineering Society has been recommended 
by the Subcommittee on Lighting and Illumination and substituted for 
the present chapter. 

Cooperation with the General Committee on Standardization of Electrical 
Equipment and Supplies of the War Department.—At the request of Major 
N. J. Neall, Chairman of the above Committee, that the Standards 
Committee should cooperate with the General Committee of the War 
Department in the preparation of specifications, the Standards Committee 
voted to render all possible assistance through its subcommittees. Dr. 
P. G. Agnew was appointed a special subcommittee to further this work 
which has been carried on throughout the year. Very effective assistance 
has been rendered the War Department Committee. 

Joint Meeting with U. S. National Committee of the I. E. C—At a joint 
meeting of the U. S. National Committee of the I. E. C. and the Standards 
Committee it was decided to recommend the early reappointment of the 
subcommittee of the I. E. C. on Rating, to meet preferably in Paris. 
Professor C. A. Adams, Mr. H. M. Hobart and C. O. Mailloux will 
represent the Institute. These representatives while abroad will also 
take up with the Rating Panel of the British Engineering Standards 
Association the actions taken and suggestions made by the Standards 
Committee. 


American Engineering Standards Committee.—The consideration of 
suggested changes in the Constitution and Rules of Procedure made it 
necessary to continue the organization committee until May 1918, when 
a revised draft of the Constitution and Rules of Procedure was agreed 
upon and sent to the five appointing societies (A. S.C. E., A. I. M.M.E., 
A. S. M. E., A.-I. E. E., and A. S. T. M.) for their approval. --This 
approval was received from all of the societies, and representatives 
appointed by each met on October 19th, 1918, and organized the American 
Engineering Standards Committee. 

Soon after organization it became evident that the Committee must be 
enlarged in order to secure the cooperation of several important organiza- 
tions engaged in standardization work. This fact was emphasized by 
the action of a conference held in Washington, January 15, 1919, to 
consider the method of developing and approving Industrial Safety Codes. 
At this conference it developed that the principal organizations would not 
cooperate with this Committee unless they had direct representation on 
it. Such representation is not possible under the present Constitution, 
so after careful-consideration the Committee has decided that an increase 
in its membership is desirable. It will therefore be necessary to make 
further changes in the Constitution. Such a revision has been drafted 
and approved by the Committee and will be submitted to the five Founder 


1764 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


Societies for their approval during the month of May 1919. Itis expected 
that this revision will enable the Committee to begin active work in the 
near future. 


Public Policy Committee——The Public Policy Committee, during the 
administrative year about to close, has held itself in readiness to take up 
any matters which might be referred to it by the Institute authorities, 
but has not initiated any recommendations. The reason for the in- 
activity of the Committee is that for the last two years the several matters 
which would have naturally been acted upon by it have been considered 
by Engineering Council. 


Committee on Safety Codes.——The Committee on Safety Codes has 
continued to represent the Institute on the Electrical Committee of the 
National Fire Protection Association, and representatives attended the 
meeting of the N. F. P. A. Committee in New York in March, this being 
the intermediate meeting, at which was discussed the various features of 
the Electrical Code, in preparation for the regular biennial meeting in 
1920, at which time changes in the Code are officially made. 

The Committee was represented at the conference in Washington with 
the Bureau of Standards, for the purpose of discussing matters relating 
to the American Engineering Standards Committee, and the desirability 
of the writing of an Industrial Safety Code. 

The Committee has been active during the year on routine matters of 
a code nature, with the N. E. L. A. 

The first part of the fiscal year the Committee was more or less inactive, 
due to war conditions, but since the signing of the armistice inter- 
association matters have revived, and almost all the activities of the 
Committee occurred in the last quarter of the year. 


Board of Examiners.—The Board of Examiners during the year held 
sixteen meetings, averaging about two and one-half hours each. It 
considered and referred to the Board of Directors a total of 2111 applica- 
tions for admission or transfer to the higher grades. 

Some applicants for admission were objected to on ethical grounds. 
Although the number of such cases was small, considerable time was 
required for the necessary investigations; adverse action was taken in a 
few such cases. The Board continued the practise of requiring question- 
able applicants to furnish proof of loyalty to the ideals of the United States. 

The result of the Board’s work for the year is given in the following 
tabulated statement: 


APPLICATIONS FOR ADMISSION — 


Recommended for grade of Associate........... Tene oe 1213 
INO’ TOCOMIBeMUCK. cay Cit oso tren tor Pitter tee ee 9 1222 
Recommended for grade of Member................... 87 
Not recommended for admission to this grade.......... 23° 110 
Recommended for grade of Fellow.................... 4 
Not recommended for admission to this grade.......... 1 5 


Recommended for enrolment as Students........ RR ascarars 659 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1765 


APPLICATIONS FOR TRANSFER 


Recommended for grade of Member.:................. 81 

Not recommended for transfer to this grade............ Leet OO 
Recommended for grade of Fellow. . ane rt ee eee Le. 

Not recommended for transfer to this eee. SS Senco 15 
Total number of applications considered............... 2111 
Mpplications recoilsidered ih. .n8ssa ss cose s we SOL ee 6 
WU rl ei Le Re, Pi arent een Ste tee eles 2117 


Membership.—Sixteen hundred and ninety-five applications for 
membership in the Institute have been received this year, which is by 
far the largest number ever received in any one year. The nearest 
approach to this was for the year ending May 1, 1918, when 1235 applica- 
tions were received. 

A printed list of reasons why a man should become a member of the 
Institute was printed for distribution to desirable candidates. Several 
thousand of these were called for by the Sections. 

The Membership Committee feels that new members should be ob- 
tained at an increasing rate to keep pace with the industry. 

The 10,000 mark has been passed, the membership of the Institute as 
of May 1, 1919, being 10,352. This shows a net increase of 1070 members 
since May 1, 1918, approximately twice the net increase of the previous 
year, which was 572. 

During the five years ending May 1, 1917, the net increase was only 
1251; the total applications received in these five years,.2440. These 
figures emphasize the greatly increased activity of the past two years. 


Honorary 
_Member Fellow Member | Associate Total 
Membership, April 30, 1918. 6 464 1332 7480 9282 
Additions: 
Pram sherne dale ata/u,or-oarshe ce teed 24 88 et ake 
New Members Qualified... 6 84 1221 
Reinstat esis e xg seks te seta ea Wf 55 
Deductions 
1D) to’ Soper ee os Hote ee ae 4 7 66 
PResigtiedias d,s aon rircts,.« exarety Hate 1 4 77 
_ Transferred...........-.+ pee sis ae 18 94 
Mropped. sveeicie vrais sielo «6 Pewcks 4 15 229 
Membership, April 30, 1919.. 6 489 1467 8290 10252 


Net increase in membership during the year........seeceeesee rer eretencccceeees 


1766 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


Deaths.—The following deaths have occurred during the year: 


Fellows—A. O. Benecke, M. H. Collbohm, W. L. Hooper, C. R. McKay. 

Members—George E. Claflin, *F. J. Duffy, Charles H. Hile, W. J. Jenks, 
Etna Kuhlman, Frank I. Porter, O. O. Rider. 

Associates—E. G. Anderson, H. F. Anderson, Arthur S. Andrews, 
Samuel Avis, G. R. Baker, *Remson Bishop, John Bottomley, Ralph E. 
Brown, W. B. Burbeck, *E. W. Caldwell, J. J. Campbell, Eric Carlson, 
*Lucian Carr, *W. W. Crawford, E. W. Currier, Harry 1 Ctrtis: 7K Day, 
Edward D. Donald, *John J. Donnohue, Hugh H. Emery, E. B. Fahnes- 
tock, I. Fujioka, John D. Gaboury, W. K. Greenwood, John Hanover, 
Vernon E. Hess, W. Lesniewski, Edward Lineberry, Claudius B. Little, 
*George Mac Indoe, J. A. MacQueen, Glen W. Merrill, *Charles J. 
Moore, A. F. Moray, *N. I. Moultrop, H. P. Myers, Archie Oakes, 
B. A. Ordonez, C. H. Parmly, D. H. Plank, James M. Poyner, H. E. 
Randall, Je, O. B.Reynolds, E. M. Rhett, Arnold Ruegg, Owen Samsel, © 
Charles P. Seeger, S. V. Setti, *D. A. Shanks, C. F. Shipman, Charles F. 
Sise, *J.C. M. Small, Herbert E. Smith, Alan Smout, C.W. Steiner, John 
F. Stevens, S. Sugiyana, T. R. Taltavall, Ralph E. Thomas, GA ce 
Thompson, Stuart Thomson, L. J. Vogel, H. Webber, F. S. Wheeler, 
Richard M. Wilson, Minor I. Woodward, N. R. Work. 


Total deaths, 77. *Died in U. S. Service. 


Employment Service.—An employment service has been maintained 
for many years at Institute headquarters for the purpose of assisting 
members in obtaining positions. The services of the Institute consist 
principally in acting as a medium for bringing together the employer and 
the employee. No charge is made. 

The engineering service bulletin is published each month in the Institute 
PROCEEDINGS and it has served to place many men in positions of 
responsibility, both in this country and abroad. The bulletin is sub- 
divided into two parts: one containing announcements of vacancies, and 
the other containing lists of men available, with condensed records of 
their experience. The value of this service to the membership will 
continue to increase from year to year as men of engineering and ex- 
ecutive responsibility realize the opportunity afforded by it to reach tech- 
nical men whom it would be difficult to find through other channels. 

Demobilization greatly increased the number of men available, while 
the number of positions open has greatly decreased. The service has 
been extended without charge to non-members who are or have been in 
the service of the Army or Navy. An effort has been made to keep 
those men on the available file in closer touch with positions open than 
heretofore possible when dependence was alone placed on the Service 
Bulletin of the PROCEEDINGS, by issuing to them when deemed ad- 
visable, a list of the opportunities on file. : 

The Institute’s employment service is coordinated with that of other 
organizations, through the medium of the Engineering Societies Employ- 
ment Bureau, organized under the auspices of the Engineering Council 
and conducted under the direction of the secretaries of the national 
societies of Civil, Mining, Mechanical, and Electrical Engineers. 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1767 


Development of the Institute—In October 1918 the Board of Directors 
authorized the appointment of a Committee on Development to consider 
Suggested or proposed modifications in the activities and methods of 
work of the Institute, including the relations of the Institute to other 
organizations. This action was taken with a view to making a survey 
of, and adjusting, the work of the Institute, having in mind the rapidly 
changing social, economic, and industrial conditions. 

Each Section of the Institute was requested to designate a member 
of this Committee; and these representatives of Sections, together with 
seven additional members appointed by the President, constitute the 
Committee, which has been actively at work for several months. The 
membership was urged to submit suggestions and most of the Sections 
have held at least one meeting for the purpose of discussing the subject. 
On account of the wide geographical distribution of the membership, 
no meetings of the entire Committee have been held, but the representa- 
tives of the Sections have made reports to an Executive Committee of 
seven members of the Development Committee. This Executive Com- 
mittee has held two meetings, at which numerous suggestions from ‘the 
membership throughout the country have been considered. The principal 
features of these suggestions representing the consensus of the views 
expressed, are being compiled by the Executive Committee for further 
consideration by the members of the general Committee; and the whole 
subject will be thoroughly considered and discussed in conferences to be 
held under the auspices of the Development Committee at the Annual 
Convention of the Institute in June, after which it is expected that a 
report, embodying definite recommendations, will be presented to the 
Board of Directors. 


War Activities.—The Institute continued during the past year in active 
cooperation with the various government departments and agencies en- 
gaged in war work as listed in the Report of the Board of Directors for 
1918. 

The work in furtherance of Allied victory in which the Institute aided 
during the period from May 1918 to the signing of the armistice included 
cooperation in obtaining personnel for many branches of service, as follows: 
candidates for the 4th series of Officers Training Schools, for Submarine 
Service, for the Coast Artillery Corps and the Forest Service; specially 
trained men for work in the Bureau of Mines and to act as instructors in 
the various army training schools; for the U. S. Navy Steam Engineering 
School at Stevens Institute and for commissions in the Ordnance Dept. 

The compilation and correction of the Institute’s Honor Roll has been 
continued until from all information at hand it shows a total of 1417 
members have served in the uniformed forces of the United States and 
the Allies of which number 21 died in service. Practically all of the 1417 
members voluntarily entered the service and it is particularly gratifying 
to note the large proportion of officers, as given in the summary. A 
large proportion of these officers received their commissions, or were 
inducted into the service as a result of calls made upon the Institute by 
various departments of the Army and Navy. 


1768 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


SUMMARY 
U. S. ARMY UP ys NAVY: 

Major Generals..........-..- 7 Rear Admirals.............-. 1 
Brigadier Generals... . 2. --.- 5.) Gaptainsna sees ote eee ui 
(Golonelsuetae eae oecsetns Oy Commanders. <.-05)- cena eee 6 
Treat: Colonels. <-ts2 one moto. 93' Lieut? Commanderss- sen. 9 
IVE A OLS ee nettemte te A ys) chs ue een gel 110 Liewtena ntsc eae ee. aera 45 
Captains. . Ls Oe 5 ee A OE ieatenatusa is ) god oie tere 72 
First Hewteasate, RAD Api 199" Bnisiens ys eee see ee eh 
Second Lieutenants.......... 162 Wiseaianenas ee Seer ae (45) 
ELE CANES mrs aie ade secures need 34 — 
Corporal searches ate on eee ee otal : .. 284 

Nitecellancous seem nt actrees 267 WSS: “Marine Corrs 
——  Lieutenants..............:.. 3 
Totalan- ec oe gee Pew kh ee LOD ee Privately. ae ee ee een eee 1 
Totalt'...¢5)..0n ea eee ete - 

ALLIED ForCcES 
British Army oiichs cutee onoe mOoe. Lualian: Ati yt meng nen aie 1 
British Naw yeekuacs se a ieise Gre japanese NAVyicna. 7 ot ces 1 
BremchpAtiiye.aiepictt sie eackere tous 6 ——= 
Total «sce eee een 
otolsonwloOnor TOM] esr we.teis pitt aie 1417 


U. S. National Committee, International Electrotechnical Commission.— 
The U. S. National Committee of the I. E. C. held a joint meeting with 
the Standards Committee in Philadelphia, December 12, 1918, at which 
resolutions were adopted favoring the resumption of I. E. C. activities, 
and recommending the early reappointment of a subcommittee of the 
I. E. C. on Rating, to meet preferably in Paris, for the purpose of con- 
sidering certain communications from the French Committee, particularly 
in regard to I. E. C. rules on Temperature Elevations of Machinery. 

At this meeting, the printing of the I. E. C. Rating Rules as an ap- 
pendix to the 1918 edition of the A. I. E. E. Standardization Rules, was 
suggested and authorized. 

The following documents have been received from the General Secre- 
tary and distributed among the members of the U. S. Nationa ]Committee: 

(1) The Annual Report of the Honorary Secretary (Colonel Crompton) 

for the year 1918. 

(2) A communication from the French Committee regarding a term for 

the unit of ‘‘Reactive Power.” 

(3) A list of Statutes of the I. E. C. 

(4) A communication from the Dutch Committee in regard to an in- 
ternational standard of comparison of aluminum. 

The U. S. National Committee will be represented by Messrs. C. A. 
Adams, H. M. Hobart, and C. O. Mailloux at a meeting of the I. E. C. 
Special Committee on Rating, at Paris, May 5-7, 1919. 

It is believed that the conventions of I. E. C., interrupted for more 
than four years by the war, will now be resumed. 


‘ 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1769 


American Engineers Go To France.—At the invitation of the French 
Society of Civil Engineers and a committee of the French Engineers’ 
Congress, and with the approval of the French government, a delegation 
of American engineers was appointed to study with French engineers 
problems involved in the industrial rehabilitation-of France; such as, 
utilization of commercial ports, the development of navigable waterways, 
the development of water power, improvement of road systems, and 
many other questions of development. 

Immediately on receipt of the invitation a delegation was organized 
representing the American national societies. The Executive Committee 
of the Institute selected Lewis B. Stillwell as the A. I. E. E. representa- 
tive. The complete delegation, which sailed from New York on Decem- 
ber 5, 1918, was, as follows: Messrs. James F. Case, Chairman, Geo. 
W. Fuller, A. M. Hunt, Nelson P. Lewis, Charles T. Main, E. Gybbon 
Spilsbury, Lewis B. Stillwell, George F. Swain, and-George W. Tillson. 

On the evening of February 10, 1919 a joint meeting of the four Founder 
Societies was held in the Engineering Societies Building, New York, at 
which the delegates presented informal reports, abstracts of which were 
published in the PRocEEDINGs for March, 1919. 


United Engineering Society.—This Society performs for the national 
societies of Civil, Mining, Mechanical, and Electrical Engineers, certain 
Specific acts which are governed by contracts; the primary function of 
the United Society being to hold in trust and to administer for these 
societies the Engineering Societies Building, in which the headquarters 
of the national societies are located. 

Extracts from the annual financial report of the United Engineering 
Society were published in the April 1919 PROCEEDINGs. 


Library.—The library of the Institute is combined with the libraries of 
the national societies of civil, mining, and mechanical engineers, adminis- 
tered as the ‘‘Engineering Societies Library’’ under the direction of the 
Library Board of the United Engineering Society; this board is composed 
of representatives of each of the four societies referred to above. 

In order to place the facilities of the library at the disposal of persons 
residing at a distance from New York, a Library Service Bureau has been 
established, and a staff of expert searchers and translators is employed to 
cover almost any engineering topic, in the following manner: abstracting, 
translating, bibliographing, statistical searches and reports, searches for » 
patent purposes, copying, preparing reference cards, etc. 

An abstract of the annual report of the Engineering Societies Library 
covering the calendar year 1918, was published in the April 1919 


PROCEEDINGS. 


Engineering Council.—The Engineering Council represents the result 
of an organized effort inaugurated in the latter part of 1916 by the national 
societies of Civil, Mining, Mechanical, and Electrical Engineers, to 
establish an instrument through which united action could be brought 
about upon matters of common interest to engineers and which would 
serve as a connecting medium between the engineer and the public welfare 
in matters of interest to the engineering profession. The first meeting of 
the Council was held on June 27, 1917. 


1770 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


For details regarding the field, aims, and activities of the Council, 
members are referred to the numerous statements published from time to 
time in the monthly Institute PRocrEpDINGs. A resume of the annual 
report covering the activities of the Council for the year ending February 
13, 1919, was published in the April 1919 PROCEEDINGS. 


Engineering Foundation.—The Engineering Foundation is a fund 
established by the United Engineering Society on January 27, 1915, 
through the generosity of Mr. Ambrose Swasey, of Cleveland. 

The purpose of the Engineering Foundation is the advancement of the 
engineering arts and sciences in all their branches to the greatest good of 
the engineering profession and the good of mankind, which it is proposed 
to accomplish largely through the promotion of engineering research, 

The Engineering Foundation is administered by a board upon which 
the Institute and other national engineering societies are represented. 
The annual report of the Engineering Foundation was also published in 
the April 1919 PROCEEDINGS. 


Representatives.—The Institute has continued its representation upon 
various national committees and other local and national bodies with 
which it has been affiliated in past years, and in addition has appointed 
representatives upon a number of new organizations, some of the more 
recent being the Engineering Division of the National Research Council,’ 
and the American Bureau of Welding. 


Edison Medal.—The Edison Medal for 1917, which had been awarded 
to Col. John J. Carty ‘‘for his work in the science and art of telephone 
engineering’ was presented to Col. Carty with appropriate ceremonies at 
the Annual Meeting of the Institute held in New York on May 17, 1918. 

The Edison Medal for 1918, has been awarded to Benjamin G. Lamme 
“for invention and development of electrical machinery,’’ and the presen- 
tation will take place at the Annual Meeting of the Institute which will be 
held in New York on May 16, 1919. 


John Fritz Medal.—The John Fritz Medal Board of Award which is 
composed of representatives of the national societies of Civil, Mining, 
Mechanical and Electrical Engineers awarded the 1919 medal to General 
George W. Goethals, the builder of the Panama Canal. The presentation 
will take place at the Engineering Societies Building in New York on 
May 22, 1919. 


Finance Committee.— During the year the committee has held monthly 
meetings, has passed upon the expenditures of the Institute for various 
purposes, and otherwise performed the duties prescribed for it in the 
Constitution and By-laws. 

Haskins and Sells, certified public accountants, have audited the books, 
and their report is included herein. 


NEW YORK 
CHICAGO 
DETROIT 
SAINT LOUIS 
BOSTON 
CLEVELAND 
BALTIMORE 
PITTSBURGH 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS : 1771 


HASKINS & SELLS 


CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS 
CABLE ADDRESS 'HASKSELLS"” 
30 BROAD STREET 
NEW YORK 


SAN FRANCISCO 
LOS ANGELES 
NEW ORLEANS 
SEATTLE 
DENVER 
ATLANTA 
WATERTOWN 
LONDON 


AMERICAN-INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


CERTIFICATE OF AUDIT 


We have audited the books and accounts of the American Institute of 


Electrical Engineers for the year ended April 30, 1919, and 


We HEREBY CERTIFY that the accompanying General Balance Sheet 


properly sets forth the financial condition of the Institute on April 30, 


1919, that the Statement of Income and Profit & Loss for the year ended 


that date is correct, and that the books of the Institute are in agreement 


therewith. 


New York, 


HASKINS & SELLS, 
Certified Public 


May 13, 1919. 


Accountants. 


1772 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF 


EXHIBIT A. GENERAL BALANCE SHEET 
ASSETS 
REAL ESTATE: 
One-fourth Interest in United Engineering Society’s Real Estate, 
25 to 33 West 39th Street: 


Quand: arid Baildtmg. ics. cic,s oretelale «cose = vie’ sllsilele|olevalstetsle mriesahalerelatieloraiate $472,500.00 
Rieal Estates qiipu1eMe swiss siape vai reyes! ale supvorofaierey=)s\pballe ie eta sia ole 14,292.79 
PT Ocal Real State sa. wchatela lars. ol ttebere nie tue tee sieneraterstete $486,792.79 
EQUIPMENT: 
Library——Volumes and, Pixtufes.ss qos st) «01's o)o0 «fe see see $ 39,847.55 
Works: of Art, «Pam tings) eter ccc astute cats stereos cue c ete eats ete 3,001.35 
Office Fusniture-and. Pixttirest Aqsewtenatare cake-oeroete opelaireia e eleters ___ 12,428.68 
etal wet eck iciauasecug 2a cereale oe ave Ce Sia e Crate meertaee certo $ 55,277.58 
Less: Reserve for Depreciation... S.twsu\siey~ so Sisieie eke eieieie slo sin 10,840.47 
Remainder—Equipment ala Gab. ele arte ka tee onel Mote atiine we Taye gate 44,437.11 
INVESTMENTS: 
Bonds—City of Wilmington, Delaware, 414%, 1934, Par Value 
PLS, OOOO Me ae ce teres sv nsctel Sele octane el suai thelavareeaiey stele tekt i eeteney ites $ 15,782.05 . 
United States Third Liberty Loan, 4% % Bonds................ 10,000.00 
Total Lavestments:.(.).j. ky: nso ak staan to tiem ote Geo ts.cietete 25,782.05 
WorkKING ASSETS: - 
Publications’ Entitled ““Transactions;~ etc... 2.0... <2+<s00. > $ 12,599.00 
Paper anduGover Paperiin ects oie e.«im soe tivmerctaves aeiele era yerereatels tals 2,162.05 
Paper for Volume 37 and Advertising.,<..m.s.s% <civws o/s «ele Riere 336.69 
IBS GS we We rence ear hardlts ennktels Tens seitecaneceeid nl «MR sretie marl as cee 1,166.74 
FE ORAL MMOL MA Se A BSCUG HE saiclnle oyeleGisore KS's 010 ere ortiz SIRs 16,264.48 
CurRENT ASSETS: 
(asia tessa tenate tote berenne aka <iesal elon whcis ops ws otis am alot o lok © Sarena $ 14,916.68 
Accounts Receivable: 
Members for PastiDuesins o ain adie bie soc ceicke seein owe he 9,728.15 
KAVELtHSETS 32 Sic cats os se e's 38 sles walepaeleldie Oh otha adip ere eam ere nile 678.80 
Miscellaneous: Sales iiyat . 52).".c wie thr eel atoree a meters Whee Remeron 388 09 
Miscellaneous Printing and Subscriptions. ..............-05 1,034.00 
Accrued Interest om Tn vestments. cc. oa oerocie we weieie Sie a ke me te 109.38 
Acerded Enterest'on Bank Balanceg.os.. i. necese0 vem senses 284.59 
otal CurremtiAssetss suki. okt tae oko Oe ones tiie ee 27,139.69 
FuNDs: 
Life Membership Fund 
Cass tare ecltte eve wet swe eR CORSE ds Wee hws et eee $ 438.67 
Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Company 
Bonds, 4%, 1958, Par Value $5,000.00.......... 4,868.75 
Aicerued!, Tatereate <r snmuce chime > abele t actcis. see 33.33 $ 5,340.75 > 


International Electrical Congress of St. Louis— 
Library Fund: 


Satis Pirie hag See eae STAaT el 
New York City Bonds, 44%, 1957, Par Value 
SA OOO0O ee nee te etre «secs ta cis SI ate oe einer ee 2,242.33 
New York Telephone Company Bond, 4% %, 1939, 
Bar. Valite:$ 1, Q00:00macenveteproieias cet ciate 878.75 
Accrued Linterestunts iene nipotcca ctu < 67.50 3,326.19 
MAILLOUx Funp: ie 
WASLE dda a waar wig, asthe hare meee etre eee are $ 142.35 
New York Telephone Company Bond, 444%, 1939.. 1,000.00 \ 
Accrued: Tnterestin, coment tn eee ee 22.50 1,164.85 
Midwinter Convention Fund—Cash...........000cccccecccce 135.89 
Rotak Funds a...tystexcatscave cts ots oe oe 9,967.68 


Dues Parp IN ADVANCE—INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL 
Commission, LONDON, ENGLAND........2.-.e005 Wsdus wptetkevs Wee -—~ * 250,00 


sinie/aya] 99 siohslatejsis ocekete velte eveimtsieis $610,633.80 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1773 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


‘Aprit 30, 1919. 


CURRENT LIABILITIES: 


Accounts Payable—Subject to Approval by the Finance Com- 
EDIE CCE nvafe, c= Seelminkn are siStacmoua's ace'lereious 
Due United Engineering Society, Account Building Addition, 
Including Accrued Interest...... 

Dues Received in Advance.......... 


FUND RESERVES: 


Life Membership Fund............. 


LIABILITIES 


International Electrical Congress of St. Louis—Library Fund...< 


Mastilotx, Fund no oct ap sass o's 68 5 


Total Fund-Reéserves......... 
Surrius: Periexbibit SB? cece cae 


6,362.87 


7,625.75 
2,805.45 


455.50 


$ 17,249.57 


5,340.75 
3,326.19 
1,164.85 

135.89 


9,967.68 
583,416.55 ° 


PL OGAL stelaisis\ca[0) eto ierwerers aveteyeke/eiexs isi 


$610,633 


1774 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


STATEMENT OF INCOME AND PROFIT AND Loss. 


For THE YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 1919. 


ExuHisiT B. 


REVENUE: 


AA ViETEISTIG sraciersvelers 00> ae oo eraisie talons etaceherPosrpiel ele! = arelar(elaie aL bya inte suneere 
SWUbSCHp LIONS. oso, wore, « s sisie vc © polera) curd, <)oie:aintet yan spain teiebe ye eae. 
Sales of “Transactions, Gte. 5c. ks o-ae xe ewe 5/o(o's:'s awl alee mee wee 
IBetGSES OMG Merete slctsreve whe sis. tuleeolmielele Oke adele cet ote! namtene aerate $3,285.75 
Less Costite race clad aiavetete eres overs) viacereue (see sc “oe ake ioeeaanaboye 2,387.83 


Interest. on Inivestitentarg sia. cleiesie.<0 aise eee Oe a ate eee 
Interestron Bank Balancés soa. de cc.c 6 «csi siqtow's selec sely seis eietete 
NOp Celats Wea Wea are a HAI AC COORD Se ao OC Toe HO ote fait 


EXPENSES: 


Meetings and Papers Committee: 
WAEHIES NS ache chs. tre ays teraiolalin eevee oi Vesa Bie oie Sie craketerere operate terete 
Binding and Mailing ‘‘Proceedings’’......0.essscsvcccscces 
IPrinitimge ee POCCCUUIIRS cart tis te. e.sle-e's cl eves sa qe es vince s tie oi ee 
LNG TAy MEL ee TOCECEINOS lene ie Chee sages 06 acy sae ererietes ree 
IPAper ang. Noo Ver Pa petatc)ssjcie eyo ie ein ass oceiel osale sire eveleuer enorme 
ENVELOPES Ars tele mon decewtel of ncted bon «wie S ew mie ee eke ee 
Stationery and Miscellaneous Printing...............eee0- 
General Expense 
Meetings 


EDITING COMMITTEE: 


Volume No. 34 
Volume No. 35 
Volume No. 36 
Volume No. 37 


ee er ce oy 


Add Decrease in Inventory: 


April SO} LOLS rer «cin SAN vawisltis «mow claeclteeetoaie $14,049.00 
APEUKSO; 1910 Arron cera eae 5 etre tiaton tne ne ors 12,599.00 


ee ee CC i a i erry 
SOMO we meee eee e meee er reer reee esses eseeeses 
TOP e meme re ee merce serene essere sede rest seer ee serecene 
CUO OS OOOO ee Meee oor he erases er erereceercenocess 


Comme m meee erences ee secre mere ree Heres sens esesyens 


Stationery and Miscellaneous Printing 
Year Book and Catalogue 


Ce ey 


Ce a ee ea 


CFCC OOPS Oe See Meee ee KS Sew eee REE Ss ese vies veins 


Peewee ewer ener eeee 


$ 7,225.00 
102,908.43 
4,044.00 
1,060.00 
10,641.33 
3,144.92 
2,954.80 


897.92 
1,089.61 


936.40 
41.91 


$134,944.32 


$ 5,940.00 
5,887.20 
8,947.43 
2,549.13 
8,342.44 

882.18 
378.53 
348.03 
6,115.33 


$ 39,390.27 


$ 56.19 
48.63 
4,721.88 
7,062.51 


1,450.00 


$ 19,805.00 
2,097.24 
371.17 
2,479.30 
3,371.90 
4,019.83 
4,597.61 


$ 11,889.21 


13,339.21 


36,742.05 


$ 89,471.53 


$134,944.32 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1775 


TOFAI-REVENUE—(Porward)/s eo <2 sil. Tae «cide Shake Co eee $134,944.32 
EEX DENS BSCE WAT) raiote aie itterela cence ow aide tintve flee ee oe $ 89,471.53 
Sections Committee: 
DEEMIGHS NICCLING. menive s oti aca ats COCA Cee ae ee ot $ 6,230.07 
Branch, Moeatings.:-:eiank vee ryoO. «kr hoe oe Se line sae 81.11 
Delegates’Convention Expense. .2i...0:..00000c0ceene ee beet 3,286.44 
Salaries ONE We VOLK OMICE oo clas Saccia elcioh ib ayeen fe Sats a bees. 2,340.00 
Stationery and Printing, New York Office.................. 768.46 
BI ea Gel ata slater Tain onic era, «vc kedtners late CsT ate crs ater wt ccor ante eaad cae 12,706.08 
United Engineering Society: 
J NECSE TOTES 3 CR RTS Ce eS on es ae ar $ 4,800.00 
MEANS COPTAULLOD. © arata sire te Wk er araG USNs haies der okt he 4,000.00 
DMP CCTIMGVM INET Air oh < ais ie Givis 2 bie ca a, ebsa KOs wie sces ben 3,733.36 
AMEE CS scepter ae) re ee 12,533.36 
General: 
Mors bership ORMIMEECE Gs asic.c slain tn vse ats aie eigha ao aS sinlisl goecane $ 1,647.34 
PATA Ce COMUNE LER «otitis colsaie soa. « Heiepem TNO e an ticet 150.00 
abe ItG EA BOE LOE iclateis o>. cos g = ois en ole Saale aveenus Sail ce olsihe 1,005.49 
Ga AS ESTEE Sa stats was Norah nung Tob unborn sieue vei cds deyotajayar a 6 30.00 
American Engineering Standards Committee............... 600.00 
Committee on Institute Development...............--....- 71.00 
Annual Dues—International Electrotechnical Commission... 250.00 
President's special Appropriation: 2.62.2 ose ol scnce eve e es 331.72 
RAGAOLATY OCCLECAT YS > clot lols aroha 2 sels sie «she Be wee eee 4,000.00 
MPG Bar ese Whe Al ANAT at ote eter sued tee re nors ay eocieue¥ sn eyavialayoheneVar ars 55.89 
European Standards Committees—Conferences............. 1,500.00 
Interest on United Engineering Society Building Addition 
TSA io, epetelrar ic iepeotsoick nig Pare eet aE alas eas sir ie soyoraioxs Keaae 556.95 
Miseeliangotia, © Cline sider ao cree cic ie ea ater sine 6'aus,s,0iis/s.0.e 252.73 
Membership: Classifica tioncins. 25k ois -lel haste ie aia s. Maleate vais 771.75 
Amortization of Premium on City of Wilmington, Delaware, 
4% % Bonds of 1934....... PCa cto} ope RTE Eadie aya rat faye nice oe oe 52.14 11,275.01 
Rot ple cpa 25 Kassie « Spada > octet: « hat SSRIS ee os $125,985.98 
Add: 


Increase in Accounts Payable—Subject to Approval by the 
Finance Committee, Expenses Undistributed at: 


DA aay tN Bs ee organ pussys xiore Ao le ecole eine) svalptnnas puniaioleatlabe’s St $ 6,304.01 
April SU pO LOS ani. Spon dls + haz. Ath Zaha 9 come (aietote Sav nidle o'oa.s 6,362.87 58.86 
PES ESR POCTICHGES Vlodes aslo cic niet cots esol aielle aterm (ie) aye «Yalan ell. op $126,044.84 
MSP ae TD Fe HE VEE NETIC a ooo oe oP io on enc dev ereiie sol sc 0.160 oye %a'e ele. ooe oaXe!a alb tales alps $ 8,899.48 
PROFIT AND Loss CREDITS: 
Proceeds from Sale of Old Electrotypes.......--++eeeeeeueeee £ 440.30 
Refund of Payment to Pan American Engineering Society...... 15.00 
ESE Ae nt or Mero ahs siete se ve a7 Wn wivole Wisse) Mel ake elwiolle 455.30 
GROSS SURPLUSPOR THE YEAR. 2c. c ce voccdcccsinvessecenccere $ 9,354.78 
PROFIT AND Loss CHARGES: 
Uncollectible Dues Written Off. .......--- eee eee eee nena $ 1,985.00 
Dues of Members in Military Service and in Countries Affected 
by the War, Written Off... .....- ss seen cece rere rere ee eeee 1,685.50 
Provision for Depreciation of Furniture and Fixtures... seni r 1,489.35 
Adjustment of Inventory of April 30, 1918, of Library Volumes 
and Fixtures........00ce cece cece e eter e reese terete seeeee 184.00 
FESPA Seem Eoin AS OE UA 8 proce Seid wi aie(e)eipcaust otelieus «aye scofe 5,343.85 
NET SURPLUS FOR THE YEAR... 1. eee ee eee cere tence eens $ 4,010.93 
SuRPLUS, MAY 1,1918......--20 secre cere etter rete nee a ictorte 579,405.62 
SuRPLUS, APRIL 30, 1919...-.. 2-2-0 see eee cece rete rece e ee nees $583.416.55 


1776 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


STATEMENT oF CASH RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS FOR DESIGNATED 
PuRPOSES, FOR THE YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 1919. 


EXHIBIT C. 
RECEIPTS: 
Life Membership Fund co. 6/scis e.< ss otoseleiere( oiccce)evelee afeln’> ernie] o Wiounte he sialore $216.68 
International Electrical Congress of St. Louis Library Fund—Interest 
AN "ROVELLIES sas sa aie ro. ook Sreneeo ere Si The SOA Samer sca aia ba cerat nl niko) toe RRS 94.50 
Mailloux:Pund—Interesticis\.:. svt ciste<' eleucsie Oracles 97s Grete ieininic aan einem 45.00 
Midwinter Convention Fund—Interest ............ 00 2.eeereceeeee 6.54 
Total vee potatos <isrs.o. e:eva © ao tas lerare ecclivisle dicts State tte a /oiets Oiena gn amen $362.72 
DISBURSEMENTS: 
Life Membership Futradscs, «+: /o, «aves re casclejose cave celscayuerel lees eee ee ca 216.68 
Midwinter/Convention Fund... . ic, «ic.cjsuct lene tous ote la iets foie oliatais ave) ieee neon 34 23 
Mailloux Bund: sro- oheudi eos. 0) 10,8 0.16 saya, oxo. pl oleae] taints an oases ieee othe 70.00 
International Electrical Congress, San Francisco, 1915—refund of sub- 
SCTIPLIONA NS «. Grove. ciers: &,o ge o-Pie OSE wa io) ww (eum, cae eee ae ieiel=, SPM ere 40.50 
Total iiss. jo acs edgar Bi oleiraxs, tev awieretere:isvovere setkcwnetale ecesetenthc eee emNeete Semmes $361.41 
RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS PER MEMBER. 
During each fiscal year for the past eight years. 
Year ending April 30....... 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 
Membership, April 30, each 
OATS erste sce ieierapinisheres 7459 7654 7876 8054 8212 8710 9282 10352 
Receipts per Member...... $13.19 $13.45 $14.08 $14.06 $13.62 $13.30 $13.17 13.05 


Disbursements per Member 12.44 15.57 12.86 13.54 13.74 12.75 11.99 12.79 


Credit Balance per Member $ .75 *$2.12 $1.22 $ .52 *$ .12 $ .55 $1.18 $ .26 
* Deficit. 


Respectfully submitted for the Board of Directors, 


F. L. HUTCHINSON, Secretary. 
New York, May 16, 1919. 


INDEX 


NOTE: For complete topical and synoptical index see end of volume 


PAPERS 


Applicability of Automatic Switching To All Classes of Telephone 
Service (Illustrated) (Arthur Bessey Smith) . . 1567 
California 220,000-Volt—1100-Mile—1 ,900,000- Ke Beas 
Bus (Illustrated) (R. W. Sorensen, H. ‘A, Cox and G. E. Arm- 


EES is oS GES Ee ee obra ee ee a are eR on, eT RY 1237 
Dielectric Field in an Electric Power ees The, (Illustrated) 

(R. W. Atkinson) .. 971 
Effect of Transient Wolices 6 on Wicleotice: II, The; “itaserated) 

Ui a I a Ea tees Se Re RS a LRP 1137 
Inherent Limitations on Transformations Possible by Stationary 

Apparatus (Illustrated) (Joseph Slepian)............0.22000-. 1697 
Order and Amplitude of Harmonics in Voltage Wave Forms with 

Indicating Instruments (Illustrated) (Leslie F. Curtis)......... 1179 
Piezo-Electric Effect in the Composite Rochelle Salt eee pig 

(IHustrated) (A. McL. Nicolson) . . 1467 
Positions of Atoms in Metals, The, Gilustrated) (A. W. LHD). 1445 
Predetermination of Synchronous Phase Modifier sg 

(Illustrated) (Hubert V. Carpenter)... 1223 
Present Limits of Speed and Power of Bavie. Shaft Steain ace 

(UUbMSE rae eH in) OLUSOM\ co etek sitttsig. tess Se ocbrigte ane 1515 
Present Limits of Speed and Power of Single Shaft Curtis Steam . 

Turbines (Illustrated) (Eskil Berg).. 1527 
Present Limits of Speed and Output of Sidele Share. ance Gener. 

ators, (Illustrated) (F. D. Newbury)... 1537 
Principles of Radio Transmission and Rorchion wih Nateana al 

CoilsAerial:(lustrated), (J. Hy Dellinger)iccs. J... 0.- ls. 4s 1347 
Problems of 220-Kv. Power Transmission pes das as Je 

Stlver) . . 1037 
Report of Béard OE eceuetene ARN yes he One ae oe ECE Fe 1759 
Report on Electromagnetic Induction, A. (Illustrated) (S. J. 

(GENE ARS tod tblot, ip Coe en Ae ROPE PAE BE ind Ma at os ieee ae 1495 
Searchlight in the U. S. Navy, The, (Illustrated) (Ralph Kelly)...... 1605 
Some Problems in the Operation of Power Plants in Parallel, 

(Merb Geh) MOL LCs LOIS). ancisce Gvdko trans as bo oll ORR agente acces 1651 
Some New Formulas for Reactance Sone Vag ey (Aa Bs 

Dvighte.... .. 1675 
Starting Gondiiods ee De ehioawus WMackines (Iilustrated) 

(Alired Hay andor. Nx Mowdawalla) i218 aeena a os oe ete ns 17138 
Telephone Repeaters, (Illustrated) (Bancroft Gherardi and Frank 

Joi NAIDOO ee OE Ao OE a TG td Deo a ae Batti 1287 
Theory of Probabilities Applied to Failures of Suspension Insula- 

poss (uiLastrated). (units, IGLGUDOr. Sive.5\., «>. ORM NA cake sae Oe 1199 
Transatlantic Radio Communication, (Illustrated) (E. F. W. 

PANEL Ot LORS OID) rae Mawel Gite ei UTI Ome Pe te RAN eo ae oh 1269 
Vacuum Tube as a Generator of Alternating-Current Power, 

(Illustrated) (John H. Morecroft and H. Trap Friis).......... 1415 


Vv 


INDEX OF AUTHORS 


Adams, Comfort A., Discussion. . 1562 
Albert, J. C., Discussion... . Ap pithde Tes CRS SOR MG. TOSS aed 8 Oe 
Alexanderson, E. F. W., Paper. My aie Nahe CEM LOD 
Alleutt,, €. 1., Discussion. . een ah oe See LOO 
Anderton, ie ee Discussion... 3 1217, 1232, 1266 
Armstrong) G: E., Paper 1237; DisbissiOn «otc ee Gone eee 1268 
Atkinson, R. W., Paper, 971; Piscussion es ee. we ler, 006 
Baers Fred: li, Discussion’... $2.46... dnecastet a Ee eee eae ee OU 
Barnett,S. Ji, Papers sc sec: kGteans 22 ac de cc ae ae seen er 
Barre, H,.A.,..Discussion’ Jn a... <j itie« «ta ames aoe et LOO pL AS Leos 
Beshler:) Bit P.. Discussioti..s 056 5) seas So a ee eee ee Oa 
Beeliians R. Al, DisCussiOn. orn. . ghee eet ee ee) 
Behrend, B. A., Discussion. . ..1547, 1562 
Bennett, Ralph, Discussion. . Cree ion Cotte ets bent. NY 
Berg, Eskil, Paper, 1527; Discussion. 29144522, 2 ene ee 
Bosler, M. O., Discussion. . SO SAR 1231 
Brand, Pie Peg ‘Discussion. . Eo ee 1122 
Carpenter, Hubert V., Bia dete (ASU iailt2 2 aseeda ne aaa 1223 
Chubbuék, LA Be Diseussiont is tic Pi eine ee ice eee ee 
Clapp,. Paul, S., Discussioni... 7 2. cnt PR es ee eee ee OO 
Clark} J... G., Discussion... She) ac teet ls. oct ate ois Se ee 
Cone, D. I., Discussion. . 1193 
Corbett, L. i Discussion. . 1266 
Gox. Hardie Paper, 12373 Discussion. . sf ete 1267 
Crane, J. B., Discussion. thes in Gig ng er eer ee ee 
Curtis, Leslie F., Paper, 1179; ‘Discussion. ates bem ate LL OOM eae tiene 
Damon, Geo. A DISCUSSION. « «<r sv, gat gaint & Gl teed weien ete cee LOD) 
Dann, -W. M..-Discussiones. SS sates! «os pce aren! See ee eee 
Davis CE Ws, OISCUSSION fot otic oe te oe nee ee ete ae ee Ce 
DeGraat, ‘Gr Ate Discussion. 7 5s. see See eee oy ee ee ee eL OO 
Dellingery Jali} Papers. nes ihc. DAE ee eee ee ee 1347 
Wel: Mar, Wm.-As, Discussion trae) ny ho oon eo eee ire OLS ed OSU Nell oD 
Diamar, NS: S Discussion sn ateaieer note ee ane Se ee oe 1191 
Downing) sP 2M as DISCussiOiys. ahsc <4, Sak ae ee 1232, 1233; 1257 
Dmight wh. Bs, Paper l6fo. Discussion...iocseescul eee ene 1119, 1230 
Eckhardt, E. At.«Discussion wt «cutee Sette aseeee eee ee 
Hmimet, «Wr -L: Roy Disewssion: Jeis.<dar. uate at abet ee  L 
Héraald, Bz:GiWDisenssiom shin ened a sie ken ead anette od 1560 
Fisher sH.ws! Discussion. Sawa) fac sees Bee ee 1017 
Risken}. Ba Discussion oi.00 news .oeatts 1218, 1254, 1258 
Roster, cW..2]-; Discussioties serie ©. oe: aca We i ane, RR Taal 
Friis, H. Trap, Paper.. 1415 
Gherardi, Bancroft, Sere 1287 
Gray, Alexander, M., Discussion. . 1556 
Grover, F. W., Discussion. . 1403 
Haar, Selby, DisCussiOih cece vas. cscnst hs ace oe 1601 
Hankershs.C. 9 Discussion des aacig tik oid. ache) peat eaten ae ea eee Talal 
Harding, Ci. Discussion: 9.0, .t askuek hee cetnet ee e 1124 
Hay, Alfred, Paper.. ; sang Th Cheeta inh Suc eae ee Se meee 1713 
Hodgkinson, Francis, Discussion, ao ee ee 1559 
Howell, 'C: ‘Tay Discussion. > «sco eo Poe one ae ee ee 1131 


Hull, A. W., Paper 1445; Discussion. . 
Jackson, R. P., Discussion......... 


INDEX 


Jennings, P. ee ee ee 


Jewett, Frank B. ane dali 
Johnson, J. F., Paper.. 


vil 


el 2ow 


P1987 
1515 


Kelly, Ralph, Paper, 1605; Ticeneaon. 


Klauber, L. M., Paper, 1199; Discussion....... 


Koiner, C. W., ‘Discussion. . 
Koontz, J. A., Discussion. . 


Langmuir, Irving, DisciiseiOn 
Ledbetter, J. C., Discussion...... 
Lichtenberg, Chester, Discussion. . 
Lighthipe, J. A., Discussion. . 


ves 1222, 1256, 


1632 
1266 
1260 


. 1125 


.. 1489 
. 1625 


So oe DIT ese. tons, 
MacDonald, H. G., See 3 Ne oe es Ae, Er 3 


NVETHOD Cy ae eer DISCUSSIONS Saiki, coli. /t ousie hoe a Se shee oe Glee 
ate h a Vee DISCUSSIONE «Gas, Stay cis. Siow iewc Bice Sos be 
RECIie alge aia MOS CUSSION hl cl sa.c foe ten terres oo Bets, Saree eb ia 


Re chy talent ee ISCUSSIOME Sc, Gactenc vas hie soos Gin Ae ee ts 


Meyer, E. B., Discus<:on.. 
Mowdawalla, BeyN., Paper. 


Morecroft, John H. Soa 1415: _ Discussion... Bs ie 


Morehouse, Lyman 'E., Discussion. 
Murphy, E. J., Discussion. . 


Murray, W. S., Discussion... .. mee ogi wana 


. 1601 
. 1623 


Mey Damn iesl).. Papert oov.+, A USCUSSION Accum. ee see wen ee 
Nicalsan—A» Nick Paper, 1467;. Disctission... {2 Geet. / ee 


Gisvoad = hagleys 1SCMSS! Om Seep een dare 8) os orice teal penne cv se orisre ays 
Paricers |ci Cry, SCH SSI OTe = meee er ie tesco ec falar viene aie 


Raricers > B.,., Discusstote . ace ne-siaes aie x * 


Paterson, wVis Lane LMS CHSELOT ete ty Se ett a a Tone ate Soa Sem ayer 


Peasides Wie Ds A DISCUSSION sc + ie ek oi 
Peek, Jr., F. W., Paper, 1137; Diseussion. ..~-- 
Peters, pees PUSOHEELEL, VACe Fd oe Seo es 
Bole iy LiSCUSSIOM. a0. ci sori hare cue 


pee conusicn ow ree radi he a oe 
cep Nie PIS CUSSION oie ae oie sar sgh aay Misuse Pen poencel a atte a feyere hasnt nls 


Ready, Lester S., Discussion. 
Roper, D. W., Discussion. . 
Ross, J. D., Discussion. . 


Scattergood, E. F., Discussion. . 
Schrader, J. E., Discussion. . 
Shanklin, G. B, Discussion. . 


Shoemaker, R. W., Discusssion. — ioe — 
Silver, A. E., Paper, 10375.° Discssion=ee~ 321- 


Slepian, Joseph, Paper 


Smith, Arthur Bessey, Paper 1567, “Discussion........ A 


Sorensen, R. W., Paper..........-+---++++-5 
Spurck, R. M., (a 


Stevens, J. F., Discussion. . 
Stone, E. C., Paper.. 
Summerhayes, 18 pal Pe “Discussion. . 


Taylor, John B., Discussion. . 


Torchio, Philip, Discussion. . 


Wallau, H. L., Discussion. . 
Williams, L. CG Discussion. . 


Williamson, R. 'B., Discussion. . ee os ‘en se 


Wilson, J. F., Discussion. 


Wintringham, Apne Discussion. . oan heen 
Wiseman, D. E., Paper ere Rescate i uate oa 


Therrell, D. MacL., Discussion. ; sons ee met, AP OES: nem Fo 


eae eis lie 9) (as bie 3: 6) 6. spin ve 


1627 
1262 


1127 
1129 
1109 
1621 


. 1234 


1130 


. 1718 


1492 


1113 


1564 
1487 


1562 
1111 


\ 


i 9 Napkghenep: 
f , 


PBs ae ex 
_ oy ; 


SYNOPTICAL AND TOPICAL 


INDEX 


OF 


AT. E. E. TRANSACTIONS 


Vol. XXXVIII, Parts 1 and II 


The main headings under which these synopses are classified were ar- 
rived at by a careful study of all the papers contributed since the organi- 
zation of the Institute. 

The method of making this classification may be called the automatic 
method, since it is created by sorting the papers themselves into groups 
and then naming the groups. 

Many papers fall naturally into several different groups and in such 
cases they are inserted under as many different heads as it is thought 
they rightfully belong. 

The classified synopses are designed for those searching for compre- 
hensive information on any given topic, while the subject index is intended 


for those looking up specific and definite data or information. 


RMB One time Co bS) 


MAIN SECTIONS OF SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Page 
Ea Ca tion cg seecgecyesiste, sae yin 5 as eae OR ee ane ae ci eee — 
Géneral-Theory.. @.048 SPE Bat ae ee. Se Oe eee 3 
Units, Measurementssand Instruments... «- > 1a eee 6 
Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena. 222.0. seam oe eee ee fi 
Electric Contluctors:4.,.02 ts SSP a ee de ee ee oe 9 
Magnetic Properties and Testing of Iron..°....... 2.5.2. — 
Bateeri@S te ones cee ie oxts aie. a oo aed aa eae k o Be — 
A PANSLOLIMETS ce os deco + oe -Slonk wee See ee 10 


Electrical Machinery and, A ppatatuSmence.a- iets cin ees 
Prime, Moversiand Steam: Botlers. 5-05. 0.0 acre ces oe ee 


Power Piants and: Central Stations... ae ee 14 
Parallel Operation oy: 08s sau odes Bietotua aeasinee ees Ee eee 15 
‘Pransmission Lines...) 5... .s\ma.o.a ae roe ee a ee ee 15 
Electric Service, Disturbances and Protection................ 17 
Distribution Systems. 35%, 32% 5 ae 2 6 Bvt Sie gener eteae epee ia aes —_— 
Control, Regulation and: Switching... 24. .i..sir aereie enenen 20 
SEPACTION jac. ui AR chs o Seaate setae, gt Panes ah ee ence ae eee cn ee 21 
Lighting andolampswpat ile aeiss US Os. Lee Be Se eee ee Dil 
BlectricityamtherArmy and Na vyr eerie i cee eae 22 
Miscellaneous Applications of Electricity.................... 23 
‘helephony and Delesrapliys gem: oe. ee nee ene eee ene 24 


Miscellaneous Topics and Institute Affairs................... 27 


2. GENERAL THEORY 


THE GENERAL EQUATIONS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT—III. 
VARIATION OF CONSTANTS, r, L, C AND g, AND ITS EFFECTS 


C. P. Steinmetz Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 191-260 


In the usual theory of transients the assumption is made, that re- 
sistance, inductance, capacity and conductance are constant. This 
however, is not correct, and as the result thereof, it was not possible to 
theoretically investigate, and numerically calculate the dissipation of 
high-frequency disturbances, the flattening of the wave fronts of impulses, 
the rounding off of steep waves, etc., with the time and the distance of 
travel, and therefrom to determine the distance, to which the danger 
from such disturbances extends, and to investigate the conditions of line 
construction, which limit the danger zone of such phenomena to the 
smallest local extent. 

In the following, two of the foremost causes of change of the line 
constants with the equivalent frequency are investigated, the unequal 
current distribution in the conductor, and the electric radiation from the 
conductor. : 

Equations of the line constants as function of the equivalent frequency 
are derived, and applications thereof made to a few problems. 

It is shown that in high-frequency conduction the section of the con- 
ductor is of little importance, but the circumference is the determining 
factor, except at very high frequencies, where size, shape, and material— 
within certain limits— becomes of secondary importance. 

The conditions, which cause a flattening of steep wave fronts and im- 
pulses, and a rounding of irregular waves, are investigated. 

For convenience, the theoretical part has been separated and placed 
in an appendix, giving in the text the discussion, with numerous tables 
derived from the theoretical equations, and curves illustrating these 
tables. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by H. S. Osborne on 
“Review of Work of Sub-Committee on Wave Shape Standard of the 


Standards Committee.”’ 


THEORY OF THE TRANSIENT OSCILLATIONS OF ELECTRICAL NETWORKS 
AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 


J. R. Carson Vol. xxxviii—-1919, pp. 345-427 


.The purpose of this research was to make a broad theoretical study 
of transient phenomena with a view to developing methods of calculation 
directly applicable to engineering problems. The investigation starts 
with the problem of formulating the current in an electrical network or 
transmission system in response to a suddenly applied e, m, f. of arbitrary 


3 


4 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


form. A simple formula is derived which expresses this current in terms 
of two independent functions: one, the applied e. m. f. expressed as a 
time function, and the other a characteristic function of the constants 
and connections of the system, this latter being termed the ‘‘indicial 
admittance’’ of the system. A systematic investigation of methods for 
solving and computing the indicial admittance follows, in the course of 
which original solutions for transmission and artificial lines are derived 
and a new method involving integral equations is developed. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W:--W. Crawford on 
‘Telephone Circuits with Zero Mutual Induction.” 
é 
ORDER AND AMPLITUDE OF HARMONICS IN VOLTAGE WAVE FORMS 

WITH INDICATING INSTRUMENTS 


Leslie F. Curtis Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1179-1190 


The author presents a method for the determination of the order and > 
percentage of the various components of an alternating wave of e. m. f., 
using indicating meters and other inexpensive apparatus. 

Two examples are given. Oscillograms are included to show interest- 
ing phenomena and to check the results of the calculations. 

The value of so-called standards for the indication of wave form is 
questioned. : 

Discussion, pages 1191-1198, by Messrs. N. S. Diamant, J. C. Albert, 
Dy J; Cone, Hs At Barre and lL. F. Curtis: 

A general discussion on determination of harmonics. 


PREDETERMINATION OF SYNCHRONOUS PHASE-MODIFIER PERFORMANCE 
Hubert V. Carpenter Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1223-1229 


The author reviews the method for showing the behavior of trans” 
mission lines first given by Perrine and Baum and then shows how it 
can be used in determining the effect of the use of a synchronous motor 
operating without load for improving the power factor. 

The diagram given shows both the improvement in voltage regulation 
and the change in power factor due to the phase-modifier for any assumed 
condition of loading for the transmission line. 

The errors of the method are discussed with methods for determining 
their magnitude, and the advantages of the graphical treatment pointed 
out. 

Discussion, pages 1230-1235, by Messrs. H. B. Dwight, M. O. Bosler, 
J. A. Lighthipe, P. M. Downing, J. H. Anderton, L. F. Curtis, fe ok 
Wilson and H. L. Melvin. 


Discussion of various methods of determination including use of circle 
diagram. 


A REPORT ON ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 


S. J. Barnett Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1495-1518 


This report discusses briefly the chief fundamental results obtained 
from the days of Faraday to the present time in studying the electro- 


motive forces ordinarily referred to the domain of electromagnetic 
induction. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 5 


Self-induction is first taken up. 

The motional electromotive force, developed when matter movse 
in a magnetic field, is next considered and is derived from Ampere’s law 
on the electron theory. 

The induced electromotive force in fixed conductors and insulators 
arising from the motion or alteration of other systems is next considered. 

The report closes with a treatment of unipolar induction in both so- 
called open and closed circuits, including brief descriptions of some of the 
principal experiments, a discussion of the theories involved, and their 
application to the unipolar generator. 

No discussion of this paper. 


SOME NEW FORMULAS FOR REACTANCE COILS 


H. B. Dwight Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1675-1696 


Formulas are presented and derived, which have not been previously 
published, for mutual inductance of coils with parallel axes, repulsion of 
coils with parallel axes, and self-inductance of long cylindrical coils. 

These formulas apply to practically all cases of reactance coils in 
common use. They are very convergent and accurate, and will give 
results to a given degree of accuracy with a minimum amount of labor. 

Sets of curves aré given from which approximate readings may be taken. 

No discussion. 


INHERENT LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS POSSIBLE BY 
STATIONARY APPARATUS 


Joseph Slepian Vol, xxxviii—1919, pp. 1697-1711 


Expressions for electrostatic and electromagnetic energies, Joulian 
-heat dissipation and power are given in complex quantities. The pure 
imaginary part of the expression for power in a static network is shown to 
be equal to 2 W times the difference between the mean electromagnetic 
energy and mean electrostatic energy. Use is made of this new principle 
in considering the problems of power-factor correction and phase splitting. 
It is shown that in general for phase transforming by static apparatus 
both magnetic and electrostatic storage of energy are necessary, and it 
is shown how the minimum amounts of each are determined by the load. 

The symmetry of the coefficients in the general equations for the 
steady state in a static network is demonstrated, and it is shown that 
limitations upon voltage and current transformations follow. The voltage 
regulation of any phase-splitting arrangement is considered. 


No discussion. 


STARTING CONDITIONS OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 


A. Hay and F. N. Mowdawalla Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1713-1755 


A detailed study of the behavior of the synchronous motor during 
what has always been regarded as a critical period—viz. the period 
when the motor is being accelerated from rest to synchronous speed. 

- Discussion, pages 1756-1757, by Q. Graham. 


6 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 
3. UNITS MEASUREMENTS AND INSTRUMENTS 


THE ABSOLUTE MEASUREMENT OF THE INTENSITY OF SOUND 


Arthur G. Webster Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 701-712 


This paper includes a description of a series of acoustical researches 
extending over a period of twenty-eight years. The properties of vibrat- 
ing bodies and the subject of elastic hysteresis are discussed. Two 
fundamentally important instruments for the absolute measurement of 
sound have been developed and the theory given. The first is the 
standard of sound, called the phone, which is capable of reproducing at 
any time a sound of the simplest character and which permits the output 
of sound to be measured in watts of energy. The second is an instru- 
ment called the phonometer for measuring a sound in absolute measure. 
This instrument is now practically as sensitive as the human ear. The 
determination of the space distribution of sound and of the effect of 
disturbing bodies, and the measurement of the reflecting coefficient of 
surfaces have been accomplished. The phonotrope is a third instrument 
tesigned and used to find the direction of a source of sound, for example 
a fog signal. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by A. E. Kennelly and H. 
Nukiyama), pages 713-723, by Messrs. J. B. Taylor, T. E. Shea, B. A. 
Behrend, R. L. Jones, A. G. Webster, H. S. Osborne, A. Press and A. E. 
Kennelly. 

A general discussion including the algebraic theory of the receiver and 
the application of the circle diagram. 


‘UTILIZING THE TIME CHARACTERISTICS OF ALTERNATING CURRENT 


Henry E. Warren Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 767-781 


By the invention of a very small, simple and reliable self-starting 
synchronous motor, in conjunction with convenient means for regulating 
the average frequency of an alternating circuit, there has been developed 
a new field of usefulness for electric power. It is now feasible to drive all 
kinds of timing devices such.as clocks, graphic instrument movements, 
time recorders, etc., directly from the lighting circuits. Remarkable 
accuracy is obtained, and the amount of care is minimized by the elimina- 
tion of winding and regulating. 

No discussion. 


THE DIELECTRIC FIELD IN AN ELECTRIC POWER CABLE 
R. W. Atkinson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 971-1016 


The data given pertain particularly to the field of three-conductor. 
three-phase cables when supplied with three-phase voltage, and are 
primarily the solution by physical measurements of some of the geometric 
problems of the three-conductor three-phase cable. 

Data are given so that it is possible, from electrical measurements on 
three-conductor cable, to determine certain specific quantities as per- 
mittivity, resistivity, etc. of the dielectric of three-conductor cables in 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX G 


the same way as can readily be done for single-conductor cables, from 
geometric considerations. 

Also, there is shown the potential and stress distribution in a three- 
conductor cable. 

Discussion (including that of paper by W.S. Clark and G. B. Shanklin), 
pages 1017-1036, by Messrs. H. W. Fisher, C. W. Davis, W. A. Del Mar, 
D. W. Roper, P. Torchio, H. L. Wallau, W. R. Atkinson, E. B. Meyer 
and G. B. Shanklin. 

A general discussion with particular emphasis on comparison of stresses 
in various types of cables. 


ORDER AND AMPLITUDE OF HARMONICS IN VOLTAGE WAVE FORMS WITH 
INDICATING INSTRUMENTS 


Leslie F. Curtis Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1179-1190 


The author presents a method for the determination of the order and 
percentage of the various components of an alternating wave of e. m. itn 
using indicating meters and other inexpensive apparatus. 

Two examples are given. Oscillograms are included to show interest- 
ing phenomena and to check the results of the calculations. 

The value of so-called standards for the indication of wave form is 
questioned. 

Discussion, pages 1191-1198, by Messrs. N. S. Diamant, J. C. Albert, 
D. J. Cone, H. A. Barre and-L. F. Curtis. 

A general discussion on determination of harmonics. 


4. INSULATION AND DIELECTRIC PHENOMENA 


IONIZATION OF OCCLUDED GASES IN HIGH-TENSION INSULATION 
G. B. Shanklin and J. J. Matson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 489-536 


This paper deals with the ionization of occluded gases in solid insulation 
from the standpoint that these gas spaces are the weakest part of an 
insulation design and should receive first consideration. The stress at 
which ionization starts in different types of built-up insulation, such as 
used in cables and coils, is measured and from these measurements a 
safe working stress determined. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. Dubsky on ‘‘The 
Dielectric Strength of Air Films Entrapped in Solid Insulation and A 
Practical Application to the Problem for Alternator Coils and Cables.” 


THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR FILMS ENTRAPPED IN SOLID 
INSULATION AND A PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE PROBLEM 
FOR ALTERNATOR COILS AND CABLES 


F. Dubsky Vol. xxx viii—1919, pp. 537-558 


An experimental investigation of the strength of air films of various 
thicknesses between glass plates. In the arrangement used, the break- 
_ down of the air or the starting point of corona could be readily observed. 


8 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Tests were also made of the dielectric strength of air films between other 
solid insulations. 

It was found that the dielectric strength of air films between insula- 
tions was practically the same as the dielectric strength of air films 
between conductors. 

The second part of the paper is devoted to the practical application of 
the data to the design of armature coils and cables, and several specific 
examples are given. 

Discussion (including that of paper by G.B. Shanklin and J. J. Matson), 
pages 559-575, by Messrs. H. G. Reist, L. W. Chubb, J. B. Whitehead, 
C. A. Adams, W. J. Foster, H. W. Fisher, R. E. Argersinger, C. F. Hard- 
ing, R. W. Atkinson, D. Du Bois, F. W. Peek, Jr., E. E. F. Creighton, 
J. J. Matson, W. I. Middleton, E. W. Davis and F. Dubsky. 

A general discussion. 


HIGH-TENSION SINGLE-CONDUCTOR CABLE FOR POLYPHASE SYSTEMS 
W. S. Clark and G. B. Shanklin Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 917-969 


In this paper the dielectric, inductive and general line characteristics 
of three-conductor and single-conductor cable are compared. The 
advantages and disadvantages of each type of cable are brought out ina 
way that will aid in deciding the merits of individual problems. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by R. W. Atkinson on 
“The Dielectric Field in an Electric Power Cable.” 


THE DIELECTRIC FIELD IN AN ELECTRIC POWER CABLE 
R. W. Atkinson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 971-1016 


The data given pertain particularly to the field of three-conductor 
three-phase cables when supplied with three-phase voltage, and are 
primarily the solution by physical measurements of some of the geometric 
problems of the three-conductor three-phase cable. 

Data are given so that it is possible, from electrical measurements on 
three-conductor cable, to determine certain specific quantities as per- 
mittivity, resistivity, etc. of the dielectric of three-conductor cables in 
the same way as can readily be done for single-conductor cables, from 

' geometric considerations. 

Also, there is shown the potential and stress distribution in a three- 
conductor cable. 

Discussion (including that of paper by W. S. Clark and G. B. Shanklin), 
pages 1017-1036, by Messrs. H. W. Fisher, C. W. Davis, W. A. Del Mar, 
D. W. Roper, P. Torchio, H. L. Wallau, W. R. Atkinson, E. B. Meyer 
and G. B. Shankin. 

A general discussion with particular emphasis on comparison of stresses 
in various types of cables. 


THE EFFECT OF TRANSIENT VOLTAGES ON DIELECTRICS—II 


The Effect of Lightning Voltages on Arrester Gaps, Insulators and Bushings on 
Transmission Lines 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxviii— 1919, pp. 1137-1164 


This paper treats of some of the practical applications resulting from 
an investigation of the effect of lightning voltages on insulators, bushings 
and protective gaps. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 9 


The relative protective values of various gaps for steep and slanting 
wave fronts and high frequency are shown graphically in Figs. 14, 15, 
16 and 17. 

Data are given on the steepness of lightning waves actually occurring 
on transmission lines in practise. 

Discussion, pages 1165-1177, by Messrs. W. A. Del Mar, F. W. Peek, 
Jr. and C. T. Allcutt. 

A general discussion. 


THEORY OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO FAILURES OF SUSPENSION 


INSULATORS 
L. M. Klauber Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1199-1212 


There are a wide variety of operating conditions which affect the 
amount of over-insulation required, and after having found the minimum 
number of insulators per string required for any given operating condi- 
tions the author points out a method of determining the amount of extra 
insulation desirable from an insurance standpoint according to the law 
of probabilities. Equations are developed from which the probability 
of failure for any given case or the ratio between such probabilities for 
any pair of cases may be determined directly. A numerical example is 
also given which shows the development of the theory of minimum annual 
cost for combined mechanical and electrical failures. 

Discussion, pages 1213-1222, by Messrs. W. D. Peaslee, C. O. Poole, 
J. A. Lighthipe, J. H. Anderton, H. A. Barre, J. B. Fisken, R. W. Shoe- 
maker, E. F. Scattergood, L. C. Williams and L. M. Klauber. 

A general discussion on the practicability of the method described. 


5. ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS 


THE GENERAL EQUATIONS OF THE ELECTRIC CIRCUIT—II 
VARIATION OF CONSTANTS, r, L, C AND g, AND ITS EFFECTS 


C. P. Steinmetz Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 191-260 


In the usual theory of transients the assumption is made, that re- 
sistance, inductance, capacity and conductance are constant. This 
however, is not correct, and as the result thereof, it was not possible to 
theoretically investigate, and numerically calculate the dissipation of 
high-frequency disturbances, the flattening of the wave fronts of impulses, 
the rounding off of steep waves, etc., with the time and the distance of 
travel, and therefrom to determine the distance, to which the danger 
from such disturbances extends, and to investigate the conditions of line 
construction, which limit the danger zone of such phenomena to the 
smallest local extent. 

In the following, two of the foremost causes of change of the line 
constants with the equivalent frequency are investigated, the unequal 
current distribution in the conductor, and the electric radiation from the 
conductor. 

Equations of the line constants as function of the equivalent frequency 
are derived, and applications thereof made to a few problems. 


4 4 


10 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


It is shown that in high-frequency conduction the section of the con- 
ductor is of little importance, but the circumference is the determining 
factor, except at very high frequencies, where size, shape, and material— 
within certain limits—becomes of secondary importance. 

The conditions, which cause a flattening of steep wave fronts and im- 
pulses, and a rounding of irregular waves, are investigated. 

For convenience, the theoretical part has been separated and placed 
in an appendix, giving in the text the discussion, with numerous tables 
derived from the theoretical equations, and curves illustrating these 
tables. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by H. S. Osborne on 
“Review of Work of Sub-Committee on Wave Shape Standard of the 
Standards Committee.” 


HIGH-TENSION SINGLE-CONDUCTOR CABLE FOR POLYPHASE SYSTEMS 
W. S. Clark ‘and G. B. Shanklin = Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 917-966 


In this paper the dielectric, inductive and general line characteristics 
of three-conductor and single-conductor cable are compared. The 
advantages and disadvantages of each type of cable are brought out in a 
way that will aid in deciding the merits of individual problems. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by R. W. Atkinson on 
“The Dielectric Field in an Electric Power Cable.”’ 


THE DIELECTRIC FIELD IN AN ELECTRIC POWER CABLE 
R. W. Atkinson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 971-1016 


The data given pertain particularly to the field of three-conductor 
three-phase cables when supplied with three-phase voltage, and are 
primarily the solution by physical measurements of some of the geometric 
problems of the three-conductor three-phase cable. 

Data are given so that it is possible, from electrical measurements on 
three-conductor cable, to determine certain specific quantities as per- 
mittivity, resistivity, etc. of the dielectric of three-conductor cables in 
the same way as can readily be done for. single-conductor cables, from 
geometric considerations. 

Also, there is shown the potential and stress distribution in a three- 
conductor cable. 

Discussion (including that of paper by W. S. Clark and G. B. Shanklin), 
pages 1017-1036, by Messrs. H. W. Fisher, C. W. Davis, W. A. Del Mar, 
D. W. Roper, P. Torchio, H. L. Wallau, W. R. Atkinson, E. B. Meyer 
and G. B. Shanklin. 

A general discussion with particular emphasis on comparison of stresses 
in various types of cables. 


8. TRANSFORMERS 


ABNORMAL VOLTAGES WITHIN TRANSFORMERS 


L. F. Blume and A. Boyajian Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 577-614 


Mathematical analysis is made of a rectangular wave impinging upon 


a transformer winding and quantitative values deduced of the resulting 


ar 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 11 


internal voltage stresses in terms of transformer constants. It is shown 
that the conclusions also apply in part to abrupt impulses and approxi- 
mate idea is given of the reaction of transformer to high frequencies. 
The difference between operating transformer with isolated and grounded 
neutral is shown. Energy losses are not considered in the mathematics 
although the manner in which the results are affected is pointed out. 
Finally, theoretical results are compared with impulse and high frequency 
tests made in the laboratory. 

Discussion, pages 615-620, by Messrs. H. R. Summerhayes, G. Faccioli, 
C. A. Adams, J. F. Peters, F. Dubsky, F. W. Peek, Jr., A. E. Kennelly 
and L. F. Blume. 

A general discussion. 


9. ELECTRICAL MACHINERY AND APPARATUS 


TRANSMISSION LINE RELAY PROTECTION 


H. R. Woodrow, D. W. Roper, O. C. Traver and P. Macgahan 
Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 795-826 


The Protective Devices Committee made an analysis of the trans- 
mission line protective relay situation throughout the country and 
prepared a summary of the experiences of the operating companies with 
this protective apparatus. Questionnaires were sent out to sixty-one 
operating companies asking for their experience and present practise. 

Replies were received from 32 and from these a general analysis was 
made of the practise of relay protection for transmission lines. 

The Protective Devices Committee undertook the work of standard- 
izing the nomenclature which it is hoped will be adopted by all parties. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. E. Richards on 
“Grounded Neutral Transmission Line.” 


PREDETERMINATION OF SYNCHRONOUS PHASE-MODIFIER PERFORMANCE 


Hubert V. Carpenter Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1223-1229 


The author reviews the method for showing the behavior of trans- 
mission lines first given by Perrine and Baum and then shows how it 
can be used in determining the effect of the use of a synchronous motor 
“operating without load for improving the power factor. 

The diagram given shows both the improvement in voltage regulation 
and the change in power factor due to the phase-modifier for any assumed 
condition of loading for the transmission line. 

The errors of the method are discussed with methods for determining 
their magnitude, and the advantages of the graphical treatment pointed 
out. 
Discussion, pages 1230-1235, by Messrs. H. B. Dwight, M. O. Bosler, 
J. A. Lighthipe, P. M. Downing, J. H. Anderton, L. F. Curtis, J. F. 
Wilson and H. L. Melvin. 

‘Discussion of various methods of determination including use of circle 


diagram. 


12 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT POWER 
John H. Morecroft and H. Trap Friis Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1415-1444 


The first part ofthis article deals with the operation of the tube when 
separately excited, the variation of power with the amount of excitation, 
the load impedance, etc., and also gives an analysis of the forms and 
phases of voltages and currents in the different parts of the circuit. 

The second part deals with the efficiency of the tube as a generator; 
the action is analyzed in detail and the conditions for maximum efficiency 
deduced, the theoretically deduced conclusions being substantiated by 
experimental data. Oscillograms are given to show the action of the 
tube under practically all the conditions which are likely to occur. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by A. M. Nicolson on 
“The Piezo-Electric Effect in the Composite Rochelle Salt Cyrstal.” 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE-SHAFT STEAM 
TURBINES 
J. F. Johnson Vol. xxxviili—1919, pp. 1515-1525 


This paper restricted to a discussion of some of the factors which 
influence limits as applying particularly to turbines of the reaction 
type. With the employment of high vacua the limit of power will be 
determined largely by the area obtainable through the last stage. 

Fig. 6 shows maximum capacity at various speeds which are physically 
possible without exceeding present limits of stresses. It is valuable 
chiefly as showing the physical relation between speed and capacity with 
given limiting stress values. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. D. Newbury on 
“Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single-Shaft Turbo Generators.” 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE-SHAFT CURTIS 
STEAM TURBINES 
Eskil Berg Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1527-1585 


This paper starts by showing that the limit of a single-unit turbo 
generator does not lie in the generator but is confined to the steam tur- 
bine, and that the last wheel of the turbine is the limiting feature. 

The author therefore takes the last wheel of an 1800-rev. per min. 
turbine, giving dimension stresses, kind of material used etc., and then 
designs two turbines, one having 23 stages and the other 13 stages. 

A 5000-kw., five-stage, 3600-rev. per min. turbine load curve is also 
given and discussed. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. D. Newbury on 
“Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single-Shaft Turbo Generators.” 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND OUTPUT OF SINGLE-SHAFT TURBO 
GENERATORS : ; 
F. D. Newbury Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1537-1546 


Output is determined broadly by rotor or stator dimensions. With 
speeds of 1200 rev. per min. and lower, the stator is the limiting member, 
while with higher speeds, the rotor is the limiting member. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 13 


The most effective rotor diameter is not necessarily the largest dia- 
meter. To obtain maximum output at a given speed the rotor propor- 
tions must be chosen to properly balance mechanical stresses, rotor 
ampere turns and flux. American design practise has established 400 
ft. per sec. as an upper limit of rotor peripheral speed. 

The maximum length of core is determined by such factors as ventila- 
tion, bearing temperatures, critical speed and limits to weight imposed 
by forging and transportation facilities. 

No opinion is expressed as to the wisdom of installing very large single- 

{t units. 

Discussion, (including that of papers by J. F. Johnson and E. Berg), 
pages 1547-1565, by Messrs. P. Torchio,. B. A. Behrend, W. L. R. Emmet, 
W. J. Foster, A. M. Gray, R. B. Williamson, F. Hodgkinson, B. G. 
Fernald, C. A. Adams, Farley Osgood, E. Berg and F. D. Newbury. 

A general discussion of factors limiting capacity and reliability with 
particular emphasis on metal fatigue due to vibration. 


STARTING CONDITIONS OF SYYCHRONOUS MACHINES 


A. Hay and F. N. Mowdawalla Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1713-1755 


A detailed study of the behavior of the synchronous motor during 
what has always been regarded as a critical period—viz. the period 
when the motor is being accelerated from rest to synchronous speed. 

Discussion, pages 1756-1757, by Q. Graham. 


10. PRIME MOVERS AND STEAM BOILERS 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE-SHAFT STEAM TURBINES 
J. F. Johnson Vol. xxxviii—_1919, pp. 1515-1525 


This paper restricted to a discussion of some of the factors which 
influence limits as applying particularly to turbines of the reaction 
type. With the employment of high vacua the limit of power will be 
determined largely by the area obtainable through the last stage. 

Fig. 6 shows maximum capacity at various speeds which are physically 
possible without exceeding present limits of stresses. It is valuable 
chiefly as showing the physical relation between speed and capacity with 
given limiting stress values. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. D. Newbury on 
“Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single-Shaft Turbo Generators.” 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND POWER OF SINGLE-SHAFT CURTIS STEAM 
TURBINES ; 


Eskil Berg Vol. xxxviili—1919, pp. 1527-1535 


This paper starts by showing that the limit of a single-unit turbo 
generator does not lie in the generator but is confined to the steam tur- 
bine, and that the last wheel of the turbine is the limiting feature. ; 

_ The author therefore takes the last wheel of an 1800-rev. per min. 
turbine, giving dimension stresses, kind of material used etc., and then 
designs two turbines, one having 23 stages and the other 13 stages. 


4 


14 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


A 5000-kw., five-stage, 3600-rev. per min. turbine load curve is also 
given and discussed. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. D. Newbury on 
“Present Limits of Speed and Output of Single-Shaft Turbo Generators.” 


PRESENT LIMITS OF SPEED AND OUTPUT OF SINGLE-SHAFT TURBO 


GENERATORS 
F. D. Newbury Vol. xxxyiii—1919, pp. 1537-1546 


Output is determined broadly by rotor or stator dimensions. With 
speeds of 1200 rev. per min. and lower, the stator is the limiting member, 
while with higher speeds, the rotor is the limiting member. 

The most effective rotor diameter is not necessarily the largest dia- 
meter. To obtain maximum output at a given speed the rotor propor- 
tions must be chosen to properly balance mechanical stresses, rotor 
ampere turns and flux. American design practise has established 400 
ft. per sec. as an upper limit of rotor peripheral speed. 

The maximum length of core is determined by such factors as ventila- 
tion, bearing temperatures, critical speed and limits to weight imposed 
by forging and transportation facilities. 

No opinion is expressed as to the wisdom of installing very large single- 
shaft units. 

Discussion, (including that of papers by J. F. Johnson and E. Berg), 
pages 1547-1565, by Messrs. P. Torchio, B. A. Behrend, W. L. R. Emmet, 
W. J. Foster, A. M. Gray, R. B. Williamson, F. Hodgkinson, B. G. 
Fernald, C. A. Adams, Farley Osgood, E. Berg and F. D. Newbury. 

A general discussion of factors limiting capacity and reliability with 
particular emphasis on metal fatigue due to vibration. 


11. POWER PLANTS AND CENTRAL STATIONS 


SOME PROBLEMS IN THE OPERATION OF POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 
E. C. Stone Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1651-1674 


In order to operate two power plants satisfactorily in parallel, the 
transmission line which ties them together must have sufficient syn- 
chronizing power, as well as sufficient carrying capacity. The ‘“‘syn- 
chronizing power’’ of a line depends upon its resistance and reactance, | 
the bus voltages maintained at its ends, and the maximum kilovolt- 
amperes it must transmit. Limiting values for ‘‘synchronizing power’’ 
of lines under various operating conditions are given. 

The design of a transmission line involves a consideration of load to 
be transmitted, voltage, reactance, resistance, losses, and charging current 
of the line, and of wattless generating capacity at the receiving end of the 
line. The wattless generating capacity at the end of the line determines 
how many kilowatts will be transmitted for each ampere of line current, 
by fixing the power factor of the load transmitted and the voltage at the 
receiving end of the line. When a line is to be designed for paralleling 
two plants, it must have sufficient ‘‘synchronizing power’ to hold the 
two plants together. 

No discussion. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 15 


12. PARALLEL OPERATION 


SOME PROBLEMS IN THE OPERATION OF POWER PLANTS IN PARALLEL 


E. C. Stone Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1651-1674 


In order to operate two power plants satisfactorily in parallel, the 
transmission line which ties them together must have sufficient syn- 
chronizing pewer, as well as sufficient carrying capacity. The “‘syn- 
chronizing power”’ of a line depends upon its resistance and reactance, 
the bus voltages maintained at its ends, and the maximum kilovolt- 
amperes it must transmit. Limiting values for “synchronizing power” 
of lines under various operating conditions are given. 

The design of a transmission line involves a consideration of load to 
be transmitted, voltage, reactance, resistance, losses, and charging current 
of the line, and of wattless generating capacity atthe receiving end of the 
line. The wattless generating capacity at the end of the line determines 
how many kilowatts will be transmitted for each ampere of line current, 
by fixing the power factor of the load transmitted and the voltage at the 
receiving end of the line. When a line is to be designed for paralleling 
two plants, it must have sufficient ‘synchronizing power’’ to hold the 
two plants together. 

No discussion. 


13. TRANSMISSION LINES 


THEORY OF THE TRANSIENT OSCILLATIONS OF ELECTRICAL NETWORKS 
AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 


J. R. Carson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 345-427 


The purpose of this research was to make a broad theoretical study 
of transient phenomena with a view to developing methods of calculation 
directly applicable to engineering problems. The investigation starts 
with the problem of formulating the current in an electrical network or 
transmission system in response to a suddenly applied e. m. f. of arbitrary 
form. A simple formula is derived which expresses this current in terms 
of two independent functions: one, the applied e. m. f. expressed as a 
time function, and the other a characteristic function of the constants 
and connections of the system, this latter being termed the ‘‘indicial 
admittance” of the system. A systematic investigation of methods for 
solving and computing the indicial admittance follows, in the course of 
which original solutions for transmission and artificial lines are derived 
and a new method involving integral equations is developed. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper Boe W. W. ae on 
“Telephone Circuits with Zero Mutual Induction.” 


HIGH-TENSION SINGLE-CONDUCTOR CABLE FOR POLYPHASE SYSTEMS 


W. S. Clark and G. B. Shanklin Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 917-969 


In this paper the dielectric, inductive and general line characteristics 
of three-conductor and single-conductor cable are compared. The 


16 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


advantages and disadvantages of each type of cable are brought out in a 
way that will aid in deciding the merits of individual problems. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by R. W. Atkinson on 
“The Dielectric Field in an Electric Power Cable.” 


PROBLEMS OF 220-KV. POWER TRANSMISSION 


A. E. Silver Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1037-1100 


Two hundred and twenty kv. is suggested as a logical voltage for high 
capacity, long-distance transmission, and the important problem- 
introduced by large concentrations of power, high voltage and high 
service standards are discussed. The economic and technical considera- 
tions underlying design of a 220-kv. system are outlined, and general 
designs are developed for a typical 220-kv. transmission line. 

Discussion, pages 1101-1135, by Messrs. W. S. Murray, W. M. Dann, 
P. Torchio, 5. W. Mauger, R. M. Spurck, J. C. Parker, J. C. Clark, 
F. C. Hanker, H. R. Summerhayes, R. P. Jackson, H. B. Dwight, 
J. Fo Peters, FoR. Brand, C.F. Harding, Fo Wo Peek, jr. jane oone, 
H. G. Mac Donald, L. B. Chubbuck, J. N. Mahoney, E. B. Meyer, 
C. E. Howell, T. B. Parker, J. B. Crane and A. E. Silver. 

A general discussion of the super-power problem particularly with 
reference to the N. Y. and New England section. 


THE EFFECT OF TRANSIENT VOLTAGES ON DIELECTRICS—II 


The Effect of Lightning Voltages on Arrester Gaps, Insulators and Bushings on 
Transmission Lines 


F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1137-1164 


This paper treats of some of the practical applications resulting from 
an investigation of the effect of lightning voltages on insulators, bushings 
and protective gaps. ; 

The relative protective values of various gaps for steep and slanting 
wave fronts and high frequency are shown graphically in Figs. 14, 15, 
16 and 17. 

Data are given on the steepness of lightning waves actually occurring 
on transmission lines in practise. MI 

Discussion, pages 1165-1177, by Messrs. W. A. Del Mar, F. W. Peek, 
Jr. and C. T. Allcutt. 

A general discussion. 


CALIFORNIA  220,000-VOLT—1100-MILE—1,500,000-KW. TRANSMISSION BUS 


R. W. Sorensen, H. H. Cox and G. E. Armstrong Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1237-1248 
y 


This paper summarizes the power resources of California and the 
probable loads to be supplied within the next six or seven years. For 
the purpose of economically distributing the necessary power and supply- 
ing the load, a long high-voltage transmission line is proposed. As 
this line would interconnect a number of different companies, it assumes 
the nature of a bus bar. The authors show how the. proposed line may 
link with some of the lines now in service and enumerate the advantages 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX ep 


of such interconnection. A comparison is made between the~240-mile 
Big Creek line now operating at 150,000 volts, 50 cycles, and the operation 
of this line at 220,000 volts, 60 cycles. Operating data on the Big Creek 
line are shown to indicate the character of the construction necessary 
for California conditions. Conclusions are drawn as to the particular 
features to be observed for successful operation of 220,000-kv. lines. 

Discussion, pages 1249-1268, by Messrs. R. Bennett, P. D. Jennings, 
C2O=Poole, J.) Ross, L. FL Curtis, J. B. Fisken; H: A: Barre, L.'M., 
Klauber, J. A. Lighthipe, P. M. Downing, J. F. Stevens, C. W. Koiner, 
L. S. Ready, G. A. Damon, L. J. Corbett, H. H. Cox and G. E. Arm- 
strong. 

A general discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the 
super-power line. 


14. ELECTRIC SERVICE DISTURBANCES AND 
PROTECTION 


REVIEW OF WORK OF SUB-COMMITTEE ON WAVE SHAPE STANDARD 
OF THE STANDARDS COMMITTEE 
H. S. Osborne Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 261-288 


The paper gives a review of the work done during the past three years 
by a sub-committee of the Standards Committee of the Institute appointed 
to make recommendations for changes in the Institute’s rules regarding 
the wave shape of alternators. The Sub-Committee last spring made 
recommendations that for the present the ten per cent deviation rule 
should be retained without change (except in wording), and that trial 
use should be made of a supplementary wave shape factor. The new 
factor, based on the relation between voltage wave shape and interfering 
effect in telephone circuits, when power and telephone lines parallel each 
other, is called the ‘‘telephone interference factor.”’ 

Discussion (including that of paper by C. P. Steinmetz), pages 289- 
303, by Messrs. C. F. Scott, C. R. Underhill, A. E. Kennelly, C. P. Stein- 
metz, J. B. Whitehead, W. J. Foster, J. B. Taylor, J. J. Linebaugh, 
E. E. F. Creighton, L. W. Chubb, C. A. Adams, L. T. Robinson, C. F. 
Harding and H. S. Osborne. 

A general discussion. 


THEORY OF THE TRANSIENT OSCILLATIONS OF ELECTRICAL NETWORKS 
AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 


J. R. Carson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 345-427 


The purpose of this research was to make a broad theoretical study 
of transient phenomena with a view to developing methods of calculation 
directly applicable to engineering problems. The investigation starts 
with the problem of formulating the current in an electrical network or 
transmission system in response to a suddenly applied e. m. f. of arbitrary 
form. A simple formula is derived which expresses this current in terms 
of two independent functions: one, the applied e. m. f. expressed as a 
time function, and the other a characteristic function of the constants 
and connections of the system, this latter being termed the “Gndicial 


18 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


admittance” of the system. A systematic investigation of methods for 
solving and computing the indicial admittance follows, in the course of 
which original solutions for transmission and artificial lines are derived 
and a new method involving integral equations is developed. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. W. Crawford on 
“Telephone Circuits with Zero Mutual Induction.” 


TELEPHONE CIRCUITS WITH ZERO MUTUAL INDUCTION 


W. W. Crawford Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 429-457 


The paper deals with the reduction of inductive interference in tele- 
phone circuits. 

Various relative positions of two or more circuits, in which the mutual 
inductance is zero, and the mutual capacitance unbalance is approximately 
zero, are discussed. The most important case is that when the two wires 
of one circuit occupy opposite ends of one diagonal of a square, and the 
other circuit, the ends of the other diagonal. 

Several forms of construction embodying this arrangement, and built 
largely with standard parts, are illustrated. 

Calculations and tentative designs are presented to show that the 
use of these forms of construction will give greatest refinement of balance 
against induction from power circuits, and possibly also against cross- 
talk, increased flexibility in coordinating with the variations in exposure 
to power circuits, a simplification of the transpositions system, fewer 
transposition poles and transpositions, and when desired, the realization 
of a part of these advantages with the lead compressed into less than 
the normal space. 

The cost of initial construction of the proposed forms and the cost 
of conversion of an existing lead to one of the proposed forms. 

Discussion (including that of papers by E. B. Craft and E. H. Colpitts, 
and J. R. Carson), pages 458-488, by Messrs. G. O. Squier, M. I. Pupin, 
A. H. Cowles, A. S. Dana, A. Pinto, V. Bush, J. H. Morecroft, A. G. Chap- 
man, H. S. Osborne and J. B. Carson. 

A general discussion including a description of the theory of function- 
ing of vacuum tubes. 


ABNORMAL VOLTAGES WITHIN TRANSFORMERS 
L. F. Blume and A. Boyajian Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 577-614 


Mathematical analysis is made of a rectangular wave impinging upon 
a transformer winding and quantitative values deduced of the resulting 
internal voltage stresses in terms of transformer constants. It is shown 
that the conclusions also apply in part to abrupt impulses and approxi- 
mate idea is given of the reaction of transformer to high frequencies. 
The difference between operating transformer with isolated and grounded 
neutral is shown. Energy losses are not considered in the mathematics 
although the manner in which the results are affected is pointed out. 
Finally, theoretical results are compared with impulse and high frequency | 
tests made in the laboratory. 


Discussion, pages 615-620, by Messrs. H. R. Summerhayes, G. Faccioli, 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 19 


C. A. Adams, J. F. Peters, F. Dubsky, F. W. Peek, Jr., A. E. Kennelly 
and L. F. Blume. 


A general discussion. 


TRANSMISSION LINE RELAY PROTECTION 


H. R. Woodrow, D. W. Roper, O. C. Traver and P. Macgahan 
Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 795-826 


The Protective Devices Committee made an analysis of the trans- 
mission line protective relay situation throughout the country and 
prepared a summary of the experiences of the operating companies with 
this protective apparatus. Questionnaires were sent out to sixty-one 
operating companies asking for their experience and present practise. 

Replies were received from 32 and from these a general analysis was 
made of the practise of relay protection for transmission lines. 

The Protective Devices Committee undertook the work of standard- 
izing the nomenclature which it is hoped will be ‘adopted by all parties. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. E. Richards on 
“Grounded Neutral Transmission Line.” 


GROUNDING THE NEUTRAL OF GENERATING AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 


H. R. Woodrow Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 827-831 


Four different high-tension transmission systems in the New York 
district have been grounded at different times during the past four years, 
all of which are operating with the grounded neutral at the present time. 
These systems were all grounded in a different manner and the results 
obtained from the effect of grounding showed that the troubles have 
been reduced. 

In addition to the grounding, special ground relays have been installed 
on three of the systems which disconnected the feeder very quickly on 
a ground and the results show that the addition of this quick acting - 
relay further reduces the stresses on a system. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. E. Richards on 
“Grounded Neutral Transmission Line.”’ 


GROUNDED NEUTRAL TRANSMISSION LINE 
/ 
W. E. Richards Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 833-838 


The paper describes the conditions on the system in Toledo which 
was originally delta-connected. Serious trouble was experienced when 
a short circuit occurred especially with synchronous apparatus. This 
trouble was overcome by changing the transmission to a Y system with 
the neutral grounded. 

Discussion (including that of papers by Woodrow, Roper Traver and 
Macgahan and Woodrow), pages 839-869, by Messrs. J. R. Craighead, 
aA. Johnson, A. H. Lawton, E. E. F. Creighton, H. T. Conover, O. C. 
Traver, P. Torchio, D. W. Roper, P. H. Adams, R. N. Conwell, A. W. 
Copley, C. P. Osborne, P. M. Lincoln, C. P. Steinmetz, E. T. Moore, 
N. L. Pollard, R. F. Schuchardt, J. C. Parker, H. C. Don Carlos, D. A, 
McKenzie, F. L. Hunt, F. C. Hanker, H. C. Albrecht, E. A. Hester 


20 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


E. G. Merrick, N. A. Carle, H. R. Woodrow, H. B. Vincent, F. D. New- 


bury and A. E. Silver. 
A general discussion of present practise. 


THE EFFECT OF TRANSIENT VOLTAGES ON DIELECTRICS—II 
The Effect of Lightning Voltages on Arrester Gaps, Insulators and Bushings on 


Transmission Lines 


F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1137-1164 


This paper treats of some of the practical applications resulting from 
an investigation of the effect of lightning voltages on insulators, bushings 
and protective gaps. 

The relative protective values of various gaps for steep and slanting 
wave fronts and high frequency are shown graphically in Figs. 14, 15, 
16 and 17. 

Data are given on the steepness of lightning waves actually occurring 
on transmission lines in practise. 

Discussion, pages 1165-1177, by Messrs. W. A. Del Mar, F. W. Peek, 
Wand C. isaac. 

A general discussion. 


THEORY OF PROBABILITIES APPLIED TO FAILURES OF SUSPENSION 
INSULATORS 


L. M. Klauber Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1199-1212 


There are a wide variety of operating conditions which affect the 
amount of over-insulation required, and after having found the minimum 
number of insulators per string required for any given operating condi- 
tions the author points out a method of determining the amount of extra 
insulation desirable from an insurance standpoint according to the law 
of probabilities. Equations are developed from which the probability 
. of failure for any given case or the ratio between such probabilities for 
any pair of cases may be determined directly. A numerical example is 
also given which shows the development of the theory of minimum annual 
cost for combined mechanical and electrical failures. 

Discussion, pages 1213-1222, by Messrs. W. D. Peaslee, C. O. Poole, 
J. A. Lighthipe, J. H. Anderton, H. A. Barre, J. B. Fisken, R. W. Shoe- 
maker, E. F. Scattergood, L. C. Williams and L. M. Klauber. 

A general discussion on the practicability of the method described. 


16. CONTROL, REGULATION AND SWITCHING | 


PREDETERMINATION OF SYNCHRONOUS PHASE-MODIFIER PERFORMANCE 


Hubert V. Carpenter Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1223-1229 


The author reviews the method for showing the behavior of trans- 
mission lines first given by Perrine and Baum and then shows how it 
can be used in determining the effect of the use of a synchronous motor 
operating without load for improving the power factor. 

The diagram given shows both the improvement in voltage regulation 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 21 


and the change in power factor due to the phase-modifier for any assumed 
condition of loading for the transmission line. 

The errors of the method are discussed with methods for determining 
their magnitude, and the advantages of the graphical treatment pointed 
out. 

Discussion, pages 1230-1235, by Messrs. H. B. Dwight, M. O. Bosler, 
J. A. Lighthipe, P. M. Downing, J. H. Anderton, L. F. Curtis, je By 
Wilson and H. L. Melvin. 

Discussion of various methods of determination including use of circle 
diagram. 


STARTING CONDITIONS OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 
A. Hay and F. N. Mowdawalla Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp., 1713-1755 


A detailed study of the behavior of the synchronous motor during 
what has always been regarded as a critical period—viz. the period 
when the motor is being accelerated from rest to synchronous speed. 

Discussion, pages 1756-1757, by Q. Graham. 


17. TRACTION / 


SOME POSSIBILITIES OF STEAM RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION AS 
AFFECTING FUTURE POLICIES 
Calvert Townley Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 621-627 


Electricity fills every requirement of railroad service, but as it involves 
a large investment, electrification has proceeded slowly. Electrification 
has also been retarded because the problem has been largely considered 
one of replacing the steam locomotive by the electric locomotive whereas 
in reality the problem is much broader. It really offers a fundamentally 
different method of train propulsion because the limitations of the steam 
locomotive disappear and the strictly limited motive power is replaced 
by one that is practically unlimited, thereby, opening up many possi- 
bilities in the methods of railroad operation. A brief review is given of 
electrified sections of railways showing the advantages which have been 
realized in both the freight and passenger service. 

Discussion, pages 628-649, by Messrs. F. H. Shepard, W. S. Murray, 
C. Schwartz, J. B. Taylor, N: W. Storer, W. B. Potter, G. F. Sever; 
C. F. Scott, G. Gibbs, J. Murphy, H. D. Jackson and C. Townley. 

Discussion deals chiefly with coal saving incident to electrification 
particularly that saving involved in the proposed super-power trans- 
mission line, etc. ; 


18. LIGHTING AND LAMPS 


PRESENT STATUS OF INDUSTRIAL LIGHTING CODES 
G. H. Stickney Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 725-742 
‘Industrial lighting codes have been adopted in four states and in 


Federal establishments. Similar action is under consideration in several 
_ other states and there is prospect of extension throughout the country. 


22 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Investigation and experience indicate the need of government regula- 
tion of factory lighting. When adopted by industrial commissions 
under authority granted by Legislatures, the codes become in effect 
state law. The existing codes correspond in essentials to the [lumina- 
ting Engineering Society code, on which they are based. 

Discussion, pages 743-765, by Messrs. C. A. Adams, C. E. Clewell, 
E. B. Rosa, C. B. Auel, M. G. Lloyd, W. Harrison, J. Vogt, W. P. Hurley, 
W. T. Blackwell, E. G. Perrott, T. F. Foltz, J. R. Cravath and G. H. 


Stickney. 
A general discussion of the code as established in the various States. 


THE SEARCHLIGHT IN THE U. S. NAVY 


Ralph Kelly Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1605-1620 


The types and uses of searchlights and signaling lights on naval ships 
are briefly described. 

A changed form of 12-inch incandescent searchlight is pes 

The introduction of the high-power searchlight revolutionized the 
application of the searchlight to naval ships. 

It is believed there is also a possibility of a considerable improvement 
in the electrodes. 

The use of the dome glass door enables a searchlight to operate in 
close proximity to large calibre rifles and makes it possible to successfully 
build even larger sizes of searchlights than those at present in use. 

The star shell has great possibilities, but it is doubtful if it will ever 
supersede the high-power searchlight. 

Discussion, pages 1621-1634, by Messrs. D. McNicol, G. A. DeGraaf> 
M. L. Patterson, E. J. Murphy, J. C. Ledbetter, R. A. Beekman, B. P- 
Beehler, C. Lichtenberg and R. Kelly. 

A general discussion of searchlights including a comprehensive dis- 
cussion of army practise. 


19. ELECTRICITY IN THE ARMY AND NAVY 


THE SEARCHLIGHT IN THE U. S. NAVY 


Ralph Kelly Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1605-1620 


The types and uses of searchlights and signaling lights on naval ships 
are briefly described. 

A changed form of 12-inch incandescent searchlight is suggested. 

The introduction of the high-power searchlight revolutionized the 
application of the searchlight to naval ships. 

It is believed there is also a possibility of a considerable improvement 
in the electrodes. 

The use of the dome glass door enables a searchlight to operate in 
close proximity to large calibre rifles and makes it possible to successfully 
build even larger sizes of searchlights than those at. present in use. 

The star shell has great possibilities, but it is doubtful if it will ever 
supersede the high-power searchlight. 


a 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX . 23 


‘Discussion, pages 1621-1634, by Messrs. D. MeNicol, G. A. DeGraaf, 
M. L. Patterson, E. J. Murphy, J. C. Ledbetter, R.-A. MESSE ‘Bee: 
Beehler, C. Lichtenberg and R. Kelly. 

A- general discussion of searchlights including a comprehensive dis- 
cussion of army practise. 


20. MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRICITY 


WELDING MILD STEEL 


H. M. Hobart Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 63-111 


The Welding Research Sub-Committee, formed in 1918, was a sub- 
committee of the Metallurgical and Electrical Sections of the Engineering 
Division of the National Research Council, and the Welding Committee, 
(under the chairmanship of Professor C. A. Adams) came under the 
direction of the Emergency Fleet Corporation. The paper is in large 
part based on the work done by the Welding Research Sub-Committee 
up to January of this year. 

Discussion oe with that of paper by O. H. Eschholz on 
“Pusion i in Arc Welding.”’ 4 


WELDING AS A PROCESS IN SHIP CONSTRUCTION 


'§. V. Goodall Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 113-119 


The paper points to the necessity for a reduction in the cost of ship- 
building, and as riveting is one of the most expensive items of construc- 
tion the substitution of welding for riveting would decrease the cost of 
construction considerably, A brief review is given of what has been 
done in substituting welding for riveting, and to the limited extent to 
which electric welding has been triedit has been found successful. Lloyd’s 
Register is prepared to classify electrically-welded vessels subject to 
certain provisions, but shipbuilders have not as yet adopted welding toa 
large extent for the reason, in the author’s opinion, that they know that 
welds are lacking in uniformity and it is impossible to tell when a joint 
is good or bad. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by O. H. Eschholz on 
“Fusion in Arc Welding.” 


FUSION IN ARC WELDING 
O. H. Eschholz Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 121-129 


This paper calls attention to such characteristics as penetration and 
overlap, peculiar to this process, which facilitate visual inspection and 
discusses briefly the effect of arc length, welding procedure, electrode 
material, arc current and electrode diameter upon these characteristics. 

Discussion (including that of papers by H. M. Hobart and G. V. 
Goodall), pages 130-177, by Messrs. W. H. Hill, H. A. Hornor, C. A. 
Adams, Capt. Corbett, A. M. Candy, C. J. Holslag, W. L. Merrill, 
D. C. Alexander, Jr., ‘W. Spraragen, J. C. Armor, S. V. Goodall, R. P. 
Jackson, F. M. Farmer, W. S. Andrews, J. C. Lincoln, H. Lemp, H. D. 


24 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Morton, R. E. Wagner, T. T. Heaton, C. R. Darling, J. Churchward, 
C. H. Kicklighter, Z. Jeffries, A. S. Kinsey, H. G. Knox, J. Martin and 
O. H. Eschholz. 

A general discussion of electric welding and its practical application. 


UTILIZING THE TIME CHARACTERISTICS OF ALTERNATING CURRENT 
Henry E. Warren Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 767-781 


By the invention of a very small, simple and reliable self-starting 
synchronous motor, in conjunction with convenient means for regulating 
the average frequency of alternating circuit, there has been developed 
a new field of usefulness for electric power. It is now feasible to drive all 
kinds of timing devices such as clocks, graphic instrument movements, 
time recorders, etc., directly from the lighting circuits. Remarkable 
accuracy is obtained, and the amount of care is minimized by the elimina- 
tion of winding and regulating. 

No discussion. 


THE PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT IN THE COMPOSITE ROCHELLE SALT CRYSTAL 
A. McL. Nicolson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1467-1485 


The piezo-electric effect is an electro-elastic property of certain crystals. 
It involves the conversion of mechanical into electrical energy, and also 
the converse effect. The paper presents an exposition of piezo-electricity 
and related optical and other properties belonging to these crystals. 

Applications of the piezo-electric effect in such crystals to the trans- 
mission and reception of sound, are described and demonstrated. 

Discussion, (including that of papers by A. W. Hull and Morecroft 
and Friis), pages 1486-1493, by Messrs. J. B. Taylor, A. W. Hull, A. M. 
Nicolson, E. A. Eckhardt, J. P. Wintringham, Irving Langmuir, J. E. 
Schroder, D. M. Therrell and J. H. Morecroft. 

A general discussion. 


21. TELEPHONY AND TELEGRAPHY 


RADIO TELEPHONY 
E. B. Craft and E. H. Colpitts : Vol. xxxviti—1919, pp. 305-343 


This paper is divided into two parts. The first part describes the 
development of the art of radio telephony by the American Telephone 
and Telegraph Company and the Western Electric Company to the 
accomplishment of trans-atlantic telephony, followed by demonstrations 
of the use of radio telephony between ships and of methods of connecting 
radio and wire telephone systems. 

The second part is concerned almost entirely with the work of pro- 
ducing radio telephone and allied apparatus for the Army and Navy in 
the late war. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. W. Crawford on 
“Telephone Circuits with Zero Mutual Induction.” 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 25 


TELEPHONE CIRCUITS WITH ZERO MUTUAL INDUCTION 
W. W. Crawford Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 429-457 


The paper deals with the reduction of inductive interference in tele- 
phone circuits. 

Various relative positions of two or more circuits, in which the mutual 
inductance is zero, and the mutual capacitance unbalance is approximately 
zero, are discussed. The most important case is that when the two wires 
of one circuit occupy opposite ends of one diagonal of a square, and the 
other circuit, the ends of the other diagonal. 

Several forms of construction embodying this arrangement, and built 
largely with standard parts, are illustrated. 

Calculations and tentative designs are presented to show that the 
use of these forms of construction will give greatest refinement of balance 
against induction from power circuits, and possibly also against cross- 
talk, increased flexibility in coordinating with the variations in exposure 
to power circuits, a simplification of the transpositions system, fewer 
transposition polés and transpositions, and when desired, the realization 
of a part of these advantages with the lead compressed into less than 
the normal space. 

The cost of initial construction of the proposed forms and the cost 
of conversion of an existing lead to one of the proposed forms. 

Discussion (including that of papers by E. B. Craft and E. H. Colpitts, 
and J. R. Carson), pages 458-488, by Messrs. G. O. Squier, M. I. Pupin, 
A. H. Cowles, A. S. Dana, A. Pinto, V. Bush, J. H. Morecroft, A. G. Chap- 
man, H. S. Osborne and J. B. Carson. 

A general discussion including a description of the theory of function- 
ing of vacuum tubes. . 


ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY OF THE TELEPHONE RECEIVER WITH 
SPECIAL REFERENCE TO MOTIONAL IMPEDANCE 


A. E. Kennelly and H. Nukiyama Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 651-699 


The theory of the telephone receiver here offered is based upon the 
motional impedance circle which has been published in various chapters 
during the last few years. The new theory, which is stated under definite 
limitations, is a further development; taking into account the m. m. ite 
produced by the vibration of the diaphragm in the permanent magnetic 
field. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by A. G. Webster on 
“The Absolute Measurement of the Intensity of Sound.”’ 


TRANSOCEANIC RADIO COMMUNICATION 
E. F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1269-1285 


The paper defines the state of the art of today which is the 'result of 
developments during the war. Transoceanic radio communication is 
at present maintained by five first class stations, two in America and 
three in Europe. New developments indicate three methods for in- 
creasing, the radio traffic without interference between the different 
messages. 


26 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


The second part of the paper describes the radio transmitting system 
for the development of which the author is responsible. This system is 
represented by the naval radio station, New Brunswick, N. J. and com- 
prises new means for generating, modulating, and radiating thecontinuous 
wave energy.-. The general theory and figures for the increased radiation 
efficiency are given. The author also predicts that the multiple antenna 
will make possible directive radiation on a large scale. 

No discussion. 


TELEPHONE REPEATERS 
Bancroft Gherardi and Frank B. Jewett Vol. xxxviii—_1919, pp. 1287-1345 


In this paper the authors have endeavored to set forth briefly but 
clearly the history of the research and development work which has 
led up to the final production of successful telephone repeaters. The 
various forms of amplifiers which have been suggested are described and 
their possibilities and limitations pointed out. The essential properties 
of repeater networks together with the necessary line conditions for 
successful repeater operation are described and illustrated. Tandem 
operation of repeaters is discussed as is also the use of repeaters in four- 
wire circuits. Illustrations are given showing a few of the more important 
repeater installations now in regular commercial service in the United 
States. ; 

No discussion. 


PRINCIPLES OF RADIO TRANSMISSION AND RECEPTION WITH ANTENNA 
AND COIL AERIALS 


J. H. Dellinger : Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1347-1402 


Coil aerials are coming to replace the large antennas in radio work. 
The advantage of the coil aerial as a direction finder, interference pre- 
venter, reducer of strays and submarine aerial, make it important to 
know how effective such an aerial is as a transmitting and receiving 
device in comparison with the ordinary antenna. In this article the 
mathematical theory is presented and as a result, the answer to this 
question is obtained. The fundamental principles of design of aerials 
are given in this paper. 

Discussion, pages 1403-1414, by Messrs. F. W. Grover and A. Press. 

A criticism of assumptions made by the author. 


APPLICABILITY OF AUTOMATIC SWITCHING TO ALL CLASSES OF 
: TELEPHONE SERVICE 


-A. B. Smith Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1567-1600 


This. paper is an attempt to place before engineers general information 
in regard to automatic telephone switching. 

The automatic switching of telephone lines is adaptable to all classes 
of telephone service and offers a flexible means of solving problems. 


Discussion, pages 1601-1604, by Messrs. Selby Haar, L. F. Morehouse, 
P.S. Clapp, F. L. Baer and A. B. Smith. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 27 


UNIFICATION OF THE MANUAL AND AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SYSTEMS 


D.E. Wiseman Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1635-1650 


A description is given of the physical consolidation of the Bell manual 
and the Automatic Electric telephone systems of Los Angeles, Cal., 
which previously to June 1, 1918 operated as separate systems. 

No discussion. 


22. MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS AND INSTITUTE AFFAIRS 


AERONAUTICS IN THE UNITED STATES, 1918 


G. O. Squier Vol. xxxvili—1919, pp. 1-62 


Major General George O. Squier, Chief Signal Officer of the United 
States Army, reviews in this address the development of Military Aero- 
nautics in the United States up to the date of the armistice, November 11, 
1918. 

No discussion. 


WELDING MILD STEEL 
H. M. Hobart Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 63-111 


The Welding Research Sub-Committee, formed in 1918, was a sub- 
committee of the Metallurgical and Electrical Sections of the Engineering 
Division of the National Research Council, and the Welding Committee, 
(under the chairmanship of Professor C. A. Adams) came under the 

_ direction of the Emergency Fleet Corporation. The paper is in large 
part based on the work done by the Welding Research Sub-Committee 
up to January of this year. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by O. H. Eschholz on 
“Fusion in Arc Welding.” 


WELDING AS A PROCESS IN SHIP CONSTRUCTION 
S. V. Goodall Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 113-119 


The paper points to the necessity for a reduction in the cost of ship- 
building, and as riveting is one of the most expensive items of construc- 
tion the substitution of welding for riveting would decrease the cost of 
construction considerably. A brief review is given of what has been 
done in substituting welding for riveting, and to the limited extent to ~ 
which electric welding has been tried it has been found successful. Lloyd’s 
Register is prepared to classify electrically-welded vessels subject to 
certain provisions, but shipbuilders have not as yet adopted welding to a 
large extent for the reason, in the author’s opinion, that they know that 
welds are lacking in uniformity and it is impossible to tell when a joint 
is good or bad. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by O. H. Eschholz on 
“Fusion in Arc Welding.” 


28 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


FUSION IN ARC WELDING 


O. H. Eschholz Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 121-129 


This paper calls attention to such characteristics as penetration and 
overlap, peculiar to this process, which facilitate visual inspection and 
discusses briefly the effect of arc length, welding procedure, electrode 
material, arc current and electrode diameter upon these characteristics. 

Discussion (including that of papers by H. M. Hobart and G. V. 
Goodall), pages 130-177, by Messrs. W. H. Hill, H. A. Hornor, Cras 
Adams, Capt. Corbett, A. M. Candy, C. J. Holslag, W. L. Merrill, 
D. C. Alexander, Jr., W. Spraragen, J. ©. Armor, S. V. Goodall, R. P. 
Jackson, F. M. Farmer, W. S. Andrews, J. C. lincoln, H: Lemp, Hy D: 
Morton, R. E. Wagner, T. T. Heaton, C. R. Darling, J. Churchward, 
C. H. Kicklighter, Z. Jeffries, A. S. Kinsey, H. G. Knox, J. Martin and 
O. H. Eschholz. 

A general discussion of electric welding and its practical application. 


ENGINEERING AND INDUSTRIAL STANDARDIZATION 
C. A. Adams Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 179-189 


An address presented at Midwinter Convention. 


REVIEW OF WORK OF SUB-COMITTEE ON WAVE SHAPE STANDARD OF 
THE STANDARDS COMMITTEE 


H. S. Osborne Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 261-288 


The paper gives a review of the work done during the past three yearS 
by a sub-committee of the Standards Committee of the Institute appointed 
to make recommendations for changes in the Institute’s rules regarding 
the wave shape of alternators. The Sub-Committee last spring made 
recommendations that for the present the ten per cent deviation rule 
should be retained without change (except in wording), and that trial 
use should be made of a supplementary wave shape factor. The new 
factor, based on the relation between voltage wave shape and interfering 
effect in telephone circuits, when power and telephone lines parallel each 
other, is called the ‘‘telephone interference factor.” 
. Discussion (including that of paper by C. P. Steinmetz), pages 289- 
' 308, by Messrs. C. F. Scott, C. R. Underhill, A. E. Kennelly, C. P. Stein- 
metz, J. B. Whitehead, W. J. Foster, J. B. Taylor, J. J. Linebaugh, 
E. E. F. Creighton, L. W. Chubb, C. A. Adams, L. T. Robinson, C. F. 
Harding and H. S. Osborne. 

A general discussion. 


IONIZATION OF OCCLUDED GASES IN HIGH-TENSION INSULATION 
G. B. Shanklin and J. J. Matson Vol. xxxviii—1919,"pp."489-536 


This paper deals with the ionization of occluded gases in solid insulation 
from the standpoint that these gas spaces are the weakest part of an 
insulation design and should receive first consideration. The stress at 
which ionization starts in different types of built-up insulation, such as 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 29 


used in cables and coils, is measured and from these measurements a 
safe working stress determined. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. Dubsky on ‘‘The 
Dielectric Strength of Air Films Entrapped in Solid Insulation and A 
Practical Application to the Problem for Alternator Coils and Cables.” 


THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR FILMS ENTRAPPED IN SOLID INSULA- 
TION AND A PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE PROBLEM FOR ALTERNATOR 
COILS AND CABLES 


F. Dubsky Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 537-558 


An experimental investigation of the strength of air films of various 
thicknesses between glass plates. In the arrangement used, the break- 
down of the air or the starting point of corona could be readily observed. 
Tests were also made of the dielectric strength of air films between other 
solid insulations. 

It was found that the dielectric strength of air films between insula- 
tions was practically the same as the dielectric strength of air films 
between conductors. 

The second part of the paper is devoted to the practical application of 
the data to the design of armature coils and cables, and several specific 
examples are given. 

Discussion (including that of paper by G. B. Shanklin and J. J. Matson) 
pages 559-575, by Messrs. H. G. Reist, L. W. Chubb, J. B. Whitehead, 
C. A. Adams, W. J. Foster, H. W. Fisher, R. E. Argersinger, C. F. Hard- 
ing, R. W. Atkinson, D. Du Bois, F. W. Peek, Jr., E. E. F. Creighton, 
J. J. Matson, W. I. Middleton, E. W. Davis and F. Dubsky. 

A general discussion. 


THE ABSOLUTE MEASUREMENT OF THE INTENSITY OF SOUND 


Arthur G. Webster Vol. xxxviii—i919, pp. 701-712 


This paper includes a description of a series of acoustical researches 
extending over a period of twenty-eight years. The properties of vibrat- 
ing bodies and the subject of elastic hysteresis are discussed. Two 
fundamentally important instruments for the absolute measurement of 
sound have been developed and the theory given. The first is the 
standard of sound, called the phone, which is capable of reproducing at 
any time a sound of the simplest character and which permits the output 
of sound to be measured in watts of energy. The second is an instru- 
ment called the phonometer for measuring a sound in absolute measure. 
This instrument is now practically as sensitive as the human ear. The 
determination of the space distribution of sound and of the effect of 
disturbing bodies, and the measurement of the reflecting coefficient of 
surfaces have been accomplished. The phonotrope is a third instrument 
designed and used to find the direction of a source of sound, for example 
a fog signal. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by A. E. Kennelly and H. 
Nukiyama), pages 713-723, by Messrs. J. B. Taylor, T. E. Shea, B. A. 


i 


30 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Behrend, R. L. Jones, A. G. Webster, H. S. Osborne, A. Press and A. E. 
Kennelly. 

A general discussion including the algebraic theory of the receiver and 
the application of the circle diagram. 


COOPERATION 


C. A. Adams Vol. xxxviii—_1919, pp. 783-793 


President’s Address. 


TECHNICAL COMMITTEE REPORTS 


Vol. xxxvili—1919, pp. 871-916 


THE VACUUM TUBE AS A GENERATOR OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT POWER 
John H. Morecroft and H. Trap Friis Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1415-1444 


The first part of this article deals with the operation of the tube when 
separately excited, the variation of power with the amount of excitation, 
the load impedance, etc., and also gives an analysis of the forms and 
phases of voltages and currents in the different parts of the circuit. 

The second part deals with the efficiency of the tube as a generator; 
the action is analyzed in detail and the conditions for maximum efficiency 
deduced, the theoretically deduced conclusions being substantiated by 
experimental data. Oscillograms are given to show the action of the 
tube under practically all the conditions which are likely to occur. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by A. M. Nicolson on 
“The Piezo-Electric Effect in the Composite Rochelle Salt Crystal.” 


THE POSITIONS OF ATOMS IN METALS 


r) 


A. W. Hull Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1445-1466 


When a narrow beam of X-rays passes through a fine powder of any 
crystalline material, it produces on a photographic plate placed just 
behind the powder a pattern of concentric circles. These circles are 
produced by the reflection of the X-rays from the planes of atoms in the 
crystal, and their diameters are a measure of the distances between these 
planes of atoms. By measuring ihe diameters of the circles the exact 
positions of the atoms can be determined. The results of this analysis 
are given for twenty common metals and several salts, with examples 
and brief description of the method, and a discussion of the results. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by A. M. Nicolson on 
“The Piezo-Electric Effect in the Composite Rochelle Salt Crystal.’ 


THE PIEZO-ELECTRIC EFFECT IN THE COPOSITE ROCHELLE SALT CRYSTAL 


A. McL. Nicolson Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1467-1485 


The piezo-electric effect is an electro-elastic property of certain crystals. 
It involves the conversion of mechanical into electrical energy, and also 
the converse effect. The paper presents an exposition of piezo-electricity 
. and related optical and other properties belonging to these crystals. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 31 


Applications of the piezo-electric effect in such crystals to the trans- 
mission and reception of sound, are described and demonstrated. 

Discussion, (including that of papers by A. W. Hull and Morecroft 
and Friis), pages 1486-1493, by Messrs. J. B. Taylor, A. W. Hull, A. M. 
Nicolson, E. A. Eckhardt, J. P. Wintringham, Irving Langmuir, J. E.. 
Schroder, D. M. Therrell and J. H. Morecroft. 

A general discussion. 


A REPORT ON ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 


S. J. Barnett Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1495-1513 


This report discusses briefly the chief fundamental results obtained 
from the days of Faraday to the present time in studying the electro- 
motive forces ordinarily referred to the domain of electromagnetic 
induction. : 

Self-induction is first taken up. 

The motional electromotive force, developed when matter moves 
in a magnetic field, is next considered and is derived from Ampere’s law 
on the electron theory. 

‘The induced electromotive force in fixed conductors and insulators 
arising from the motion or alteration of other systems is next considered. 

The report closes with a treatment of unipolar induction in both so- 
called open and closed circuits, including brief descriptions of some of the 
principal experiments, a discussion of the theories involved, and their 
application to the unipolar generator. 

No discussion of this paper. 


INHERENT LIMITATIONS ON TRANSFORMATIONS POSSIBLE BY STATIONARY 
APPARATUS 


Joseph Slepian Vol. xxxviii—1919, pp. 1697-1711 


Expressions for electrostatic and electromagnetic energies, Joulian 
heat dissipation and power are given in complex quantities. The pure 
imaginary part of the expression for power in a static network is shown to 
be equal to 2 W times the difference between the mean electromagnetic 
energy and mean electrostatic energy. Use is made of this new principle 
in considering the problems of power-factor correction and phase splitting. 
It is shown that in general for phase transforming by static apparatus 
both magnetic and electrostatic storage of energy are necessary, and it 
is shown how the minimum amounts of each are determined by the load. 

The symmetry of the coefficients in the general equations for the 
steady state in a static network is demonstrated, and it is shown that 
limitations upon voltage and current transformations follow. The voltage 
regulation of any phase-splitting arrangement is considered. 

No discussion. 


es Biers 
eres ee 


te me 


"Pet ea 
hie 


tae aoe 


on, N 


é 
abet 


TOPICAL INDEX. 


Aerials, coil, principles of (See Radio Transmission) 


Aeronautics, air, physical conception....................4--... 18 
otek A) BMPR dcbere yf 3 Jans tae ve ean 1 
ACCOSSOTIES aie wmten 5 £8 enue we 7,17 
acrody namics Miata NSS SUR) ore 34 
Aircrattienginesrn hc ete ne Le ee 52 
airplane fabrics). 49s eet eet 37 
Taciatorewras tet; eee 35 
CATDUTELLON wet see koh ua lg 36 
direction finders;tadiot. 2 on. eee 50 
fiers, classification offs 4.7... ee 29 
maintenance of efficiency..:....... 31 
DHysiolosical studyaof-s ca... Soe 27 
helium, commercial production.......... 23 
A SNItIONproblenis awe ak ee eee 36 
bigbtrall dys simawse ski GS ee 36 
meteorolopical services cc. ss cw ne snes 24 
National Advisory Committee........... 39 
ETSOM EC ar ete te tN ee cn cca 4,17 
BOW CEGDIANIES foc2 t-..  eeeee re Meat ears 34 
radio development, airplane telegraph sets 50 
telephone sets 49 
Vacttum tubes../..... 45 
AVES TIO ATIONGMMELY ctr eS ole osm 34 
ta wrinatertales ee semesee. a2 Shs sys tationce. Gaela 
Science and Research Div. of Signal Corps, 
W OPI OLE eee ere cars’ Hina es ikaei tt 41 
SELvice ensinesie eee ; Shs hee ecleas 13 
planes? Deliaviland tA. on o.ht ef 12 
Hanudley-Page.c. 0. bs a 12 
craininoved dipment ee as. sce aoa A 5 
Air-brake disconnectors, 220-kv. transmission....~.............. 1095 
dielectric strength, Pashen’s Law.............. LA oe eT ot: 498 
table: 22 4.9 oe Be, 3 2 498 
films, between glass plates, dielectric strength............... 589 
metal surfaces, dielectric strength............ 538 
Brea kesowi.of, eect ss, 70h we Bock oe ee ae 538 
diclectmostrenrth ol 20+... 28 o.oo eee ae eee 537 
im armature cous, eff@ct-on desion-. 5 nee tee ee 546 
physitcalvconception Ol. % w0. 22s. Pees Pa hc War ou 18. 
Alternating current, frequency, standard maintenance, master clock 769 
time characteristics, utilization of.......... vs 767 
Nem ecer, TIM PUIG. ta weanee asinie oom aoe Ne eet s ak Ei, oad uA 855 
Antennas multiple, theory of: ...7....4.3...- Ui ies Tie ay 27233 
radio, transmission and reception principles (See Radio 
Transmission, te : ms 
Ne MSrOUNIC SU PPLeSSOP USE OL sore ices mins, oe 1 5 eae eee Seep 
feteare leceis films in insulation; etiect of... 2..2.0 0810. a8 546 
Arrester gaps, horn, spark-over, wet vs. dry .................... 1142 
relative discharge-valuesse-.. tse ie eee 1153 
SSCLECLIVIE Sree hs tes cks. « PSS Me tees Pe ee ee w» 1145 


34 TOPICAL INDEX 


Arrester gaps (continued) 
sphere, covered. . 
horn, spark- -over, wet vs. dry. 
spark- over, wet vs. dry .. 
transmission, lightning, effect of. Pine abe bap ete 
various types, protective values, relative. oa siayents 
Atoms, position of, centered cubic, iron. Ar RTE, 3 
face centered cubic arrangement. CARON et see 


an ret alls 5.5.0, can wale: cnc teste See eee eeee 
measuring machine pens 3s Meher ee 
rod. 
calibration. . 


powder photographs, interpretation lee 
tetrahedral arrangement... 6s. eee 
AnidiOne Ga COL y Ol 22s. chide ote coe 40 ret oknwe cellars Oerne gue eerie oe eee 
Automatic telephony, applica bility.....ccime ruse ee eee 


Automobile, headlights a ae es ee se ; 


Balanced*protection; transmission lines sa... .uis <li 
Bonding, cable, single-conductor. . : A et) te enh 
Bushings, transmission, mame is effect. of. cto wae ae ay 
Cable, multi vs. single conductor. . x ; 
power, dielectric field... Prey hays 5k ENO 
actual cable tests...............-.. 
capacitance and charging current. 
data, practical application of........ 
ell ech OLStranG ine, otis ilies Ce 
Sector cable: tc. a= te Oeeaeee et eee 
solid electrolyte, use of. 
stress measurement, electrolyte tank.. 
inside potential, determination of, diagram of con- 
NLECHLO DSS nein sien hare mike icant al eo arene 
three-phase, nature of field. . : 
single-conductor, advantages and disadvantages... a 
bonding and gtodndine = ae naa ee 
GSI gin LO fies ic a5 seas e ee ence teenie 
dielectric lOSSeS, 4 og.7a merce tales este 
predetermination of...... 
effective resistance, theoretical solution. . 
grading insulation. . 3 
high-tension, polyphase systems. 
inductive chatactemstics:... o.oo eee 
parallel, non-magnetic sheaths, theoretical 
SOMMAONG «54.5 «overt . uqegpinyn see een cae 
self- ere onrae theoretical solution 
vs. three-conductor lines . 5 


Carbons, Neeane ISOS Air rer sietea nai ero eee ae 
Charging current, 220,000 volt transmission 
Circuit breakers, oil, 220 kv. transmission .................. 

Clamps and fittings, 220 kv. transmission sib hehescgite wacin Bete ets y 
Goal U.S. production ammount... eerie: oe a nee 


Ci ROLE A Cen Pe Sy 5 


TOPICAL INDEX 35 


Codes, lighting, industrial, present status (See Lighting Codes, 
Industrial, etc.) 


Condensers, chatging of, time required... ...>... @. 6.0000 600 
Conductors, aluminum- steel, mechanical characteristics.......... 1054 
current distribution i dia UINCOUAL ar yee ee ee 245 
single, high-tension, cable, polyphase systems. 917 
various types, advantages NRE Ie aOR 9% ar aera 1046 
Conduit, underground, heating characteristics, representative. . 944 
Cooperation, Pe ACOe SA MOT pee ela orc kes ce EY oak 783 
research. 6 OSS io CURSES ASS ens cene ooRSee aR « 788 
standardization....... Panay eh CaCI SR 785 
Corona, effect on insulation, corrosive action.................. 565, 570 
loss data, 220 kv.. eit ee eee eee DLA 
220 volt transmission. . aa mn em eee ve RI OAL 
Cost, construction, 220 kv. transmission....................... 1097 
insulators, porcelain, Sis pelrciOnet seek ee eee oe, 1209 
welding, gas vs. electric. = SPAS oer ita 85 
Crystal, Rochelle salt, piezo- electric effect. . cena a: ne oe LAGT 
Retire Are eve rasta tine Nee ead See ee awed oe baie is 125 
Curtis turbines, Stes GL enAaractenstic Ccurvess.7 eee hee bss 
speed and power, limits. . PT eT LOT 
wheel breakages, cause. isa ae HOO 
Dvelectricucldespewemcanle £0 a. en ke eee 971 
losses, CAMersinele-CONGUCLON tc): S50 iene ee 925 
strength, air films... 02.00... rare as ee 24347/ 
BA ag ee) che ami Sh oO is ce ES 
Dielectrics, protective gaps. oe ee tenes eee ee lO 
transient voltages, ‘effect of.. MS Ps ROOD Re ae Md 8 bY 
mureetion findermeradsion ys eee eee ee ee iain eee owe 50 
Economics, electric service, committee report................... 891 
Education, committee report. . Ee aa She tk os 915 
Efficiency, telephone receiver, equation. GS aos RAINES BOS Coe 717 
Electric circuit, charging, quarter wave. Pe eee keontt oor utaee cake 224 
constants, various frequencies 4 nn, RAE rae Bl 259 
general equations of.. Fog 191 
line constants, current distribution, effect of...... 194 

finite velocity of electric field effect 
OL eee ee Me ee nam the te, 2 195 

_ high frequency, effect of size, shape 
ADAG IIa ceria aeetaa Ew a, eres 205 
hehtinimte condnictorssa «ta a: 200 
AULT OL Ol eee eM ee et 192 
radiation resistance, inductance and capacity.... 248 
rectangular wave, attenuation of...............0 222 
Steelwave ironts, Hattening*Of a. arth we. as ke ee 234 

zone of, return conductor vs. 
STOUT CLULN ey aye ieee 229 
iavelling, wave, rectangulat. S20 o. woo. . v4 as 231 
unequal current distribution in conductors....... 245 
DVCRCLE CAN Rae a ths eke akan odor emote Nagd abe ce alee 214 

Hectrical networks, transient oscillations in, theory of (See Trans- 

ient oscillations, etc.) 

lectritications tailrOad, pOseiDilities: 4... 0a. Cea age cas eee 621 
Electrode, diameter, welding ES oe DIR ee See NL 2 BC . ) 126 
IMA LCHIAlse Wel Cit Pepin. Ee Gt cls. AeH) scone eae 124 
Electrodes, welding, PES biG Mmm Rey ea.) oi Ng, \c OS > oddity aes 100 
Electromagnetic induction, report on..... ER My ath eo 1495 

theory, telephone receiver (See Telephone, 

receiver, etc.) 

Electrophysics, committee report EEN ON cei nie oceans nea deemed 896 
Engineering standardization...... 6.6... sss sees eee e eee eee e ee 179 


[Dyn erbaNOS, RUBIES oop wea vd GN OS ays Coke Sinisa Fir Oana ekie- rma eee 52 


36) TOPICAL INDEX 


Feeders, parallel operation. . Pot. Ss 800; 850 
Fixation, atmospheric nitrogen, " silent discharge method.......... 565 
Frequency, 25 cycles vs. 60 cycles, 220 kv. transmission.......... 1120 
meters, errors of.. Hs rahi Matteo ees 772 
oscillation, transformer windings. Re Chrt te eto Behe | 588 
standard maintenance, master clock................ 769 
meter vs. master clock method 773 
VAlUEG- OF ahem ee eee eee 774, 776 
Eusionpare Welding ac coe bcm ehate oe ay renee eee eee ee 121 
welding, mild steel. . Sec RG NS Oe rie OT he ee es ae 65 
Gas, welding, Senos tests DFR Ae en ene ec eae 
Gases, occluded, ionization of, high-tension insulation.......... 489, 537 
Genetator, a-Cs, VaCutii: CUDE m7 ieee cee ieee eter ene 1415 
oscillation, radio ea wee ee ra ates a 314 
radio, transoceanic. . : Air ec tet 90 2 here, scam eA 5) 
Generators, turbo, G. E. Co., sizes in ase. 2)” NaS eae 1554 
mechanical stresses... |... ss!hee eee eee 1547 
single-shaft, ampere turns, rotor vs. stator.... 1539 
Capacities Vs. speeds. o. Secan see 1543 
peripheral speed, limits.....-.... 1540 
: rotor déflectiGn® i)... ease beta 1541 
speed and output, limits......... 1537 
transportation facilities.......... 1542 
ventilations.. ase. s.1.2 ket nies 1540 
winding temperatures............ 1541 
Ground suppressor, arcing, US€10E: -.. 4 Ge. ened sce oe aes 866 
Grounded neutral, transmission system. . An ore ene See BO eee 
Grounding s cable, single-condtictor. ).2 22.2. nace ele | eee ee 951 
Ground wires, overhead, 220 kv. transmission................., 1061 
Elarmonics; amplitude, determination Of =2.5, 2... .0. suc ecient 1183 
order and amplitude, determination................ 1179 
bet hide ti tec tee: 1181 
practical exam- 

le. Bre pee 1185, thee 

Cetermiuination OL. seerrsc ws. steno eee ee 118 
Heat generation, stationary apparatus, formulas... Dt) oe eee as 1702 
Helium, commercial production. . 3 BRSRL EA sree 23 
High-tension cable, single conductor, polyphase systems. crete 917 
Illumination and lighting, committee report.. MONET shige es RODS 
Inductance, mutual, reactance coils parallel Pres ee ee 1675 
Induction, electromagnetic, report on. Hote LAOS 
motor, polyphase, single- phase on ‘rotor, theory Of Sa 1739 
mutual, telephone circuits, effect of power circuits .... 451 
square vs. flat phantom.. 482 


square vs. flat phantom ap- 
plication to existing plant 484 

square vs. flat phantom cost 483 

square vs. flat phantom 


(Ain Lena Cet s.0 eee 484 
transpositions, cost........ 443 

methods 

of cal- 

cula- 

Tove a4 4G 

variation in spacing, effect 
Olea. 6 antec tact tne rae 449 
various transpositions...... 432 

various transpositions com- 
pene (6 Pe Swati i acti So 436 


Ae telephone circuits... SR ae ate ee 429 
unipolar. . : 


TOPICAL INDEX 37 


Inductive interference, telephone circuits, reduction of.......<... 429 
Industrial lighting codes, present status (See Lighting codes, 
industrial, etc.) 


standardization. . eR Ln ect ey oie FE e SARE noah 179 
Instruments, committee report Nm Gee he © ete reas oaks fh ies 912 
Insulation, effect of corona on. corrosive action. 565, 570 

graded single-conductor cable. oat 

high tension, occluded gases, causes of. . So beede 490 

ionization of........... 489, 537 


three-conduc- 
tor cable. . 506 
conductor 


with rect- 

angular 

cross sec- 

tion. §24 
curves...... 492 

distorted 


waveeffect 496 
effect of age- 


i BRS ery 509 

maximum 

stress, con- 

ductor to 
sheath.... 508 

strength of 

Ait eee 497 

thickness of gas spaces, 
determination of...... 503 
2200007 OlGrttaAmsHiissione sy, 6. Mes oes, Te 1241 
Insulators, 220 ‘ky. transmissicn, grading of . Pe ety oe ee Le el OOD 
metallic shields................ 1066 
disk, electrical, characteristics, 220 kv. transmission. 1062 
mechanical characteristicsscant ss se ee 1067 
high tension. Se eS OCS 
suspension, failure, accumulation as a ‘cause. Re Nee er 3 1211 
conditions governing overinsulation 1200 
CHECHIOLACENSION sme mie mae 1216 
mechanical. . 1207 
probability per insulator, ‘diagram. 1203 
Gestings COShiote errr Mette tt rete 1209 
theory of probabilities............ 1199 
DOLeMital oracient. . oe areas et, fee 1219 
transmission, lightning, effect of . W370 
Interference, telephone, factor, limiting values, determination of. 273 
relation to wave shape. . : eater 266 

single frequency currents, ‘relative effects 
Leann tee sho AONE oh al tier, SAT oe ate 275-277 
tests, reading and articulation. . nk, sege PAs 

Ronization currents, measurement Of). 0... 7 eet fas isin hee ee 
gases, occluded, high tension insulation.............. 489, 537 
Iron and steel industry, committee ers ee Gm eek bite tea che 909 
Lighting, automobile headlights. . eh Mi ten nt oe peat at eet ews LoS] 8) 
codes, industrial, daylight eee cae Oo ee, ne nt ee 730 
distribution. . ee a ee ee, Ate 
emergency. Sel Pons ral nketeaPa eh eet: cpa iahe They 
enforcement. . Pee eh OO MnO hi 
Federal safety ‘standards.............. 750 
/ elare tactorsuimvolved:,...:5 5. ha. 5. 760 
DR ea ohio 6 0's sian) oes 
ISEGI erate oct Pes rte ee. f myser neler 727 


inspectors, training of................ 744 


38 TOPICAL INDEX 


Lighting, codes, industrial (continued) 


intensity, Speciation wars. spiel le 732 
NECESSILY: [OTs <. hse eee ee aes 726 
Scope. oe ude <i aha ey ae een nee 
SPeCiiCa ONS Lees Sik pena eee 729 
SUATUS 12) 2 Spt eee ct aoe tae eee ce 725 
FACEOTY! os, coe a Ue sate Sh sto See peal aaenseee tee tae an ee ae a 888 
motion picture lamps. x, aq oes pear sg eee eee gerne 889 
DLOCECEIVE A. aisncmond achaige io roe toto a tne Rte ear een ee 888 
street, PLOPTESS.101.. .Wie.t)- tees Sek ae eee 886 


Lightning, arrester gaps (See Arrester gaps) 


effect on gaps, insulators and bushings................ 11387 
Machine, a-c. armature coils, air films in insulation, effect of...... 546 
Marine: ;committeéreports .) a. 1. «xc% tea oe 905 
Measurement, absolute, intensity of sound....................- 701 
Measurements, committee report. . 1... 2-3. os ee ee ee 912 
Metals’ position: of, atoms. x7... ete ee ee ee 
Meteorological servicey US: 19185 eee e 3 mane eee 24 
Meters,-frequency; Gfrors of- 0.8 = =e ee ee ee 772 
Mines, use~of electricity in, committee report....—.............. 908 
Motors, polyphase, theory, single-phase on rotor............... 1739 
synchronous, effect on transmission lines............... 1223 
starting conditions. ne. Seabee oe ee 
timing devicesdtivel st. sS-< ai PR 767 
descriptioncofsol%.. a0 « 768 

Mutual induction, zero, telephone circuits (See Induction, mu- 

tual, etc.) 

Neutral, grounded, transmission systems..................827, 833, 865 
Nitrogen, fixation of, silent discharge method....-..............- 565. 


Oilftotal: production. Ur Set ate. Wee Bt Gelck codn See ee 643 

Operation, parallel, power plants (See Power plants, parallel 
operation) 

Oscillations, transient, electrical, networks, theory of............. 345 


Parallel-operation, Teed efS.c00 onc ya <eaeceacuete sin eo ea re 

power plants (See Power plants, parallel opera- 

tion, etc.) 

Permittivities, coil insulation, various materials, table............ 550 
Permittivity, plate glass, variation with temperature............. 543 
Phase modifier, synchronous performance, determination of...... 1223 
Splitting: stationaryappatapisee. oe see eines eet 1704 
Phone: sound: measusententn ssa .6 tee na eee es cl SO Se 709 
Phonodek, sound: meAsuremenitwncs. > acces. se. ae eee 706 
PRhonometer, sound cmeastirementiayq. sects eas ee 705 
Phonotrope, sound measurement, direction of................... 710 
Piezo-electric effect, ionization currents, measurement of......... 1470 
Rochelletsalt, crystal mac suet eater ee ae Ne 
applied stresses......... 1475 
axial compression....... 1476 
. polarity and dressing.... 1474 
sound transmitter....... 1481 
a ceystallognaphy. .... 6. - 1471 
: electricity. 8s... «sc sete ayoe oak cp pice ma ee ae ee 1469 
Pilot wire system, transmission line protection..... 816 
Polyphase motor, theory, single phase on rotor................- 1739 
systems, cable, high-tension, single conductor......... 917 
Power factor, improvement of, effect of synchronous motors...... 1223 
: compensation, stationary apparatus..... 1703 
industrial and domestic, committee report..... 881 
plants, ‘parallel operation of (mca nis a's nce ee 1651 
cost Of transmission). .0e. sae “1662 


phase angle variation, maximum 
permissible 4.00. 4..«.08 Sandee 


ri 
ee 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Power, plants, parallel operation (continued) 
synchronizing power formula. 
wector diagram .... 
wattless current vs. tie line ‘power 


transmission, 220 kv. (See Transmission, 220 ky. ry 

President’s Address. . 

Protective devices, committee report.. Ra Sieh ae ene eae ene 
EE PSs chia illo ieee Ss oe SE amc SER RE 
coe transmission line (See Relays, transmission line, 

etc 

Reeieaciia eel, Meira Ofys. ye os ee 

vs. re relative effectiveness............ 
antenna effect.. at > anh 

condenser aerial . 

electrostatic vs. magnetic fields . at eee Oe 

induction vs. radiation, discussion of distinction........ 

radiation vs. reception . 

reception, antenna, formula derivation. . 
coil, formulas, derivation. a 
current and Kinase) principle of measurement. 
fAetor.- fNe eee Reet 

resistance, radiation. SoS hes ana A ee IL 

surroundings, Bleeker eer ee ee 

telephony (See Telephony, radio, etc.) 

transmission and reception, antenna and coil aerials, 

principles ..... 
formulas, deriva- 
LUO TIN 2 cere rone 
coil aerial, ee deriva- 
tion. ettestar oh oftoete Sehgeiny 
vs. antenna, “comparison 
formulas. . ee ae 
LOLA AS ypc hata ce PROM pen: Sas ces easiness 
Aevial miele dtr mee aM Mn, asd sehen: 
Jimita sony sor. ser ce ete eRe ps mee, SA 
transoceanic.. / ATG, Pee RON cn ORs ae 
generating system. Res he ag CR ee cgi ee eo 
COMM a Lote eee rata ceemicg 
multiple antenna.:......... 
epee ry esac aa 
high speed EE: Daas te 
radiation, directive. . RT oT a A Pe 
LeEcephiON, GITECHVE 4 alti) + supuce Ae eas 
traffic capacity, future possibility ............ 
wave lengths, closer spacing of.............. 

Railroad, electrification, possibilities. . 

Railway, electrification, steam vs. electric ‘operation, power con- 

SITING PA 1am Ue REE REN coco, ada ScLhgecs co's sVeyre'a oh eG loayelegh epee eivees 
ereLAanee coms LOMmdlasihOIn amy se apiietbaa.\« oso so 0ste-0 mom oten Bare ace 
parallel axes, mutual inductance formulas....... 

mechanical force between... 

GE PU SLOMMOL byl cms. ere sg homer oa 
short, self-inductance........ Pe Ba ees ae 
long tself=ind Getamcen ere potas ote eens lea oes 

Receiver, telephone, electromagnetic theory (See Telephone re- 

ceiver, etc.) 

Relays, 220 kv. transmissions. 00.65.2202 4.5. 50% Sage git ole Ber 

current directional, application Of... i.e. sense aes 


a (Onna eroVOlLEN Abbr es ce ty Seecacas Les, CRcueLst ANON ect tc er ner : 


Hest oRATICeS CL pil hme Meets cease sitis iets os ase lone 6 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Relays (continued) 


transmission line, balanced protection...............-4- 
inverse time-current, typical application 
parallel Operations so asje ee ene el 
Pilot wire Sy Stem = cc ae eee tater ts Steer 
present practises..." + ago sees area 
protection... 
settings, determination of. . ae 
split-conductor cable sme cins acne ier 
tesiioe ant eae Ee eee oon. 
tripping. . OP ee ee eat ts ee 
types definitiones ..) scat sean peas 
under-current, and OVer=VOltas Cass ae ete enter tn aeeeeete 


Repeaters, telephone 20s. <> « Je eee eae eae 


asynchronous generator type ...........-.. 
balancing ‘of lines; ee Sa ee 
booster type! circurte- eee eer eee eed ere 
Boston-Washington cable...... Sede 
classification7:.2) AG. t se 2s cee ate eee 
d-c. and a-c. generator type.......... oe wr ae 
fOur-Wite°CITCULU, 2s ee et ee aa ee roe 
historical sss. - se ee eee eens 
linéimpedance: Py sy ote eee ie ee 
cable lengths, effect of....... 
loading: coils 23) yie. a. ie aera 
mercury Vapor sha eee ce ee oe en 
method ‘or applying eee ae ees 
hegative resistance type. -. a... assure 
New York—San Francisco circuit, diagram. . 
operation tandem 7... .)... .ie eas oe eee 
repeaterrelemient os, ..200 0.09 08 2. 2S eee 
DAIVEVEOMG YS. Aeregh, remctae ean eet) Seal oe oe eee 
PION CITCT tims antes gee tt eR tea 
Vacuum tube: types eter ee eee 
2. and 22 type: Seco © eer a eee 


Report, committee on use of pase ne 11 TN NOS). 2, te, atten eee 


economics of electric service. Wein erie Ne SS es 
educational ‘committee! 2p ee ee ee 
electrochemistry and electrometallurgy committee ....... 
electrophySics COmMmMItHee te am tueis he mana aerate ee ee 
industrial and domestic power committee..... rae ee 
instruments and measurements committee.............. 
iren and steel industry committees a1 yu eee ee 
lighting andallumination commuttecy.... 8.0... . iy tee 
itiatine’ Comanitvee. fem. °c ere te re ee en 
protective devices committee..... Pe ge ig caries ah event 
technical commiuttees............... Citi Pana ha 
telegraphy and telephony committee................... 
transmission and distribution committee................ 


esearch cooperation. . 3. : 7). . cyactrehe ee ara eee 
Resistance, radiation, electric circuit... =. ae Sue eee ee 
DPCATCHUPhtSinan ste Motel oie eee ee 5 ec Deh eherer tar MER es ce 


Adis luni Se she eeahonees Me eee asec 
arc, high power. . ESS 3, Cc et She T 


blinker,' portable tube Po eee 
yardsarmte. Stren e eo ee ee 


0) 8) Oe) aya: 0.48! 19: Peis ‘ew 0 05 Velie Age (s.6 witb ele aha else 


‘© Fs) 8) 0 Te 0) 60 0) 6%» 6) © oils! 0 0) Wat BAe. 


Ventilationloln.ss) 0 eae 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Ship construction, welding process..........................0. 113 
Single-phase, network, transforming, general theory 1708 
j winding, rotor, polyphase motor..... 1739 
Sound, intensity of, absolute measurement... .. 701 
measurement, coefficient of reflection................... 709 
direction’ Of; phonotrope <7... fey cenes 710 
DCIS Te ee eRe MeL Nie 2 709 
PhORodel ka seen eee ye een wt 706 
DEGQGIIE et eT eA. oo in, eee 705 
preedwverulator, genetator! Tadio...0... ee eke cc oe. 1277 
Split-couductor;.cables..z.. 01... .. 815 
praaepremtisic, Sic steel J. sien he PANEL IO OLR ewer 67 
pene Cat mine cuiagiec a eee es 261 
DEatdaxd zation mc asciicatiOnas tee no. ste ee 180 
COOPCTALION see rin eee a Hee ne MeL 785 
engipeerinpsand industrials iin wee MeL s > ~.179 
TAC MCE COL trey Kt eee el 186 
TIC CCGA Gy Vialtl Geta eect io ea Meet bere saci 184 
SIRATECHECS CMI SCRGIMERCMETT MRM acter Od pats ete dmg 1619 
Starting, conditions, synchronous machines (See Synchronous 
machines, etc.) 
Steam turbines, single shaft, speed-and power, limits......... 1515, 1527 
Substation, equipment, 220 ky. transmission.............0..00% 1086 
ti DehDOWeG PEatisrissOllee es cee et fe RN ek ces wee habe 631 
DAMES ae og ote eh Oe 1037 
Calstocata 220 OO0volties sania ee oe 1237 
systems of California, Nevada and 
ATI OMA TITANS EM aia ons Tacos acs 1247 
Synchronizing power, parallel operation of power plants; formula.. 1655 
Ey ucChrOuOlus, Machines startino arene. vot dot eee A. hath eat . 1713 
open vs. closed field windings.... 1728 
Pordiie, acceletatings ac. ayieslkie Solo 
torque, due'to eddy currents-..........< 17238 
hysteresismmeme es: .: a akek.  “LOke 
induced currents.......... 1720 
squirrel cage starting...... 1719 
pulling into synchronism......... 1724 
SPECOt CUI VES ee ae ne, eee LALS 
varying magnetic reluctance...... 1716 
FOLGE, taming device Gli ver. ot ye Erin sass stn 767 
piechiaicaln@ ommitlee EpOLtSe esate ti S;- cindy eoiete tte ies obs eaeieuohdes 871 
sielootrapla madre Nairplane SEUSS Nes. seu ce bi Mieclthe ee tiers ala, aoapn ns 50 
elegraphy and telephony, committee report.::.........4...200- 897 
radio, transoceanic (See Radio, transoceanic, etc.) 
Telephone, circuits, mutual, induction, zero (See Induction, mu- 
tual, etc.) 
TeccimelDIpOlatemMAcielC CIfCtits 1.112. pment ee 653 
PMechAniCalisysveim be ens haa at ane 653 
ESHA TON eens eee tin noite arara ic tlc nn, Baba ane Bur 717 
electric and magnetic relation, algebraic dis- 
» CUSSTO Mek a. tibia metho tt space Meee ne eee aetna (aie | 
electromarretictheoty.. 1... ee ome ees 651 
e. m. f. diagram, diaphragm damped........ 657 
e. m:f. diagram, diaphragm free............ 658 
force diagram, diaphragm damped and free. 665, 670 
impedance diagram, diaphragm damped..... 660 
: frees. P2529 661 
motional power diagram....... Si sak teare 5 Ae OB 
distribution, magneticcircuit 684 
power diagram, diaphragm damped and free. 663 
_winding turns, effect of changing............ ieee 


BOPEBLORS ns gies wine fe ce Renee ye edema s ve eu sane 


* 


42 TOPICAL INDEX 


Telephones, radio, airplane sets. Pe dr 49 
Telephony, automatic, applicability. . 1567 
controlling circuit. eas 1576 
community exchange. ties Sete a ea 1586 
durability and maintenance: y.n. arse 1581 
equipment characteristics............. 1573, 1583 
line faults, effect of. . fahren eee 1 1579 
long distance. . iia da 1599 
operating company 's requirements un ee 1571 
relays te. ae Ss eben ete teen oie ke ete Gane eer 1574 
rural, 4s eee nw oe CR ee 1583 
’ subscriber’s requirements. . 1568 
toll switching. . cise 1591 
between exchanges. 4 Re sit ho, 1592 

manual and automatic, unification of, Los Angeles 
system: 6c} Aggie Goan 5 a ee ee eck 1635 
TACiOwene te 305 
aircraft... ...>..0. 3c ee ee 327 
development of apparatus.............. 330 
experimental: works. Soo ate cee ee 329 
ignition mterference. «6-2. 0 eee 340 
radiating systems.. ag ee ee 339 
Shortwave ty De. = Be pc. ea ee 338 
wind driven generators, voltage iouaaes 331 
Arlington-Darien experiment.................% 316 
Honolulu experiment... fis... 2. see 319 
Paris CXpPeriments sy - sos. 1c eects 320 
atdion, introductionrcob, o.ac sc eee eee 310 
battleship equipment.. 322 
commercial development. . 332 
first field trials. . 3 313 
first system description. . 306 
fundamental principles. . 308 
future of.. 342 
Heising modulation ‘system. . ij) SR es eS 
cnilitary Sey 5. ee cee Cee ee ee ee 326 
MULCH LEX. 5 omens ey ee « notaent ste ete eee ee 324 
Nave ae Ce Island demonstration .. 318 
oscillation generator... ry Noten, 314 
practical developments. . 321 
submarine chaser, equipment. . : a eee 341 
vacuum tubes, receiving, characteristics. She eae 334 
transmitting, characteristics. ..... 335 
“Wehnelt Cathode” type........ 333 
Temperatires, rotor, turbo senerators..ccss eae a ee ee ee ee 1541 
Resting, electrodes, welding. casa. ok om <0 st nee ee oe 100 
relays. . 801 
Time characteristic, alternating current, ‘utilization eta eee 767 
Torque, synchronous SHAENIGS: sa 1 Soe peomeee ee hose eee 1715 
Tower, transmission line, river crossing, Toledo system.......... 837 
Towers, transmission, 220 kv. 1071 
Transformations, stationary apparatus, inherent limitations. . 1697 
phase splittine.; =e 1704 
power and energy........ 1699 

power factor eres 

tion.. ig eee 0. 

pransformeér, bushing. .ceere: rent, cee ee aed se 
Duis, ty penile: aes, Sees > nee ee Oe iss 854 
voltages, abnormal... 577 
abrupt impulses... 578 
condenser reaction of transformer 581 
high frequency impulses. . Reems =! 


TOPICAL INDEX 43 
Transformer, voltages, abnormal (continued) 
initial effective capacitance, steep 
RVAVCLEDGTI TI att. te Sire octet aes 599 
initial voltage distribution....... 582 
steep 
wave 
j front 6595 
SUrvedmpedance. 15 .). 5c. os. meh, 609 
transient voltage distribution. . 583 
types of.. Se cena ar 
: voltage to ground ‘and | per ‘turn, 
iCPRE S-CN ETON 01 en Reco ie aac ieee ere eee 585 
waves with long tails........... 579 
windings, high-voltage, high-frequency tests........ 592 
imipulsestests Onis. ames 590 
oscillation, natural as 588 
Transformers, 220-kv. transmission. . 1090 
Transforming network, single-phase, general theory ; 1708 
Transient oscillations, artificial line indicial adc rence "solution 
(Ost oes 5 Reenehs eas een On Sm re Re nay 367 
electrical networks, generalformulas....... 347 
indicial admittance de- 
termination of. ; 356 
indicial admittance 
Fourier’s es ag so- 
lution. . : 359 
indicial “admittance 
power series solution. 357 
indicial admittance 
So ae method of 
solution. . 359 
theory of.. 345 
leakageless line indicial 
admittance solution 
for 381 
Moaet “cable, approx- 
imate solution....... 384 
smooth line, voltage 
* formulas, solutionfor 382 
smooth line, or con- 
tinuously loaded, line 
indicial admittance 
SOMULIOUM OL: amin tise 376 
transmission line with 
terminal eopedences 
ereehetig solution. . 403 
Transmission and Distribution, Committee report. . #2 2 876 
OAV Mie Bsus Abo ee ate CORRS EO ee SIO Seite ae 1037 
aluminum steel geme He characteristics.... 54 
220,000 volt, California. . awl ae 1237 
50 vs. 60 cycles .. : 1240 
charging current.2)--..---- 1242 
COOMA civ, ureter haber: sae 1241 
nae Nan hates Rea cae 1244 
insulation. . 1241 
line capacity. . : 5. 1243 
mechanical construction. ; 1244 
operation FW ee ictae cs: cx, locus dos Selim 1244 
clamps and fittings.. ee OGS 
conductors, electrical characteristics. we 1047 
materials and eS Bitar aaee 1045 
connections, Y vs. delta. ke 1044 


44 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Transmission, 22,000 volt, (continued) 


Turbines, 


ConstELUchHoMeCOss.. atc eke ee 1097 
COTO tars oie Go eedhngs oes See LOSE 
LOSS Catan cin & -semny oak: 1048 
design, featunes srrsere pierre eis aa 1042 
disconnectors, air brake.............. 1095 
disk, insulators, electrical character- 
istics nsasgves eee: See agian eos 062 
economic span, determination of..... -,_ L088 
fielich: £05 jpestersa s,0hs uct iensua oa alters os nous tae eel eas 
frequency tc. 12/3. oko on OSS ITD 
high voltage switching......... . 1088 
insulators, disk, mechanical character- 
ISICS Nx zch cased Bis poteeetey. =: 1067 
grading Oly. , s2- fai ae LOGD 
metallic shields........... 1066 
types available.2 0); 2001.05 1061 
oil.cirewit breakers vr. Sr7 eters ree 1093 
overhead ground wires............... 1061 
protective) equipment.....2. 5. ..- 1089 
relay. systemaiy fear tmae, 5 ee eee 1097 
station and substation equipment..... 1086 
GOWEPSiES vc.cnhs es Bas oa ret is Sree 1071 
deterioration, galvanizing...... 1086 
BUAUSLOMMEFS Yt. 4 scars d<e,ehs eae eines 1090 
COMMECHONS sas. -chaca eee 1088 


three-phase vs. singlephase 1103 


balanced protection scheme... ....... <2 Geman ae 860 
current directional relays, application of........... 859 
grounded neutral, bushing transformers.....>...... 854 
bus-type transformer............ 854 
Chicago systenix axis Soe ee 865 
CUITENT MTACHSe. ey eee 827, 822, 865 
N.Y... Wdison systenarsasyaenaien 827 
oledo. Systeme eee eee 833 
general scheme.... 835 
high tension....... 836 
landing tower..... 837 
United Elec. Lt. & Pr. Co....... 828 
line, power factor, synchronous motor effect........ -/ 7 1998 
protection, relays (See Relays, transmission 
line etc.) 
regulation, circle diagram..... 1230 
balanced protection schemes.............. 808 
parallel operation of feeders, savings effected....... 850 
protective devices, Chicago system..... 846 
relays, method of tripping...... 857 
; testing and setting |. «alee ene se 850 
radio, principles (See Radio, transmission, eve..) 
superpower, line. ...'. appa awe) las AU oes .. S 
systems, transient oscillations in, theory of (See 
Transient oscillations, etc.) : 
under-voltage and over-current relays, application of 863 
steam, imptilse.ves zeaction . :lm.> Crus cnc 4a eee 1551 
single shaft, speed and power, limits........ 1515, 1527 
speed and power limits, blades, material specifi- 
: CatLOnE wae, shes 1521 
double flow low-pressure 
SUAS... snake oe beeen eS 
ECONOMIC... cei, Gblip ea 
physicals. «cvhuidia sete 
theoretical,..<oyase.. our sdb le 


TOPICAL INDEX 45 


Turbo generators, single shaft, speed and erie] limits. . se Perse ths RHE 

Underground cables, line characteristics................ att eee OOS 

~~ Trew aye) Eoue- SANGRE crn Mos VRB sale Meetnnaic, San chor it aaa eee na 1508 
Vacuum tubes, currents and voltages, phases and forms in tube 

CAL CULE igen tema hess 2 dan Das ae So, smash Sak es 1420 

developmen Pasar a mars atehatl sn 6 oboe toc 45 

CMCICUC Ys OF ete ae 4 te eres 0d oe ree 1424 


functioning of, déscriptions,ciss.i.......2%..0.. 472 
CENCEDEORION A-CaMOWE?, os tie Aewhc, eed. oe ae L415 
pe ney ToS gk ele Pee a eee oun 1442 


power output.. tents ne RRs et a wheats: 20 LAG 

safe load. . Peete ORLA LS 

Sha Saghe 67, “characteristic curves. ee. ee OHA SO 

CINCUIL Ciara magesg vet een eek: 476 

Neier OLN deeb an 1439 

static characteristics, curves. ee eee 1426 

Ventilation, turbo generators, single shaft. . 1540, 1555 
Voltage, abnormal, transformer (See Transformer voltages, ete. ) 

Wave form, harmonics, determination of.. ae A AS) 

shape standard, sub-committee of Standards ‘Committee, 

REVIEW IOiaWOLK: >. te at icitoys Sayan ety. 261 

telephone interference, relation to......... 266 

Welding, a-c., bare vs. covered electrodes..... givin ieleegsgant es 79 

consideration as single- phase load. . Eaaiies Cain ne 81 

ME MUGACiyes eck Meet a bs Per peg bee st aioe ee 78 

DOW ECAC HOt a. «ie ptt Sein Re Rao ee ts eae 80 


Meme Omaha Ee ere Es face eaciets ax ns 80 
Sale a6 Ree. BO eae ee teat eens ie oe eae 79 


AEC HCHTTCH ener en eee Se AG. crs 8 Oc Pye AG etetr ae dua: 6 125 
ORB BURR ie ac <5 y 3 Sat ce RENE ROS Cre ee ty Oe 82 
L110 EA ee ete RT ako. ci ate op det ADRS. SEER oe 121 
EV CULL ee Ne athe ee MER on as cn aieis etenaccare Baas 122 
penetration. . WOR eriag Pst. oe 122 
Wirt-Jones tests, . TO ienec. ave eae LOE. 

deposited metal, composition. . Beat"): nena te a oR 76 

d-c. vs. a-c. As CURE Soiree oe Ree eS 78 

electric, arc length, ers ainsi 94 

UAT EOE CAs AM ee SIM chet oz, 1 airs: yaal ee tau 3 gs 91 

and semi-automatic machines....... 150, 155 
bare vs. covered electrodes, relative ductility .... 87 
CAT OOMERE CSS EIEN: Shee. et ais obs Uh leee a 0iane <P 91 
compasinion.of-plates;, effectiofis ..c.2- sa ed ae 174 
contacts, current densities at... ccs .5c e356. ve 146 


COLLOSIOM Dy Gea WALEED arcs.) ++. tute ices ool) Spee 138 
disk: depressionamethodys.). ..2 Wi aacdvn joer, 06 


electrodés andscurrentsy. ..... 2% 1 aver rasa. 155 
coating of.. 21 hy Sis ae OS ent ee 135 
preferable sizes... SM ee 90 
Felavion tol work. vse olas te Wars tear 153 

exchuistOnOU OXY PCM. ho... 0 Ade 6 eee Nan en LOO 

MALTESE) DASE Semester: eat finial ays ate eset Ries 142 

Tavienseeitml CtOL Ait... n8 ay. mus osteo. Lapeer 93 

Que ETANsS lOLMety ppt ass. nite ayn ae ees ee ere 148 

operators, protection of..... 2s eek Mien ohne 143 
training of.. Ge Sh IS OT aah LOL 

(OLE e Apter Oiyrac. ated aan KameyootD quod ot ore 6 148 

potential required «40s Haiti tees 137 

preparatiqa Or edges. Mi4.-.) ge. -am ys Ue a eee 92 

FaGeayel \ifSeanaloy Mes ER SK We Meer 'n catno <, oe no eee 0 93 

ship plates, contraction stresses..............- 144 

SyAKeCUAL BOE, Go nesqan gob opind Ob 02 Oecmnmanr OK 165 

CCS tig ee ea hater hy ee ee 87 


46 


TOPICAL INDEX 
Welding, electric, speed (continued) : ; ee 
Sed obtained). 42.04 as ox Sahl a Sea 
spot, strength of........ Pe ae at) Se 
subsequent heat treatment............ 
suitable currentso.9 sis oe eee 
tests, standardization af... Sela sets et tk 
~y thickness of plates... .5 7.07 es or fee 


tama St eelly coc tren ot ee ere 


ee fel Piao Sareea 


thin materials eG aa 
uniform arc length, maintenance of... 
voltage‘effect..Q4 0,0 Stn see eee 


electrodes, diameter... sn ene eee SS ees 
materialsct coe eee. oe ee 
testing, standard.procedure........ » cea 

fusion, currents employede: cease. aes cee 


mild-steel... see 
gas,-bending tests. 937 y=: teen eee fe gs doer ae) 
vs. electric, comparative costs .2 505 eee 

/ respective fields:./7 722%. eae eee 


‘Operators, training of....... 
overhead, quality oft teen Bi 
polarity: se ot eresi ae 
resistance...... piiertnc stag 
ship construction. > Pe ee 
Bee hos oe 
lap vs. butt | 5 : 
Time savings eee 


Id steel > 21 7 - qeeeet 

cs ATC. deta e Oe ee 
tests, technique. of 20 :c0-. ss we alee 
wire, bare and covered......... Be Sent ; 
‘Wirt-Jones tests arc welded ship plates. trees i 


