TRANSACTIONS 


OFY THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


JUNE TO DECEMBER, 1907 


Dene NOY PARITY LE 


PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
33 West THIRTY-NINTH STREET 
NEW YORK, N.Y., U.S.A 
1908 


Copyright, 1907 
by the 
AMeErIcAN InstiTuTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


pS Sei Te 
Press of McIlroy & Emmet, 22 Thames Street, New York 


OFFICERS AND BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 
1906-1907. 


PRESIDENT. 
SAMUEL SHELDON. 
Term expires 1907. 


JUNIOR PAST-PRESIDENTS. 


JOHN W. LIEB, JR. SCHUYLER S. WHEELER. 
VICE-PRESIDENTS. ’ 
Term expires 1907. Term expires 1908. 
CHARLES A. TERRY. A. H. ARMSTRONG. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. FRANK G. BAUM. 
GANO DUNN. H. H. HUMPHREY. 
MANAGERS. 

Term expires 1907. Term expires 1908. ‘Term expires 1909. 
C. O. MAILLOUX. CUMMINGS C. CHESNEY. A. M. SCHOEN. 
HENRY G. STOTT. * BANCROFT GHERARDI. PAUL. SPENCER. 
JAMES G. WHITE. CALVERT TOWNLEY. JOHN J. CARTY. 
LOUIS A. FERGUSON. CHARLES L. EDGAR. PAUL M. LINCOLN. 

TREASURER. SECRETARY. 
Term expires 1907. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON, RALPH W. POPE, 
463 West St., New York, N. Y. 33 West Thirty-ninth St., New York, N. Y. 


i 


PAST=PRESIDENTS. 


NORVIN GREEN, 1884-5-6. LOUIS DUNCAN, 1895-6-7. 
FRANKLIN L. POPE, 1886-7. FRANCIS B. CROCKER, 1897-8. 

T. COMMERFORD MARTIN, 1887-8. ARTHUR E. KENNELLY, 1898-1900. 
EDWARD WESTON, 1888-9. CARL HERING, 1900-1901. 

ELIHU THOMSON, 1889-90. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 1901-2. 
WILLIAM A. ANTHONY, 1890-91. CHARLES F. SCOTT, 1902-3. 

ALEX. GRAHAM BELL, 1891-2. BION J. ARNOLD, 1903-4. 

FRANK J. SPRAGUE, 1892-3.. JOHN W. LIEB, JR., 1904-5. 


EDWIN J. HOUSTON, 1893-4-5. SCHUYLER S. WHEELER, 1905-6. 


STANDING COMMITTEES AND LOCAL SECRETARIES. 
1906-1907. 


Executive Committee. 


SAMUEL SHELDON, Chairman, 
JOHN J. CARTY. HENRY G. STOTT. 
GEORGE A. HAMILTON. CHARLES A. TERRY. 
RALPH W. POPE. CALVERT TOWNLEY. 


Board of Examiners. 
WM. MAVER, Jre., 
Chairman. 
H. FLEETWOOD ALBRIGHT. 
FRANK W. ROLLER. 
LEWIS B. STILLWELL. 
TOWNSEND WOLCOTT. 


Committee on Papers. 
HENRY G. STOTT, Chairman. 
BERNHARD A. BEHREND. 
HENRY A. LARDNER. 


Library Committee. 
WM. J. JENKS, 
Chairman. 
EDWARD CALDWELL. 
CHARLES F. CHANDLER. 
CHARLES A. TERRY. 
F. N. WATERMAN. 


Editing Committee. 
THOS. J. JOHNSTON, 
Chairman. 
GANO DUNN. 


Committee on Finance. 
JOHN J. CARTY, 

Chairman. 
GANO DUNN. 


CECIL P. POOLE. 


PAUL M. LINCOLN. 


E. WILBUR RICE, Jr. 


JAMES G. WHITE. 


Local Honorary Secretaries. 
WM. B. HALE, 


JAMES S. FITZMAURICE, 


210 George St., Sydney, N. S. W. 


H. F. PARSHALL, 


Salisbury House, London Wall E. C., London. 


ROBERT B. OWENS, 


Arco de San Augustin 8, City of Mexico. 


CLARE F. BEAMES, 


for Porto Rico and West Indies], 
San Juan, P. R. 


W. G. T. GOODMAN, 


McGill University, Montreal, P. Q. 


ADOLPH SHANE, 
Iowa State College, 
mes, lowa. 


C. J. WHIPPLE, 
University of Michigan, 


nn Arbor, Mich. 
W. R. COLLIER, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
CHAS. . EDWARDS, 


Baltimore, ’Md. 
M. qT. SALDANA, 
Lehigh University, 
Bethlehem, Pa. 
Cc. H. PORTER, 
Mass. Inst. Technology, 
Boston, Mass. 
A. C. STREAMER, 
ashe ale of Colorado, 
oulder, Colo. 
Cc. E. FREEMAN, 
Armour Inst. of Technology, 


Chicago, Ill. 
H. R. KING, 

Chicago, Ill. 
LAURENT LOWENBERG, 
Cincinnati, O. 

H. D. CARPENTER, 
University of Missouri, 
Columbia, Mo. 


Local Secretaries. 


F. E. BEUTLER, 
Ohio State University, 


de Lee 


G. C. BAKER, 
University of Arkansas, 


Columbus, O. 


Columbus, O. 


COOK, 


povneet ille, Ark, 


H. H. NOR 
Cornell Ueiv ersity, 
Ithaca, N. Y 
J. W. ESTERLINE, 
Purdue University, 


Lafayette, Ind. 


J. W. SHUSTER, 
University of Wisconsin, 


Madison, Wis. 


Ss. INCH, 
Wiatseeaite of Montana, 


aoa Mont. 


H. F. SANVILL 


Philadelphia Pa. 


H. D. JAMES, 


Pittsburg, Pa. 


S. H. BLAKE 


W. E. 
Sea earae University, 


St. Louis, Mo. 


pvhittstield, Mass. 
YAN, 


Adelaide, South Australia. 


Ai Ss ends eee 
t, Louis, Mo. 
BARRY DIBBLE 
St. Paul, Minn. 
A. H. BABCOCK, 
San Francisco, Cal. 
E. E. F. CREIGHTON, 
Schenectady, N. Y. 
W. S. WHEELER, - 
Seattle, Wash. 
H. L. FREDERICK, 
Pennsylvania State College, 
State en Pa. 
A. M. WYGA 
Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, 
GEO. E. KIRK, 
Toledo, O. 
L. W. PRATT, : 
Toronto, Ont. 
M. K. AKERS, 
University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Ill 
PHILANDER BETTS 
Washington, D. Le 
A. lv'CHILDS; 
Worcester Poly. Inst. 


Worcester, Mass. 


CONTENTS. 


ANNUAL CONVENTION AT NIAGARA FALLS, JUNE 25-28, 1907. 


The Properties of Electrons. (President's Address)—By Samuel 
SUING OVI PE 25 cr 70 Be eg ne A a LO gag ee 
The Heating of Copper Wires by Electric Currents—By A. E. 
Kennelly and E, R. Shepard. (lllustrated.)................ 
Power-Factor, Alternating-Current Inductive Capacity, Chemical, 
and other Tests of Rubber-Covered Wires of Different Manu- 
facturers—By Henry W. Fisher. (Jllustrated.).............. 
Discussion by Henry W. Fisher, Chas. P. Steinmetz, E. W. 

SUC SUSOM mint eWinn GL OCOULMenmeyhaee. atin amie aie raxteseta eke 
Interaction of Synchronous Machines. (A Graphical Solution by 
means of a New Circle Diagram.)—By Morgan Brooks. 
CUURASITENAGIS, sis 0S ME ad Wes 2 ON aan Rin ia RNC aNA SESE 
Discussion by E. J. Berg, Chas. P. Steinmetz, Comfort A. 

ENGI VERS sa. Bienes Solas SAN TR OR CREE eT a eae ee 
Protective Apparatus Engineering—By E. E. F. Creighton. 
CUI SEMA A OE es 5 DES sy BOA Nah ol A Re nS ee a, 
Practical Testing of Commercial Lightning-Arresters—By Percy 
Eieap ly coiiycls san CLLLULS TROL CC.) edewe We, eee, tench Saree ease eek cae 

A Proposed Lightning-Arrester Test—By N. J. Neall. (Jilustrated.) 
Discussion on ** Lightning-Arresters,’’ by E. E. F. Creighton, 

N. J. Neall, Chas. P. Steinmetz, Percy H. Thomas, W. S. Lee, 


Choke-Coils versus Extra Insulation on the End-Windings of 
pranstormens Dyno Va AMeMeR aaske, ae tit cee nee ois cies ottieye 
Protection of the Internal Insulation of a Static Transformer 
against High-Frequency Strains—By Walter S. Moody. 
HUM SATCREG y= Massy Stoca, WENOUOTEL eee DI Bute, ETE RENO wR Ee 
Notes on Transformer Testing—By H. W. Tobey.  (dllustrated.).. 
Discussion on ‘‘ Choke-Coils versus Extra Insulation on the 
End-Windings of Transformers,”’ ‘‘ Protection of the Internal 
Insulation of a Static Transformer against High-Frequency 
Strains,’ and ‘‘ Notes on Transformer Testing,” by S. M. 
Kintner, A. H. Pikler, P. M. Lincoln, J. W. Fraser, W. N. 
Smith, Charles W. Stone, E. E. F. Creighton, William Mc- 
Clellan, W. S. Lee, R. P. Jackson, Chas. P. Steinmetz, Ralph 

-D. Mershon, D. B. Rushmore, W. LeRoy Emmet, O. 5. 
Lyford, Jr.. H. W. Buck, W. S. Moody, H. W. Tobey, E. J. 
Berg, B. C. Shipman, Frank G. Baum, A. C. Pratt, James 
ana cane hey OSSOON eye eitnm oy Mean: oe een ke aah & kant es 
Notes on Resistance of Gas-Pipe Grounds—By J. L. R. Hayden. 
(llustrated.)...... co igegen tha ACS urn REL mR ae aT 
Discussion by Chas. P. Steinmetz, Ralph D. Mershon, 

F.'B. H. Paine, Percy H. Thomas, N. J. Neall, F. J. Hoxie, 

APD ered cert pres ns Caeia yop veil yg pepe eee ss aysi a coe Shea, guk alba cathe. s 


937 


969 


997 
1021 


1027 
1047 


1049 


1097 
1139 


1169 


1173 
1179 


1190 


1209 


Vi 


Transmission Line Towers and Economical Spans—By D. R. 
Scholes.” “(1Uhis rated ira aeiee oe ret ale eet ae eee ee 
Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables as a Means of Protecting 
Transmission Lines against Lightning—By Norman Rowe. 
(LUMStrated Nata es oe 3 Got Bidens 4 OE Ee eee ee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Transmission Line Towers and Economical 
Spans” and ‘‘ Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables asa Means 

of Protecting Transmission Lines against Lightning,’ by 
William Hoopes, Percy H. Thomas, W.S. Lee, F. B. H. Paine, 

C. W. Ricker, Geo. T. Fielding, Jr., N. J. Neall, Ralph D. 
Mershon, D. R. Scholes, Frank G. Baum, Farley Osgood...... 


A New Type of Insulator for High-Tension Transmission Lines— 
By PeaMivclewlet tem, (llusixdied, ear ae ie ea eee ee 


Some New Methods in High-Tension Line Construction—By H. W. 
Buck. |» Ullusirateds) srg s daeceiae Saha he Se hee EO eee 
Discussion on ‘‘ A New Type of Insulator for High-Tension 
Transmission Lines,’ and ‘‘Some New Methods in High- 
Tension Line Construction,” by J. B. Whitehead, Ralph D. 
Mershon, Ralph W. Pope, F. B. H. Paine, Chas. P. Steinmetz. . 

The Transmission Plant of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario 
Power Company—By Ralph D: Mershon. (Jllustrated.)..... 
Discussion by E. J. Berg, Ralph D. Mershon, J. W. Fraser, 
F230. Paine tiiiges. tot ato, Sonat Cty noe eas ay ee eae 


Location of Broken Insulators and other Transmission Line Troub- 
les bya. CaoNicholsone (LUasirared.) ae wae caer) ae ee 
Discussion by L. T. Robinson, Ralph D. Mershon, F. B. H. 

TAIT GSS agate dca, tee sb glete ah cyernemny eee 2h one A ee Oe tee ae 
Switchboard Practice for Voltages of 60,000 and Upwards—By 
mtephiem Ot Hayes. (llaserareda), a anes eee ee ee 
General Discussion on High-Tension Transmission papers 

by P. M. Lincoln, F. B. H. Paine, D. B. Rushmore, H. W. 
Buck, J. B. Taylor, William McClellan, W. N. Smith, L. C. 
Nicholson, Stephen Q. Hayes, J. H. Finney, F. G. Baum, 
Ralph Dis MershOtinastnts oxic coke ats. Cea a ce ee naar Se eee 
Deflocculated Graphite—By Edward G. Acheson................. 


Single-Phase versus Three-Phase Generation for Single-Phase 
Railways—By A. H. Armstrong. (Jllustrated.)............. 
Discussion by P. M. Lincoln, Henry G. Stott, V. Karapetoff, 

John B. Taylor, William McClellan, Chas. P. Steinmetz, A. H. 
ATEOSUTON Geers a haeMon tee halen’ ci ack el kee ad ane ee 


The Choice of Frequency for Single-Phase Alternating-Current Rail- 
way Motors—By A. H. Armstrong. (Jllustrated.).......... 


Twenty-Five versus 15 Cycles for Heavy Railways—By N. W. 
Storer ij 


Commutating-Pole Direct-Current Railway Motors—By E. H. 
Andersdns i llestrated. jd vy locke Ne ae ee ee 
Discussion by Gano Dunn, J. C. Lincoln, E. H. Anderson, 

We WN, SONU stack Nia Wann, cel, 9s sol en RRO en 


Proposed Code of Ethics ; 


Discussion by Schuyler S. Wheeler, William McClellan, 
Henry G. Stott, H. W. Buck, Charles F. Scott, Samuel Sheldon. 


The Attitude of the Techincal School Toward the Profession of 
Electrical Engineering—By Henry H. Norris. (Lllustrated.).. . 


1221 


1239 


1394 


1407 


1418 
1421 


1426 


1429 


vil 
On the Concentric Method of Teaching Electrical Engineering — 


Toward the Profession of Electrical Engineering ’’ and ‘‘ On 
the Concentric Method of Teaching Electrical Engineering,”’ 
by V. Karapetoff, F. B. Crocker, Gano Dunn, William Esty, 
G. W. Patterson, Lester W. Gill, L. D. Nordstrum, Charles F. 
SC Chatnh| fol [SMC ia icc ate + cae vO Re i a cr 


Fractional Pitch Windings for Induction Motors—By C. A. Adams, 
WK. Cabot, and G: AU Irving, Jr.) (Illusirated.)...,.....¢: 
Zigzag Leakage of Induction Motors—By R. E. Hellmund. 
UES ROTe.) eae trek yee een aN, ene ea eta ame eye se 
Discussion on ‘‘ Fractional Pitch Windings for Induction 
Motors,” and “ Zigzag Leakage of Induction Motors,” by J. C. 
Lincoln, Chas. P. Steinmetz, B. T. McCormick, Comfort A. 

ENG asm ee Ore CIA StOri ss: aren ets vente Wt na Lies ens Os 
The Vector Diagram of the Compensated Single-Phase Alternating- 
Current Motor—By W. I. Slichter. (Jllustrated.)............ 
DISCUSSION ED yeh ArapeLOlue. jr thes ee mray yen a)-eatr ee ave 
Track-Circuit Signaling on Electrified Roads—By L. Frederic 
lekencenugl, CUM nerttele)\ ils ee Ak eh eh Gk ont Seah Reng Ree enn 
Discussion by Charles F. Scott, Henry G. Stott, Charles A. 
erkainic wl mE eELOWATt clesras ssi vee ot wee a el eee Te eA 
Some Power Transmission Economics—By Frank G. Baum. 
(AES OR TEIN i NSE Bhs ea PER, PO cM Ecos COTE 
Discussion by Chas. P. Steinmetz, F. B. H. Paine!....... 
Single-Phase High-Tension Power Transmission—By E. J. Young. 
(SUDISUMON AGM se 6 tad 56 2.68 Cette CR Oa eee By etd Meier a Sy 
Discussion by Chas. P. Steinmetz, E. H. Schwarz, C.-T. 
Watlimsaris Cult eldita oy Ghre teem eb eee: 1s cet dncceteranis are ks 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, OCTOBER 11, 1907. 


The Grounded Neutral, With and Without Series Resistance, in 
High-Tension Systems—By Paul M. Lincoln. (Lllustrated.) 

The Grounded Neutral—By F. G. Clark. (dllustrated.).......... 

Experience with a Grounded Neutral on the High-Tension System 

of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company—By George I. 

Elvi CoMmmne (LUI SEL CLCC aN eee eRe, ck telet TT te a easter ey eel alt 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Grounded Neutral.” by Peter Junkers- 

feld, Philip Torchio, N. J. Neall, John B. Taylor, Carl Schwartz, 

C. W. Stone, F. B. H. Paine, Chas. F. Stott, Paul M. Lincoln 

George I. Rhodes, Chas. P. Steinmetz, Frank G. Baum, O. S. 

eon em) Ge Ox COreen Ltn Od ese ye, 2b fic an Medel tes tots akdisrene s Custos 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 8, 1907. 


Comparative Performance of Steam and Electric Locomotives— 
By Albert H. Armstrong. (Jllustrated.).......... COTO cat Se 
Discussion by William J. Wilgus, Cary T. Hutchinson, W.S. 
Murray, William McClellan, C. L. de Muralt, W. N. Smith, 
Gliese ROLeiMimelZ Ns Ele Ati StrOne 4: tees piesa there clin se ssysstes 


MEETING AT ITHACA, DECEMBER 6, 1907. 


Practical Aspects of Steam Railroad Electrification—By W. N. 
SH Lte ll ee ee Man PE Toner tee ec Meats taiic, WA ty sue Totiedenitls a "ot slawers. acy 


1441 


1643 


Vili 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, DECEMBER 13, 1907. 


The Ratio of Heating Surface to Grate Surface as a Factor in Power 
Plant Design—By Walter S. Finlay, Jr. (Jllustrated.).. 
Discussion by Chas. E. Lucke, W. F. Wells, Walter T. Ray, 
Henry iSecletss W.L. Abbott, A. Bement, F. V. Henshaw, 
W.S. Finlay, Jr., A. A. Cary, J. P. Sparrow, J. E. Moultrop. . 
An Exhaust Steam Turbine Plant—By Henry H. Wait. (Jilus- 
tte) = PSIG a As Big nes lekaaee ote age Oe One ee 
Discussion by Francis Hodgkinson, J. R. Bibbins......... 
A New CO, Recorder—By C. O Mailloux. (Illustrated.).. a 
Discussion by AVA Adler ic. oo Sato5 eek ee 


APPENDIX 


Proposed, CodetofvEthics=— Revised a.) 2e ree tee 
Standardization Rules of the A.I.E.E....... lchevetey creaky Ae eters ae 
History of the Standardization Rules.......................... 


1709 


1720 


1739 
1764 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Co:zvention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engia 
neers. Nragara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I. E. E. 


THE PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 


PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS 


BY SAMUEL SHELDON 


_ Introductory. The physical properties of electrons form the 
basis of electrical engineering, and a thorough understanding 
of them is essential for successful investigation in some depart- 
ments of research. No specific treatment of the subject has 
appeared in the printed publications of the Institute. It is | 
therefore hoped that what follows will be of service to the” 
membership. No attempt has been made to treat of the con- 
duction of electricity through gases, of the phenomena of radio- | 
activity, or of electrolytic conduction, in all of which the — 
electron plays an important part. 

The Electron. Electrons, which are called cise by 
some physicists, are the smallest particles of matter that have 
been isolated. They are considered by some (Larmor) to be 
constituted of ether. Their shape is unknown, but it is fre- 
quently assumed as spherical. At ordinary velocities the mass 
of an electron is 6.3 X 10-* grams; at rest, its mass may be zero; 
and at velocities approaching closely to that of light it becomes 
nearly infinite. Each electron carries an invariable negative 
electric charge of 1.1 10°® [=e] coulombs, = 1.1 10° [=e] 
electromagnetic units, = 3.4 10° [=e,] electrostatic units. 
Some writers use the term to designate particles carrying posi- 
tive charges and having other eoPenne Such use is not 
common nor desirable. 

Electrons in a free condition are present in metallic conductors, 
in gases, especially at low pressures, and to a limited degree 


in ordinary solid dielectrics. They are not present in free 
937 


938 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


ether or space. Combined with other electrons and with an 
unknown something or condition, that gives under certain 
conditions evidences of positive electrification, electrons are 
present in all matter. Their properties are in nowise dependent 
upon the properties of the matter with which they are asso- 
ciated, and they are considered to be indestructible by any 
agent within the command of man. Every electron is in some 
manner entangled with the luminiferous ether. 

The ether is a fluid plenum or continuum, endowed with the 
properties of inertia and rotational elasticity, and is the medium 
through which all forces are exerted. It fills all space between 
electrons and the bounds of the universe; it is supposed by 


INN 
Log 


Stationary. Moving to the left. 
Fic. 1.—Distribution of electric flux from an electron. 


some to penetrate the electrons, and (Lorentz) remains stag- 
nant during the passage of electrons through it. 

Each electron, when isolated and at rest, produces at every 
point in the ether an elementary electrostatic field, corre- 
sponding in direction and intensity to its charge. All electro- 
static fields are due to the resultant superpositions of such ele- 
mentary fields. The force exerted upon an electron in a field 
of intensity E, produced by a plurality of electrons, is Ee, dynes, 
both quantities being expressed in electrostatic units. An 
electron moving with uniform velocity in a straight line at a 
velocity v cm/sec produces at every point both an electric field 
and a magnetic field, and carries them with it. If the motion 
be in the direction of the Z axis of codrdinates, and the velocity 
be small as compared with that of the propagation of ether 


i907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 939 


disturbances, at a point whose codrdinates are x, y, z, the elec- 
tric field will be radially directed, and have a magnitude E£, in 
electrostatic units, the same as when at rest. With the elec- 
tron at the origin and with a medium of unit permeability, the 
equation for EF is 


nS 1 


(ees 
B= 


(1) 


and the intensity components a, 8, y, of the magnetic field 
parallel to the X, Y, and Z axes, respectively, are given by the 
equations;! 


rs tA aD in alecg 

a Cy U GP +9? +24)” 

paca torte Nits (2) 
AR CO e) 

x = 0 


For large velocities, the velocity of light being ¢ cm/sec, 


es C ( xr +4? +2? \3 


E = — ——_ 
4z(c —e-)4 { iC 3 
(#t9+ some) | 


Cm CU 


See Cay ree G Eee 
OT OF Cty + oS 2) (3) 


cu 


Cre U x 


UGE ER aA 


C— vu" 
Siete 
An electron, with its charge e,, moving with uniform ve- 
locity v cm/sec at an angle @ to the direction of a magnetic 
field of intensity H, is acted upon by the field with a force 
whose magnitude is 


F = Hé,,vsin 6 dynes, (4) 


1. Heaviside, Phil. Mag., p. 324, April, 1889; J. J. Thomson, Cond. of 
Elect. Through Gases, p. 531. 


940 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS {June 25 


If an electron, moving with a velocity small compared with 
c cm./sec. that of light, suffer a change, either in the magnitude 
of its velocity or in its direction, a radiation of energy between 
it and the surrounding ether will take place whose magnitude is? 


Can a? 


J = 4 erg/sec (5) 


c 


where a is the acceleration in cm/sec? 

Charge of the Electron. J. J. Thomson? and others have de- 
termined the magnitude of the charge carried by a negative 
gaseous ion, which is the same as that carried by an electron. 
The method employed for measuring the charge depends upon 
the discovery! that if a dust-free ionized gas, saturated with 
water vapor, be adiabatically expanded so that the ultimate 
volume bears to the initial volume a ratio of 1.25, droplets of 
water will form about the negative ions, but condensation will 
not occur around the positive ions until this ratio reaches the 
value 1.31.-when droplets will form about both ions. Using an 
expansion of ratio 1.25, the charge on a negative ion can be 
found from a determination of the number of droplets and of the 
total charge on all the droplets. The number of dropletsis ob- 
tained from a determination of the size of each droplet and the 
weight of allof them. The total weight can be obtained from 
the known properties of gases that are saturated with water 
vapor. The size of the droplets can be obtained from the rate at 
which the cloud, that they form in the enclosing receiver, 
settles. According to Stokes’ law, the terminal velocity u cm/sec 
of a sphere of radius r cm and excess of density d, falling through 
a gas of which the coefficient of viscosity is y, is expressed 
by the equation 


2 dgr 
uUu= 9 7 ’ 
whence te qe 
emN 2 oid! (6) 


a a 
* Larmor;—ASther and-Matter, p. 227; Phil. Mag., Dec., 1897, p. 512. 
$J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag., Dec., 1898, Dec., 1899. ‘ 
‘C. T. R. Wilson, Phil. Trans., A., 1897, p. 265. 


1907) SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 941 


g cm/sec? being the acceleration due to gravity. From observa- 
tion of u and a determination of 7 the value of r is obtained. 

The droplets upon falling are allowed to collect in an insulated 
receptacle connected with an electrometer. H. A. Wilson? 
checked the determination of the size of the droplets by observ- 
ing their rate of movement in a strong electric field arranged to 
act against or with gravity. 

The total charge was determined by Thomson by impressing 
- a small potential difference v volts upon two parallel horizontal 
-electrodes so placed as to include between them all the ionized’ 
gas, and by measuring the current-density J ampere/cm? which 
flowed through the gas. Let N = total number of ions per 
cubic cm, positive as well as negative, e = charge on each ion 
in coulombs, “’ = sum of velocities under a gradient of one 
volt/cm, of positive and negative ions (determined by a special 
method), and / the distance between the electrodes, then the 
charge on each ion is 


e= coulombs, (7) 


1% 
Nu V 


Thomson’s latest value for e, is 3.4 107°, using an expansion 
ratio of 1.31 and thereby obtaining the total number of positive 
and negative ions. 

Mass of the Electron. Many determinations of the ratio of 
the charge on an electron to its mass m have been made, from 
which, knowing the charge, the mass can be obtained. One 
method, used by Thomson, was to pass a stream of electrons, 
projected from a cathode in a highly exhausted tube, through a 
magnetic field of uniform intensity H and perpendicular in 
direction to the path of the electrons. Ifthe electrons be moving 
with a velocity v cm/sec, the field will exert a force e,, v H dynes 
upon them, and they will move in a circular path whose radius 
can be determined from the observed deflection of the stream; 
and has a value, as in any case of centripetal acceleration, of 


5H]. A. Wilson, Phil. Mag., April, 1903. 


Ne 
i) 


4 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


(atgen leh 


whence | m= grams. (8) 


To obtain v the electrons must simultaneously be subjected to 
the influence of an electric field of intensity E in electrostatic 
units, whose direction is perpendicular to the lines of force of 
the magnetic field and also to the original path of the electrons. 
By adjusting the intensity and sign of the electric field until 
the force it exerts upon each electron, Ee;, is equal and op- 
posite to that exerted by the magnetic field, it follows that 


Ee, = H ey B, (9) 
we Pee 
or Tees Ps 


TiC ier 


and a ‘e grams. (10) 


Another method of obtaining an expression for v, involving 
m and measurable quantities, used by Thomson, was to allow 
the electrons to bombard the face of a thermopile whose rate 
of increase of temperature could be determined from the rate 
of increase of the thermoelectromotive force. If the face of 
the thermopile be bombarded by N electrons per second, moving 
with a velocity v cm/sec, heat will be communicated to it at 
such a rate dk/dt that 


K = dk/dt = 4N mv’ (11) 


If the charges of the electrons be allowed to pass to an insulated 
conducting system connected with an electrometer, the rate 
of increase of negative charge can be obtained, and is 


= de/dt = Ne. 


Therefore | v= 


(12) 


and Mn (13) 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 943 


Another method of obtaining an expression for v, used by 
Kaafmann® and by Simon,’ is based upon the assumption that 
all the kinetic energy of the electrons is represented by the 
energy that would be required to transfer their charges between 
two points having a difference of potential V equal to that ex- 
isting between the cathode and the anode of the containing tube. 


In this case t$Numv=VNe,. (14) 


and substituting the value of v in (8), 


rer? 
Sanyo (15) 
This method gives too. large values because it does not take 
account of the energy lost in collisions, and that requized to 
detach the electron from the cathode. 

Many other methods of determining m have been employed; 
all yielding values of the same order of magnitude, but differing 
considerably from one another. The first determination of the 
ratio @,,/m was made by Zeeman in connection with his ex- 
pe1iments on the influence of the magnetic field upon the spectra 
of gases. The values obtained by various methods, and upon 
electrons obtained in various ways are given in the following 
table* from Lorentz: 


Method. 2m 10-7 u/c 
m 

CCA YE LOC Grrr, sea teve) oe afore) lapels pt a yeigelicjny's whee ee io 1.6 to 3 
Rotation of plane of polarized light............ 0.9 to 1.8 
Grp Ocdeetanss (SIT OM) ie oivys sce isis abaleie.s seve. s0 1.86 0.1 to 0.3 
Cathode rays (other observers). 0. 5.06 - sees os 0.7 to 1.4 
Wilicamutoletara VS OMI ZING tes nulls ec a ece 6 s'n suet as 2 Oth 
Ree DAYS Srey Tne) i Wises, teers 0 wis ress Small. 


The differences between the values obtained are probably 
due to some of the electrons being loaded with matter, and to 
the various velocities with which they were moving. 

The influence of velocity upon mass has been determined 


6 Kaufmann, Wied. Ann., 61, p. 544; 62, p. 596; 65, p. 431. 
7Simon, Wied. Ann., 69, p. 589. 
8 Lorentz, Electrotechnische Zeits., June 15, 1905, p. 558, 


944 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


by Kaufmann in the case of electrons ejected from radium 
preparations in the form of @ rays. 

Suppose a charged electron to be moving in a curved path, 
and to be accclerating both tangentially and radially. Let 
the tangential acceleration be a, and the radial be a,. Inas- 
much as a moving electron produces a magnetic field, whose 
lines are circular and lie in a plane perpendicular to the direc- 
tion of motion and whose intensity at any point is proportional 
to the velocity of the electron, the acceleration must be accom- 
panicd by an increasing strength of field. As this increase 
requires that work be performed upon the ether, part of the 
force which causes the accelcration must be used in performing 
this work. 

Let m, and m, represent two coefficients, which, when multi- 
plied, respectively, by the accelerations a, and a,, give the 
forces required to perform this work represented by the in- 
creasing intensity of the two components of the magnetic 
field. Then, if m, be the mass as ordinarily understood, of the 
electron, the tangential and radial components of the force, re- 
spectively, will be 


ht 


ir = a, (m,+m,) 

The coefficients m, and m, appear, therefore, to represent, re- 
spectively, longitudinal and transverse electromagnetic masses 
of the electrons, which it is assumed have also a true mass Mp. 
Now m, and m, are not constant, but depend upon the ve- 
locity of the electron, as shown in equations (3); (3) and-€5); 
For small velocities, as compared with that of light, if the elec- 
tron be assumed as spherical of radius R em. and with its charge 


Cm Spread uniformly over its surface, m, and m, each have the 
value ? 


a, (my +m) 


dynes (16) 


Cn, 

mM, = ™M, = 3 as (17) 

For greater velocities these values increase, until at the 
velocity of light they become infinite. Using analytical results 
obtained by Abraham, Kaufmann concludes from his experi- 
ments upon the deflection of @ rays that, within the limits of 
experimental errors, (m,+m,) varies with the velocity as m, 
should, and therefore m, = 0, that is, a stationary electron has 


®Thomson, Recent Researches :n El, and Mag. 1893, p. 21. 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 945 


no mass whatsoever, and all the mass of a moving electron is 
due to its entanglement with the ether. The values determined 
by Kaufmann and the percentage difference from theoretical 
values based upon the assumption m, = 0 are given in the 
following table:!° 


u/c m,/m Observed Per cent. variation from theoretical 
Small ie — 
0.732 1.34 —1.5 
0.752 1.37 -0.9 
ORG 1.42 —0.6 
0.801 1.47 +0.5 
0.830 1.545 +0.5 
0.860 1.65 0. 
_0.883 1.73 . +2.8 
0.933 2.05 —7.8 (?) 
0.949 2.145 -—1.2 
0.963 2°42 +0.4 


The following curve shows the relation which exists between 


10 


3|2 


Grams OSG 0dr Woe 06 EOT 08 0.0 © 10 
: 7) 


a 
Fic. 2. 


the mass of an electron, expressed in terms of its mass at low 
speeds, and its velocity expressed in terms of that of light. 


10 Rutherford, Radio-Activity, p. 111. 


946 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


The mass at small velocities is 6.3 10-°* grams. Ata veloc- 
ity equal to that of light, the magnetic flux surrounding an 
electron in a plane perpendicular to its path and passing through 
it, should become infinite; this follows from the substitution 
of v=¢ and z=0 in equations (3). The electron thereby would 
acquire an infinite self-inductance. Consequently, an infinite 
force would need to be exerted upon it in order to produce a 
finite acceleration. The mass of the electron, therefore, at this 
hypothetical velocity would be infinitely large. 

Size of the Electron. If it be assumed that the electron is 
spherical in shape, then, knowing its charge e,, and its apparent 
mass at low speeds m,, its radius R can be obtained from 
equation (17) 

e 
R=% —“=1310 cm (18) 
my, 


which is much smaller than the diameter of atoms. Lorentz 
has been led to conclude, from the consideration of various 
phenomena appearing in moving systems of different kinds, 
that the electron is spherical when at rest, ellipsoidal at inter- 
mediate speeds, and a flat disc at the speed of light. Upon 
this assumption he obtains results, after a severe and com- 
plicated mathematical analysis, that are in accord with Kauf- 
mann’s experimental results, give larger masses for the same 
speed than those obtained by Abraham, give a mass of zero at 
rest, and are consistent with equation (17). 

The Atom. On the supposition that the atom consists of a 
_sphere of uniform positive electrification in which are contained 
a number of moving electrons.. Thomson," in 1904, endeavored 
to determine how electrons would arrange themselves in various 
atoms, and what properties would thereby be conferred upon 
the latter. Mathematical difficulties prevented a general solu- 
tion for a spherical arrangement, but a solution for arrange- 
ments in rings was obtained. which has, by analogy, been ap- 
plicd to the spherical arrangement. 

Aceording to these results, it has been assumed that the 
atom consists of negatively charged electrons uniformly dis- 
tributed vwver concentric spheres as a result of their mutual 
repulsion, and enclosed in a sphere of uniform pesitive electri- 
fication of such intensity that the electric field that would be 


"J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag., March, 1904, p. 237. 


1907} SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 947 


produced outside the atom by the charges on the electrons is 
nullified. 

Examination of the distribution necessary for equilibrium 
of such aggregates consisting of consecutive numbers of elec- 
trons, reveals the following facts: 

1. The distribution of one aggregate may differ from that 
of another in having a greater number of electrons distributed 
upon one or more additional concentric shells. The first ag- 
gregate has as a nucleus the identical distribution of the second. 

2. The equilibrium of the distributions of some aggregates 
may be very stable, while that of others is less so. 

3. Some less stable aggregates will become more stable if 
one or a few electrons be added to it, thereby giving the atom 
which it represents a negative resultant charge. 

4. Some less stable aggregates will become more stable if 
one or a few electrons be taken away from it, thereby giving 
the atom which it represents a positive resultant charge. 

Assuming the atoms of the various chemical elements to be 
thus constituted, the equilibrium requirements will explain 
their physical and chemical differences and similarities. The 
different aggregates indicated in (1) would yield atoms of 
similar qualities, but different atomic weights, as lithium, 
sodium, and potassium. If an atom, consisting of an aggregate 
whose equilibrium would be rendered more stable by the losing 
of one electron, should be brought up to an atom requiring 
for stability an additional electron, a transfer of one electron 
would account for known facts. The first atom would after- 
wards have a resultant positive charge. The second atom would 
-have a resultant negative charge, and the two would attract 
each other. The first atom would correspond to an electro- 
positive atom, like that of sodium, and the second atom would 
‘be electro-negative like chlorine. After the change and result- 
ing attraction, a molecule of sodium chloride is formed. Chem- 
ical affinity is thus considered to be due to electric attractions. 

The number of electrons in an atom may vary from time to 
time, and the atom may therefore have a positive or negative 
electrification or may be neutral. The combination of two or 
more atoms, that are held together by electric attractions re- 
sulting frona differences in the sign of their electrifications, con- 
stitute a molecule. The atoms may be of the same or different 
chemical elements. 

If stable equilibrium is obtained by the loss of one and only 


948 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS _ [June 25 


one electron, the aggregate gives an atom that is univalent and 
electro-positive; if a single additional electron is required for 
stability the atom is univalent and electro-negative. The re- 
quirement of a loss or gain of two, three, or four electrons for 
complete stability characterizes the atoms as divalent, trivalent, 
and quadrivalent respectively. 

More complex molecules, as for instance the various oxides 
of lead, result in some cases in an incomplete stability of the 
component atomic aggregates. 

The electrons in the atom are supposed to be moving continu- 
ously in orbits, subject to displacement and distortion under 
certain circumstances. The large number of electrons and their 
entanglement with the ether has been offered as an explanation 
of the spectra characteristic of different substances, which are 
in some cases very complex. 

Some aggregates are stable when the electrons move in their 
orbits with an angular velocity greater than a certain value 
and they become unstable when the velocity falls below this 
value. Electron velocities decrease very slowly as a result of 
the loss of energy which they radiate. When, however, the 
critical velocity is reached, an entirely new distribution may 
take place, and may be accompanied by ejection of some elec- 
trons from the atom. This is possibly what takes place in the - 
case of radium. 

As a consequence of the results obtained by Thomson, in 
1904, concerning the structure of the atom, many have con- 
cluded that an atom of hydrogen contains over a thousand 
electrons and that its mass is equal to the sum of the masses 
of the electrons. It, therefore, has no true mass, but mercly 
an electromagnetic mass. They have also concluded that atoms 
of other atomic weights contain a proportionally larger number 
of electrons. Such an atomic structure would satisfactorily 
explain differences in the atomic weights and might lead to 
some conclusions explanatory of characteristic spectral com- 
plexities. Thomson, however, has more recently" concluded 
from experiments upon the dispersion of light in gases, upon 
the scattering of Réntgen radiation in gases, and upon the ab- 
sorption of @ rays from radium compounds that ‘‘ the number 
of corpuscles (electrons) is not greatly different from their 
atomic weight.” He finds from the dispersion due to hydrogen 
SS 


” Thomson, Phil. Mag., Vol. 7, No. 39, p. 237-265, March, 1904. 
13 Phil. Mag., p. 769, May, 1906. 


1907] - SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS | 949 


that a hydrogen atom contains not far from one electron and 
that the mass of the carrier of positive electrical chaive is large. 
compared with that of the electron. From the scattering of 
Rontgen radiation in air he calculates that there are 25 electrons 
in a molecule of air. 

The Ion. An important part is played in the phenomena of 
electrophysics by atomic aggregates of electrons that exhibit an 
external electrical field. When an aggregate or system of ag- 
gregates with an excess of positive or negative electrification 
is subjected to the influence of an auxiliary electric field, it 
tends to move in the same or opposite direction to that of the 
lines of force of this auxiliary field, according to the sign of its. 
excess of electrification. It may then be termed an ion, posi- 
tive or negative according to the sign of its excess of electrifica- 
tion. In the various physical states of matter are present the 
following: 

NEGATIVE Ions 

1. Isolated and free electrons. 

2. One or more electrons acting as a nucleus for a cluster 
of molecules, the cluster roughly estimated, in some cases, as 
containing 30 molecules. 

3. Atoms of electro-negative elements, the instability of whose 
aggregate has been reduced by the addition of one or more 
electrons. 

Positive Ions 

1. Atoms of electro-positive elements, the instability of whose 
ageregatc has been reduced by the subtraction of one or more 
electrons. 

2. Molecular clusters from which an electron has been removed. 

Negative ions may or may not be associated with ordinary 
matter. Positive ions are always found associated with it. 

The lines of force of the electric field of an isolated ion are 
directed radially towards it as a center. In a molecule, while 
practically all the lines of force start from its electro-positive 
atoms and terminate upon its electro-negative atoms, thus 
being electiostatically nearly saturated, the field distribution 
is different for different planes passed through its molecular 
center. The molecule does not, therefore, suffer translation 
when placed in an auxiliary electric field, but rotates and orients 
itself. The orientation of a system of molecules produces a a 
polarization of the substance containing as system. 


950: SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS {June 25 


Free electrons exist in gases at pressures under 10 mm. of 
mercury, especially when subjected to ionizing agencies; in 
conducting solids; in the @ rays from radium; and in conducting 
flames. 

Clusters exist in all conducting gases under pressures greater 
than 10 mm. of mercury; sometimes in gases at lower pressures, 
and possibly in liquids and solids. 

Electronized or deelectronized atoms, or both, exist in all 
conducting gases at all pressures; both exist in liquid electro- 
lytes, in solid conductors, and possibly in solid dielectrics. 

The Production of Ions, or Ionization. In all gases at ordi- 
nary atmospheric pressures, spontaneous ionization is continu- 
ally going on. This doubtless results from molecular collisions 
of an intensity much above the average. Recombination of 
positive and negative ions is also continually going on and 
will be discussed later. If an ionized gas of volume V cm? 
be enclosed in a receiver provided with two electrodes connected to 
the terminals of a source of electromotive force, an eiectric current , 
can be made to flow through the gas and circuit. Under the 
influence of the electric field set up between the electrodes, the 
negative ions move towards the anode and the positive ions 
towards the cathode. A negative ion upon reaching the anode 
gives up to it an electron with its charge of 1.1 10-* coulombs. 
The ion thus becomes transformed into an ordinary atom. 
What the anode does with the electron need not concern us 
at this point. In a like manner, the positive ion upon reaching 
the cathode receives from it an electron and itself becomes an 
' ordinary atom. The double exchange is accompanied by what | 
is generally understood as the conduction of 1.1 10-'® coulombs 
through the gas. It is also accompanied by the disappearance 
from the gas of one positive and one negative ion. If an in- 
creased voltage be employed, the velocity of the ions will increase, 
the current or rate of transference or electric quantity will in- 
crease, and the rate of disappearance will increase. The last 
can never be made to exceed the rate of production of ions. 
Therefore, a limiting saturation current is reached, which cannot 
be exceeded even though the voltage impressed upon the elec- 
trodes be increased so long as this increase does not of itself 
produce ionization. Spontaneous ionization of gases at ordinary 
atmospheric pressure will permit the passage of only about 
3.3 1018 amperes per cubic centimetre.’ 


44 Wilson, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc, x; p. 32, 1900; Proc. Roy Soc. 
Ixvisi, p. 151, 1901. 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 951 


Recombination of ions occurs in gases at a rate proportional 
to the square of the number present. If N ions per cm® be 


present at a given time, then the number x present after ¢ sec- 
onds will be 


N . 
ope N at+1 (19) 


where a is a coefficient of recombination, which equals® 1.1 10-° 
and has the same value for hydrogen, carbon dioxide, air, and 
probably other gases. Its value is independent of pressures 
above $ atmospheric, but decreases with decrease of pressures 
below this limit. 

It has been determined by Townsend that an electron, mov- 
ing in a rarefied gas along a free path whose terminal points 
differ in potential from each other by 20 volts, 2.e., 20/300 
electrostatic units, acquires just sufficient energy to ionize a 
molecule with which it comes into collision. The energy re- 
quired for the production of one negative and one positive ion 
from a gas molecule is therefore equal to the product of this . 
potential drop by the charge on the electron, that is, 


a 3.4 10° = 2.3 10-" ergs. 
The velocity v acquired by the electron of mass m just before 
collision, is derived from the equation of energy }mv?=2.3 10-4, 
and is 


AR 1()-12 
v= ene = 2.7 10* cm/sec (20) 


This velocity is very great as compared with the mean molec- 
ular velocity of gases at ordinary temperatures. In weak 
electric fields, the electrons or negative ions, but not the positive 
ions, produce fresh ions by collision. In strong fields, both 
negative and positive ions produce them. 

Salts introduced into the flame of a Bunsen burner are ionized 
and the flame becomes conducting Hot metals ionize the gas 


8 Townsend, Phil. Trans A., 193, p. 129, 1900. 


952 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


in contact with them and eject negative ions from themselves. 
A temperature of 200° cent. is sufficient to produce some ion- 
ization. Platinum!'* at 1500° cent. in a vacuum permits a max- 
imum current towards it, by means of negative electrons which 
it throws off, amounting to one milliampere per square centi- 
metre. Heated carbon filaments have been found to supply 
sufficient ions to allow of one ampere per square centimetre of 
surface. 

Gaseous ions are also produced as a result of energy ex- 
pended’ by radioactive substances, as by X-rays, by Lenard 
rays, by ultraviolet light, and likewise by chemical action. 

Metallic Conduction of Electricity. Investications concerring 
the nature of the process of electric conduction in metals have 
led to the conclusion that in the metals are to be found mole- 
cules and atoms of the metallic element, positive ions, and 
free electrons. The molecules and atoms are not free to mizrate 
from one part of the metal to another, but have a limited free- 
dom of movement about a mean position. The clectrons are 
not constrained to any particular part of the metal, but are free 
to move from one part to another, such movement being ac- 
companied, by collisions and changes in the direction of move- 
ment, in a manner similar to that accompanying the movement 
of molecules in a gas, considered from the standpoint of the 
kinetic theory of gases. The positive ions have been supposcd 
by some to change their positions, by others not. The number 
of free electrons per cubic centimetre of metal is very larce, 
being of the order of a billion billions. The mean free path of 
* an electron scarcely exceeds one millionth of a centimietze in 
any case. The number per cubic centimetre and the length 
of free path are different with diferent metals. In an ordinary 
metal at a uniforin absolute temperature of T degrees, all the 
particles of the metal are in motion, collisions are constantly 
occurring, and the directions of the motion are such as result 
from chance. According to the doctrine of the equipar’ ition 
of energy, the mean kinetic energies of the molecules, of the 
atoms, of the positive ions, and of the electrons, are equal to 
each other and dependent upon the absolute temperature. 
Inasmuch as the masses of the electrons are much smailer than 
those of the other particles, the velocities of the clectrons must 
be much greater. 

a a a a 


#©O, W. Richardson, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., xi, p. 286, 1902, 


a“ 
1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 953 


Following Drude, assamea metallic conductor of unit cross- 
section, and length L cm’s., containing N electrons per cubic 
cm. each of mass m and with a charge of e, electrostatic units. 
If a ciference of potential V in electrostatic measure be estab- 
lished between the ends of the conductor, the electrons will be 
subjected to the influence of an electric field of intensity E=V/L 
and, during the interval of time ct between collisions, they will 
be. subjected to a force in the direction of the length of the 
conductor such that 


Col 
dt 


m = Fe, dynes. (21) 


Integrating throughout the time t and evaluating constants, 
wm L= *% ¢, Ei? . (22) 


The electrons, if the difference of potential be maintained, will 
in addition to their original undetermined velocities have a 
velocity component v, in the direction of L such that 


T 
= i ee 2} 
UL 3 es He (23) 


A quantity of electricity will pass per second through a cross- 
.section of the conductor, which constitutes a current Is in 
electrostatic units, such that 


| ‘ cs. 
I, =e,Nu =teeN—E = heeN— var (24) 


The resistance per unit length, that is the resistivity of the 
metal, will, in electrostatic units, be - 


V m 


ee peg 25 
aT ie neh oe 


17 Drude, Trans. Int. El. Cong., 1904, Voi. 1, p. 319. 


x 
9&4 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS {June 25 


The specific electric conductivity will equal the reciprocal of 
the expression or 


a=theeN = (26) 


It is desirable to substitute for + another expression, which 
takes into account the mean velocity, v, of the electron in the 
direction of its path and the average length A of its free path. 
Since vt = A 


A 
4 CHa babe 

g=t4e/N re (27) 
Metallic Conduction of Heat. It is probable that the flow of 
heat in metal under maintained difference of temperature is 
due to the presence of electrons in the metal, they acting as 
carriers and distributors of energy which they possess in the 
kinetic form. According to the kinetic theory of gases, every 
molecule or particle possesses an average kinetic energy / at an 

absolute temperature of T such that 


h=aT, (28) 


where a is a universal constant which has a value of 1.6x 10-"* 
ergs per absolute degree. If metals be ultimately constituted 
as has been assumed, then an electron, when uninfluenced by 
electric or magnetic forces, has the same energy as a gas mole- 
cule at the same temperature. 

From the kinetic theory of gases, an expression for the heat 
conductivity of the metallic conductor, considered above, may 
be obtained. If one end of it be heated, the flow of energy or 
heat Q per second in the direction of its length and across any 
transverse cross-section of the conductor is given’ by the equa- 
tion 

vAN dh 
era TT erg /sec. (29) 


Q 


Substituting the value of h from (28), 


dT 
Q= savin (30) 


The heat conductivity k of the metal in mechanical units, that 
eee Benoa 
Drude, |; carne2l, 


1907] . | SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 955, - 


is, in ergs per square centimetre per absolute degree per centi- 
metre, is obtained by reducing the temperature gradient dT /dL 
to unity. The expression is then 


k=kavin (31) 


It has long been known that with some exceptions the heat 
and electrical conductivities of pure metals, when at proper 
temperatures depending upon the metal, bear a constant ratio 
to each other. This is the law of Wiedemann and Franz. No 
satisfactory explanation for the constancy has been given 
except that which assumes that both electricity and heat are 
conveyed by electrons, the one under the infiuence of electro- 
motive force and the other under the influence of thermomotive 
force. Dividing (31) by (27) and substituting 2 a T for mv? 


k a ean Ve 
<-5(£)7 (32) 

The following table of Jaeger and Disselhorst!® gives the 
values of k/o at 18° cent., at 100° cent., and the ratio of the 
latter to the former. In this table is also given the number | 
of electrons N per cubic centimetre, calculated by Drude”® from 
data concerning the optical behavior of metals, and the mean 
length A of their free path. 


k/o (100°) 
Metal k/o 1-8 (18°)|k/a 10-8(100°)| —————_|V 10-22|4 10° cm 
k/o (18°) 
Aluminum.... 636 844 1.32 14. 0.2 
Coppers. i): 665 862 1g 4.09] 1.1 
Silvery soe es 686 881 L28 6.35) 0.9 
Geld AeA». 72 925 1.27 4.36] 0.9 
Nic ikelsemn. =) cs 699 906 eres 9.21} 0.08 
WATIGAE Apr St ets 672 8607 1.29 18.4 0.08 
Cadmium..... 706 905 ies 11.9 0.1 
ead sen. 715 935 ih oil alah 0.034 
Tete ook eae ae 735 55) 1.26 14.3 0.05 
Platinum. ..... : (4533 1013 1.35 13.65} 0.06 
Palladium.... 754 1017 NSS) 
I HOS0 oe NRCC 802 1061 1.32 14.6 0.05 
iste. ss 2. 962 1077 1.12 10.8 0.007 
Antimony.... 26. 0.006 


i ee ee 
19 Jaeger and Disselhorst, Berliner Berichte, 38, 1899, p. 719. 
2 Drude, 1. c., p, 327. 


956 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF. ELECTRONS {June 25 


That k/a is directly proportional to the absolute temperature 
is clearly indicated by the values given in the fourth column 


of the table. The coefficient a common to gases, would 
give, for the temperature difference here employed, viz., 
100° — 18° = 82°, the value 1.28. 

The specific heats of metals are not so large as might be ex- 
pected with such a large number of free electrons per unit 
volume. 

To meet this difficulty, Thomson” assumes that the electrons 
are not free for a sufficiently long interval to acquire the enerry 
corresponding to a given temperature. They suddenly shoot 
out from one atom into a neighboring one. On this basis, he 
calculates the values of k/o and finds a difference of but about 
12% from Drude’s values. 

Contact Electromotive Force. If two metals, having N, and 
N, freé electrons, respectively, per cubic centimetre, be placed 
in contact with each other, and if N,>N,, and the temperature 
be constant and uniform, then, according to the principles of 
the kinetic theory of gases, more electrons will pass from the 
latter into the former than in a reverse direction. This will 
give a negative charte to the former, and will thereby set up 
an electric field, whose lines of force will be perpendicular to 
the plane of separation; which will tend to reduce the velocity 
of the electrons entering the former and increase the velocity 
of those leaving it. An equilibrium will eventually result 
when as many clectrons pass in one direction as in the other. 

A contact difference of potential, of a value which can be 
predetermined if N, and N, be known, is established across the 
surface of separation. Drude* has derived an expression for 
this contact e.m.f., which at 18° cent. reduces to the form 


E = 0.05 logs a volts (33) 
1 


For other uniform temperatures, the value of E varies directly 
with the temperature expressed in absolute degrees. The 
complete expression for EF is 


*1 Report of Lecture before I. E. E., Electrical Engineering, Feb. 28, 
1907, p. 381. 
#2 Drude, 1. c., p. 323. 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 9¢ 


or 
“J 


= 4 phe N, -8 
dae Bate. T loge N. 10-° volts 34) 


where a@ is the thermodynamic constant, e» the charge of an 
electron in electromagnetic units, and T is the absolute tem- 
perature. 

Seebeck Thermal Electromotive Force. If a circuit be formed 
of two metals connected in series, and if the difference in tem- 
perature between its two junctions be dT absolute degrees, 
then the thermal electromotive force dE sct up as a result, is 
obtained by differentiation of (34) and equals 


i 


sat ow og 2 19-8 
Fats: ; Benen 10-8 volts, (35) 


from which the value of the thermoelectric power can be ob- 
tained. This expression assumcs that N,/N, does not vary 
with TI, concerning which there is as yet not suflicient experi- 
mental evidence. 

Irom equations (34) and (35), an expression is readily ob- 
tained for the rate of absorption or devclopment of heat when 
a current I (amperes) flows in the circuit. This power P, 
which is a measure of the Peltier effect, is expressed as follows: 


4 @ Near a ST 
P=EI=, re OMe OF = LT Tp 10 watts. (36) 


Drude has also obtained an expression for the Thomson effect, 
that is, the development or absorption of heat as the result of 
a current that flows through a homogexcous circuit having 
local temperature differences. 

Electromagnetically Induced Electromotive Fa orce. The gencra- 
tion of clectromotive force as a result of the relative motion 
between a conductor and the flux of a magnetic field is a direct 
consequence of the ethcr entancslement with the electron. A 
force acts directly on each electron whose direction is detc:- 
mined by the directions of the flux and of the motion, and whose 
magnitude depends upon the relative velocity and the flux- 


density. ! 


958 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


The Hall Effect. Consider a rectangular piece of sheet metal 
with a current flowing along it. If the current enter by a 
terminal connected to the iniddle point of one edge of the rec- 
tangle and leave by a terminal connected te the middle point 


{G. 3.—Flow lines of current. 


of the opposite edge, there will be a zero potential difference 
between two points located respectively at the centers of the 
remaining opposite edges. A galvanomcter connected between 
these last two points would give no defection. If now a mag- 
netic flux be passed perpendicularly through the surface of 
the sheet, a current will flow through the galvanometer circuit, 


Fic. 4.—The Hall effect. 


whose magnitude will be directly proportional to the strength 
of the original current and to the flux-density of the magnetic 
field, and whose direction will be reversed if the direction of 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 959 


either the flux or of the original current be reversed. This 
phenomenon is known as the Hall effect. This effect is readily 
explained from the standpoint of the electron theory. 

The electric current may be considered as accompanied by 
a procession of electrons moving in the sheet in a direction 
opposite to that of the current flow. Let the migration 
velocity of the electrons be v cm./sec., the charge of each be ¢y, 
electromagnetic units, and the magnetic flux-density be H, a 
transverse force F will be exerted upon each electron whose 
value will be e,,vH dynes; and in consequence they will be 
forced towards one side of the sheet, and a flow of current through 
the galvanometer circuit will be necessary to maintain equi- 
librium. If no galvanometer circuit be present, a negative 
charge will appear at the side towards which the electrons 
move, and will grow until the transverse electric field which it 
occasions attains such an intensity E, in electromagnetic units, 
as to exert a force ¢,, E dynes upon each of the electrons equal 
in magnitude and opposite in direction to that exerted by the 
magnetic field. Then 


Gey li = Be xo Tel 


Since @, is known and EF and H can readily be obtained by 
experiment, it is possible to obtain the average migration 
velocity v of an electron from the above formula, as 


E 


Macet 


(37) 


Boltzmann calculated v for various metals several years ago. 
The velocities are remarkably small for even very strong cur- 
rents. Lorentz? gives the following values for one ampere 
flowing through a wire of one square millimetre cross-section: 
copper 0.005, nickel 0.2, and bismuth 90 cm./sec. 

Some experimental results obtained in this field are not 
easily explained. The direction of the current in the galvano- 
meter circuit, when an iron sheet is employed,is opposite to 
that which is to be expected. A thorough investigation of 
the Hall effect in ferromagnetic substances may shed some 
light upon the question of the cause of their large permeability. 
Thomson” explains the apparently inconsistent results by the 
etree 


23 Lorentz, l. c., p. 588. 
24 Blectrical Engineering, Feb. 28, ’07. 


960 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


assumption of a gyrostatic action of the molecule which causes 
the electrons to move in a different direction from that of the 
foree exerted upon theni by the magnetic field. 

Solid Dielectrics. Solid dielectrics probably contain some 
free clectrons, although the number per unit volume is small 
compared with that ia metals. To free electrons is due the 
conductivity of solid insulators that remains after surface leak- 
aze has been prevented. Free atomic ions are probably ab- 
sent, since conduction through their mediation woull result 
in a transport of matter with accompanying differences in the 
chemical and physical character of the surface layers of the 
dielectric when kept between conductors having a maintained 


Fic. 5.—Dumb-bell molecule. 


difference of potential. Such transport has not been observed. 
If the atomic ions of a-dielectric are not possessed of freedom 
of migration, the maintenance of a mean position of equilibrium 
mst be due to the attractions and repulsions of unlike and 
like charged particles. If a distinction is to be drawn between 
atomic ions devoid of freedom of migration and molecular 
azv7r-czates of atoms, then the latter are probably also present. © 

Consider a diatomic molecule in a solid dielectric. Al- 
thouch nothing is known of the shape of a molecule, and although 
in the treatment of the kinetic theory of gases it is frequently 
assumed to be spherical, it seems reasonable to assume, from 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 961 


the standpoint of the present discussion, that it is not spherical 
and that it may be shaped somewhat likea dumb-bell withan atom 
at each end connected by a sheaf’ of electrostatic flux lines. 
Such a molecule would behave in an electric field much as would 
a magnetic needle of the same shape in a magnetic field. Both 
would orient themselves, but would not suffer translation if 
the fields were uniform, and the molecule would have an elec- 
tric moment similar to the magnetic moment of the needle. 
But, while the pole distance is rigidly maintained by the steel 
in the needle, this is not the case with the end atoms of the 
dumb-bell molecule. With a sufficiently large electrostatic 
flux-density, the molecule would be ruptured, its oppositely 
charged atoms being forced away from each other by the field. 
The rupturing of an assemblaze of such molecules in a solid 
dielectric would, in such a field, manifest itself as a rupture of 
the dielectric. The molecular-magnet theory* of magnetic in- 
duction in iron, can, by analogy, be directly applied to solid 
dielectrics consisting of an aggregate of such dumb-bell mole- 
cules. The application of an electric field would orient the 
molecules to a greater or less extent, which would be evidenced 
as a residual polarization after the field was removed. Such 
polarization is a common occurrence. The flux due to the 
orientation would be superposed on the ether flux produced 
by the original source of the ficld, the dielectric thus exhibiting 
a larger dielectric constant than the free ether. That the di- 
electric constant of all solids is greater than unity is well known. 
Under the influence of alternating ficlds, the configuration of 
orientation would be different for the same values of increasing 
and decreasing intensities. This would result in a dielectric 
hysteresis of greater or less extent accompanied by an energy 
loss which would be dissipated in heat. This loss in ergs per 
cubic centimetre per cycle G has not only been observed, but 
its magnitude, as dependent upon the material and maximum 
electric flux-density Ejyna,, is expressed by a formula™® similar 
to Steinmetz’s law for iron, the exponent ” of Einar lying be- 
tween 1.5 and 1.95, and corresponding to 1.6 in the Steinmetz 
formula. If a represent a constant dependent upon the char- 


acter of tlie dielectric, 


G= a E” may ergs. (38) 


‘6 Ewing, Magnetic Induction in Iron and Other Metals, p. 382. 
26R. Threlfall, Phys. Rev., 1897, iv, p. 457; v, p. 21. 


962 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


A tendency to dielectric saturation, accompanied by a re- 
duced specific inductive capacity corresponding to the satura- 
tion and reduced permeability in iron under increase of electric 
flux-density, has been observed in the case of crown glass, 
guttapercha, megohmit, and paraffined paper.” 

The lack of rigidity of connection between the atoms of a 
dumb-bell molecule permits vibration of the atoms ahout a 
mean position relative to each other. There is a natural period 
for such vibrations. If now an alternating electric field of 
this natural period be impressed upon the molecule, an inter- 
atomic vibration would be started at the expense of energy sup- 
plied by the field. The natural frequency is very large, of the 
order of those due to light disturbances. The propagation of 
light disturbances is always accompanied by an alternating 
electric field of high frequency. If now light, of such color as 
to have a frequency synchronous with the natural frequency 
of vibration of the atoms of the dumb-bell molecule, be passed 
through a transparent dielectric containing such molecules, its 
velocity therein would be reduced below that which would 
exist for higher or lower frequencies, and a prismatic spectrum, 
produced by passing white light through a prism of such di- 
electric, would therefore show the colors in other than their 
usual order, that is, the prism would cause what is termed 
anomalous dispersion. The natural frequency of vibration of 
quartz molecules is such that radiations of wave-lengths much 
longer than those of red light (A= 56) are refracted by a 
quartz prism more than violet light.“ 

The argument outlined above applies equally well to mole- 
cules of greater atomicities and complexity. It is also appli- 
cable to the negatively charged electrons and positively charged 
remainders of atoms, if it be assumed that these can be separated 
under the action of an electric field. Such an assumption is 
made by J. J. Thomson.” ; 

The Production of Light. Many efforts have been made to 
explain the characteristic spectra of the various chemical ele- 
ments from the standpoint of the electron theory. For many 
reasons, such efforts can hardly be considered as successful, 
as clearly presented by Crew.*® There is as yet too little knowl- 


7 J, A. Fleming, Electric Wave Telegraphy, p. 137. 

*® Rubens and Aschkinass, Wied. Ann., 67, p. 459, 1899. 

*2 J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag., May, 1906. 

8° Henry Crew, Science, N.S., Vol. XXV, No. 627, p. 1-12, Jan. 4, 1907, 


1907) SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 963 


edge concerning the relations which exist between electrons and 
atoms as they occur in the various forms of matter. Further- 
more, hardly anything is known about the positively electrified 
portion of matter or about positive electricity itself. This 
much, however, can be considered as established; that an elec- 
tron with its negative charge e,,, when accelerating a cm/sec.? 
the velocity of propagation of ether disturbances being ccm. /sec., 
radiates energy into space whose value (see equation 5) is ex- 
pressed as 


ee 


= 2.7X10-* a erg/sec (39) 


If by any means the sign of acceleration be changed period- 
ically at a constant frequency having a value lying between 
4x 10" and 8 x 10", then the radiant energy will consist wholly of 
monochromatic light radiation. Change in sign can be obtained 
either by reversing the direction of motion in a rectilinear path 
with accompanying changes in velocity (collision or impact), by 
merely changing the direction of the path (circle) leaving the 
velocity unchanged, or by both. If on the other hand the 
duration of the periods between reversals be variable within 
wide limits, then there will be non-luminous heat radiation, © 
continuous spectrum luminous radiation, and ultraviolet radia- 
tion. In this case only a portion of the energy which is radiated 
is converted into light. 

The acceleration which an electron may assume, varies over 
very wide limits. When it is considered that, within a vacuum 
tube of a few centimetres length, an electron can start from 
rest and attain a velocity of one-tenth that of light, that is, 3 10° 
cm/sec, its acceleration must have been at least 2 10!” cm/sec 
The distribution of voltage in such tubes would indicate that 
its acceleration near the cathode would be many times greater 
’ than this. Assuming it to be five times as great; that is, a? = 
10° cm/sec”, this electron would radiate 2.7 10°“ erg/sec or 
ete OlewraLt, 

Black-Body Radiation. According to the Stefan-Boltzmann® 
law, a black body (one which absorbs all radiations falling on it 
and which neither reflects nor transmits any) at an absolute 


81 Stefan, Ber. d. k. Akad. d. Wiss., 79B., 2 Abth., 1879, p. 391; 
Boltzmann, Wied, Ann., 22, p. 291, 1884, 


964 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS [June 25 


temperature of T degrees, radiates from each square centimetre 
of its surface an amount of energy” 


I 


1:71)104 T“erp/sec (40) 
= 1.71 10-” 7* watt 


j 


This radiation, at sufficiently high temperatures, consists of 
wave disturbances embodying all frequencies that are able to 
stimulate the optic nerves, besides a continuous series of fre- 
quencies in the infra-red and ultraviolet regions. 

The portion, W, of the total radiation per cm’ that is capable 
of stimulating the optic nerves so as to given a sensation of 
light is to be obtained from the equation® 


k ‘ 
‘ i Ee eg =) zy , +) , 
woe Gee P(E) +3 (Bro (E) ren 
-¢(]) a" ort EV 43(F)ir+6 pure on 
P (7 r (7 


erg/sec (41) 


where 4’ =0.000039= wave length at violet end of spectrum in 
cm. 


4’’ =0.000075 = wave length at red end of spectrum in cm. 
C=1.24 10° 
ke =1.4435 


e=2.718=Naperian logarithmic base. 


The visible radiation efficiency at any tempcrature T is therefore 


Lid 
1 


= (42) 


Carbon filaments are generally considered to yield approxi- 
mately black-body radiation. 

The radiated energy is not equally distributed among the 
various frequencies. Planck* has shown that the energy 


%4 FB. Kurlbaum, Wied. Ann., 65, 18y3, p. 740; Drude, ‘Yheory of Optics, 
p. 515. 
83 Mendelhall and Saunders, Astrophys. Journ., 1901, p. 46. 
84 Planck, Verh. d. Deutsch. Phys. Geo., 2, 1900, p. 202; Ber. d. k. 
Akad. d. Wiss., Berlin, 1901, p. 544. : 


1907] SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 965 


radiated per cm’ between wave-lengths 4 and A+dA can be 
represented by the equation 


1 
— 


etre] (48) 


k=Ci 


The physiological characteristics of the normal eye are such 
that for diferent wave-lengths different rates of energy are 
required to be received upon the retina in orcer to procuce the 
same intensity of sensation. Therefore, while values of ¢ 
indicate the stimulative portions of radiation, thcy co not 
indicate the amounts of luminous sensation that thercby mi¢ht 
be produced. Although the sense responsiveness of the cye 
for a given color varies and depends on the incividual, on the 
portion of the retina stimulated, on visual fatizue, and on the 
rapicity of iris response to variations in intensity, an average 
sensation equivalent of IV caa be obtained by making use of 
Abney’s® coefficients of luminosity for the normal cye. With 
wavc-lengths as abscissas, valucs of E are plotted as orcizates. 
The values of / are each multiplied by the luminosity cocfficient 
corresponding to the wave-length and used as ordinates in plot- 
ting a new curve. If the valucs of A be limited to the visible 
spectrum, then the area included between the first curve and 
the axis of abscissas is proportional to W, while the area Z 
between the second curve and the axis is proportional to the 
sensation equivalent. The luminous efficiency of the radiation 
is then 


wh 
ee 44 
1 ; (44) 


_ As the temperature of a black body rises not only does the 
power radiated increase but the predominating frequency rises, 
that is, the wave-length 4,, at which the intensity of raciation 
is the greatest, decreases. At an absolute temperature® T 


Sie 4%) 
——— a aaa 
% Abney, Color Vision, 1895. 
38 Drude, Theory of Optics, 1902, p. 523; Wien. Berl. Ber., 1893, p. 
55; Wied. Ann., 49, 1893, p. 633; 52, 1894, p. 1382. 


966 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS _ [June 25 


The intensity of the radiation at these wave-lengths also increases 
as the fifth power of the absolute temperatures. 

If a black body, for example, a carbon filament, be considered 
as containing free electrons as well as atoms and molecules, then 
as its temperature is raised the mean kinetic energy of each 
electron would be increased. Inasmuch as the geometrical di- 
mensions of the filament are not materially altered by the 
change of temperature, it is reasonable to assume that the length 
of free path is not increased. The increase of energy, 
causing an increase of electron velocities, will result, therefore, 
in an increased frequency of collisions and an increased rate of 
change of velocities. This accounts for the direction of the 
shifting of A,, with rise of temperature, and for the accompanying 
increase of total radiation. Many of the collisions will occur 
oftener than at the preponderating frequency, and others will 
occur less often, which accounts for the character of the dis- 
tribution of radiated energy over a wide range of frequencies. 
The accelerations which accompany collisions of the higher 
frequencies are of necessity greater than in the case of lower 
frequencies. The radiated energy is therefore greater in the 
former case than inthe latter, and the curve of distribution of 
radiated energy over different frequencies is not symmetrical 
but deviates from the curve of probabilities. 

Selective Radiation. No material radiates in accordance with 
the laws of black-body radiation. One of the first conclusions 
of Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory is that good conductors 
of electricity cannot be transparent. Hagen and Rubens*? 
have shown how the absorbing power and the emissive power 
of metals can be calculated from their electrical conductivities. 
Their experimental results for the longer heat-waves are very 
satisfactory. Kirchhoff’s law, according to which the ratio 
between the emission and the absorption for all bodies has the 
same value, being a universal function of the absolute tem- 
perature and of the wave-length, has also been accounted for 
from the standpoint of the electron theory. Lorentz, using 
the expression for the electrical conductivity previously devel- 
oped [see equation (29)] has calculated the value of this function. 
He then compares the amount of energy radiated from a metal 
within the limits of certain long wave-lengths with the ex- 
perimental values obtained by Lummer and others, and finds 
that they are in accord. 


87 Hagen and Rubens, Ann. der Phys., 11, p. 873, 1903. 


1907) SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS 967 


Luminescence. At all temperatures above absolute zero, all 
bodies radiate energy. If the nature of the body be not changed 
by this radiation; that is, if it continues to radiate in the same 
manner, as long as its temperature is maintained constant by 
the addition of heat, the process is termed pure temperature 
radiation. If, on the other hand, the body changes because of 
the radiation, and does not continue indefinitely to yield the 
same radiation although its temperature is kept constant, the 
process is termed luminescence. The cause of some of the 
radiation in the latter case does not lie in the temperature of 
the system but in some other source of energy. According as 
the extra supplied energy accompanies either chemical trans- 
formations, exposure to light, or the passage of electric currents, 

_ the processes are respectively termed chemico-, photo-, and 
electro-luminescence. The total radiation from a body of this 
class is made up of two parts, that due to its temperature and 

that due to the extra energy. If the intensity of radiation of a 
body within any region of wave-lengths is greater than that of 
a black-body at the same temperature, luminescence must 
be present. This is frequently® taken as a criterion for the 
detection of luminescence. The frequencies of luminescent ra- 
diations are more or less restricted, being often evidenced by 
bright-line spectral distributions. The electrons which yield 
these radiations are supposed to vibrate harmonically under 
conditions that are not yet understood. That their movements 
are not governed simply by chance seems to follow from the 
character of the spectra. Although change in the character of 
the material as a consequence of its yielding luminescent radia- 
tion may not be capable of detection by chemical analysis, yet 
the atomic and molecular systems are nevertheless doubtless 
undergoing constant changes due to the loss or gain of electrons. 
The entrance of an electron into a system, or its ejection, must 
without doubt occasion complex harmonic disturbances of 
many or all the electrons in the system. 

If luminescent radiation be confined chiefly to wave-lengths 
of the visible spectrum, the luminous efficiency of the body 
becomes high. Terein rests the economic significance of the 
efforts being made to advance the art of lighting by means of 
vacuum tube and flaming arc lamps. 

A very interesting example of luminescent radiation is that 


38 Drude, Theory of Optics, p. 528. 


968 SHELDON: PROPERTIES OF ELECTRONS _ [June 25 


which is yielded by photogenic bacteria, which are frequently 
found in sea-water and upon meats and fish that have been 
directly or indirectly infected by sea-water. They are the 
sources of light known as the phosphorescence of the sea. Some 
cases of phosphorescence in animals and in plants are explained 
as an infection with them. Gorham® has shown that the light 
which they give is the result of chemical transformations ac- 
companying metabolism inside the cells of their bodies. When 
fed with substances such as asparagin or glycocoll, they are 
able to grow and reproduce but not to give light. In Gorham’s 
summary, occurs the following: 

We therefore conclude that for light production there must be present, 
over and above the requirements for growth, the oxygen of the air, 
sodium or magnesium, and certain organic acids, derived from the de- 
composition of the carbon and nitrogen constituent of the food. 

The chemical energy resulting from the union of the sodium or mag- 
nesium with these organic acids, in the presence of oxygen, or from 


the later combustion of the products of that union, is set free in the 
form of light. 


The brightness of these bacteria considered as sources of 
light is very small. Lode’s*® measurements show an intensity 
of emission of 0.000C9 candles per square meter. This is too 
small to stimulate the color sense. The bacillus lucijer of 
Molisch,** however, is much brightec, gives a continuous spectrum 
in the green, blue, and violet, and is able to stimulate the color 
sense. 

Conclusion. Although much is known concerning the size 
and mass of the electron, its electric and magnetic effects when 
in motion, and its radiation effects during acceleration, little 
more is known concerning its structure than that:® 


It is the intrinsic strain-form alone that constitutes the electron; 
and it is a fundamental postulate that the form can move from one 
portion to another of the stagnant ether somewhat after the manner 
that a knot can slip along a cord. 


® TF. P. Gorham, The Photogenic Bacteria, Doctor’s Thesis, Harvard 
Univ., May 1, 1903. 

4° Lode, Zentralbl. fir. Bakt., I 35, Bd., p. 524. 

“| Molisch, Leuchtende Pflanzen, 1904, p. 133. . 

“2 Larmor, Aither and Matter, 1900, p. 335, 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- . 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Eu- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I, E. B, 


THE HEATING OF COPPER WIRES BY ELECTRIC 
CURRENTS 


BY A. E. KENNELLY AND E. R. SHEPARD 


In August 1889, a report was made by one of the present 
writers’ to the Edison Electric Light Co., on ‘‘ The Heating of 
Conductors by Electric Currents.’ The report was published 
in the minutes of the convention of the Association of Edison 
Illuminating Companies, at Niagara Falls, August, 1889. It 
contained a large number of measurements of the temperature 
elevations of active conductors supported in wooden moulding, 
and in free air, within doors and without. A further report 
was made in 1893? upon the temperature elevations of electric- 
light cables. The research reported in the present paper has 
been undertaken to extend the scope of the above measure- 
ments, and also to increase the precision of the results previously 
obtained. In the measurements of 1889 and 1893, above re- 
ferred to, the temperature-coefficient of resistivity of copper 
wires was taken as 0.388 per cent. per degree centigrade of 
temperature elevation ; whereas it is now taken by the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers as 0.42 per cent. per degree 
centigrade from and at 0° cent. Again, the law of thermal ra- 
diation employed was that of Dulong and Petit;* whereas the 
law of raciation generally adopted at this time is that of Stefan.® 

'The Heating of Conductors by Electric Currents, by A. E. Kennelly, 
The Electrician, Dec. 13th, 1889, Vol. XXIV, p.142; The Electrical World, 
Vol. XIV, No.-21, p;: 836, Nov. 23, 1891. 

2The Carrying Capacity of Electric Cables, Submerged, Buried or Sus- 
pended in Air, by A. E. Kennelly, Minutes of the Ninth Annual Meeting 
Association of Edison Illuminating Companies, 1893, p. 79. 

8Trans. Am. Inst. Elect. Engineers, Vol. XIX, p 1082, June, 1902. 
Standardization Report. 

‘Annals de.Chemie et de Physique, 1817, Vol. VII. 

Wien. Akad. Ber., 1879, LX XIX, pp. 391-428. 

969 


970 . KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 26 


Although these changes in physical data and constants do not 
greatly affect, from an engineering standpoint, the results pre- 
viously obtained; yet it seemed desirable to make a new series 
of measurements® and deduce their results with the aid of the 
most recent data. It is the object of this paper to describe the 
new measurements, so far as they relate to wires in water, soil, or 
wooden moulding, leaving the measurements on wires in air 
to some future occasion. 

Method of Determining Temperature Elevations. The copper 
conductor under test had a length of from 2 to 6 metres (6.56 
to 19.69 feet). Pressure wires were soldered to it near its ends. 
The resistance of the conductor between these pressure wires 
was determined; first, when cool, 7.e., at the temperature of 
the surrounding air, and second after having been heated by 
an electric current of measured strength. The increase in the 
resistance of the conductor enabled its increase in temperature 
‘to be determined by the formula: 


R; = R, (1+ 0.0042 2) ohms (1) 


where R, is the resistance of the conductor at 0° C., and R; its 
resistance at ?° C. 

Method of Measuring the Resistance of the Copper Conductors. 
The resistances of the copper conductors under test were measured 
by a differential galvanometer; 7.e., by connecting one coil of a 
differential galvanometer to the pressure wires on the tested con- 
ductor, and the other coil to the terminal of a german-silver 
constant resistance of determined amount in circuit with the 
tested conductor. Extra resistance was inserted in the circuit 
of the coil of preponderating current until the galvanometer 
deflection was zero, or the two currents differentially balanced. 
Under these conditions, the resistance of the tested conductor 
became known in terms of the constant german-silver resist- 
ance. As the tested conductor increased in temperature, its 
changes of resistance could readily be observed and followed, by 
noting the change in the balancing resistance. 

The electrical connections employed are indicated diagram- 
matically in Fig. 1. A separate motor-driven low-voltage 
direct-current dynamo Y, of 3-kw. capacity (300 amperes at 

®The research was carried on at Pierce Hall, Harvard University, and 


a report thereon formed the subject of a thesis for the degree of A.M. by 


E. R. Shepard, entitled : ‘‘ The Heating of Copper Wires by Electric Cur- 
rents,” 1906, 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 971 


10 volts), was connected by stout leads to the conductor CC, 
under test, in another room, through a grid resistance D of 
german-silver wires and a regulating resistance R. The cur- 
rent strength in the circuit was measured by the Weston am- 
meter A, and adjusted partly by varying the resistance R and 
partly by varying the shunt field rheostat F. The differential 
galvanometer G has one coil connected to pressure wires on. the 
standard grid resistance D, and the other coil to pressure wites 
on the tested conductor CC. An adjustable’ resistanee 7 
was inserted in one or the other of the two galvanometerecir- 
cuits as occasion required, in order to secure a differential 


Fic. 1—Electrical connections in tests 


balance. Switches in the main circuit and in the galvanometer 
circuits have been omitted from the diagram. 

The German-silver Wire Grid. -The grid was made up in 
such a manner as to carry the strongest testing currents used 
with a relatively small rise of temperature, and was made of 
metal having a relativ-ly small temperature-coefficient of re- 
sistivity, so as to maintain a practically constant resistance 
during the tests. It consisted of an open wooden frame about 
2 metres long (6.56 feet) by 1 metre broad (3.28 feet), contain- 
ing 65 parallel wires of german-silver supported freely in air, 
each 0.129 cm. (0.0508 in.) in diameter, and 183 cm. (6 feet) in 


972 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


length. These wires were divided into three permanently con- 
nected groups of 25, 20, and 20 wires respectively, in such a 
manner that the groups could be connected either in series 
or in parallel for different resistances and current-carrying 
capacities. When the three groups were connected in series, 
the total resistance of the grid between pressure wires was 
0.0441 international ohm. When the three groups were con- 
nected in parallel, the resistance of the grid between pressure 
wires was 0.0044 international ohm. Intermediate  series- 
parallel groupings and corresponding resistances were also used 
in some of the tests. 

The resistance of the grid was frequently measured and 
checked. One such check measurement was ordinarily made 
with each successive conductor test. The grid resistance was 
measured by using the same connections as are shown in Fig. 1, 
but with a standard platinoid strip resistance substituted for 
the conductor CC. Two such standard strips were employed, 
with resistances of 0.015125 and 0.03053 international ohms 
respectively. These standard resistances were in their turn 
checked and calibrated by comparison with a standard 0.01 
international ohm loaned by the Jefferson Physical Laboratory. 
All the measurements of resistance stated in this paper are in 
terms of the international ohm, and are ultimately referred 
to this 0.01 ohm standard. 

The Differential Galvanometer. The galvanometer employed 
was of the Edelmann type, having a steel split-bell suspended 
magnet, swinging in a copper well, and two separate coils of silk- 
covered wire placed on opposite sides of the suspended magnet. 
These coils were wound specially for these tests with silk-covered 
copper wire, each coil having a resistance of about 1800 ohms. 
The resistances of the coils, being subject to change with varia- 
tion of room temperature, were frequently measured during 
extended tests. The differential condition was also frequently 
checked. 

The sensitiveness of the galvanometer as used in the tests 
was 0.143 microampere for 1 mm. scale deflection at the range 
used of 140 cm. Referred to a range of 1 metre, this would 
be 0.20 microamperes per mm. scale-reading deflection, or the 
current sent by 1 volt through 5 megohms, including both coils. 

The periodic time of the galvanometer swing was 5.17 seconds. 
The damping ratio of successive opposite elongations was 2.465, 
or the Naperian logarithmic decrement of successive opposite 


1907} HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 973 


elongations 0.9027. Four complete swings, executed in 20.7 
seconds, sufficed to reduce the deflection to 545 part, or, 
for practical purposes, to rest 

When balance is obtained on the differential galvanometer 
G in Fig. 1, we have 


international ohms (2) 
Gp 


where Rp is the resistance of the grid, Gg and G, the resistances 
of the two galvanometer coils respectively, including leads, and 
r the resistance added to the circuit of the conductor CC, 
whose resistance is x ohms. In all the experiments, G and r 
were measured by a B.A.-unit Wheatstone bridge, in B.A. 


Fic. 2—Diagrammatic cross-section of lead-covered insulated wire 


ohms. As, however, only the ratio oe appears in formula 


Cc 
Gp 
(2) this does not affect the evaluation of x in international ohms, 

Theory of the Temperature Elevation of an Active Conductor 
Cooled Entirely by Thermal Conduction. The simplest case of 
the heating of an active electric conductor is that of a uniform 
cylindrical wire carrying a steady direct current, and covered 
with a uniform concentric coating of rubber or other insulator, 
the external surface of which, either with or without a leaden 
sheath, is kept at a uniform known temperature by being im- 
mersed in a tank of running water. 

In Fig. 2, the wire of diameter d cm, is covered by insulating 
material to a total diameter of D cm. The external sheath of 
lead is so good a thermal conductor that, for all practical pur- 
poses its temperature is ¢ C. at all points The imternal wire 


974 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


of copper is likewise so good a thermal conductor that its tem- 
perature at all points is t+0 degrees centigrade. This means 
that, after a sufficiently long application of a direct current 
through the wire to establish a steady thermal condition, there 
is a difference of temperature of 0° C. between the internal and 
external surfaces of the insulating cylinder. 

If we consider one unit length or linear centimetre of the con- 
ductor, the thermal resistance, to the radial flow of heat, offered 
by any cylindrical element of the insulator between the radii 7 
and r+dr centimetres will be 


a thermal ohms (38) 


where a is the thermal resistivity of the insulator at its working 
temperature, and is numerically equal to the thermal resistance 
of a cubic centimetre of the substance between any pair of op- 
posed faces, dr is the thickness of the elementary cylinder, 
and 2 zr the surface area of this cylinder in unit length. The 
total thermal resistance between wire and sheath will be the 
sum of all the resistances of the elementary cylinders between 
the internal diameter d and the external diameter D; or 


o iB) 
R= ae loge > thermal ohms (4) 


in a linear centimetre of the insulator. 

If p; is the electric resistivity of the wire at the initial tem- 
perature #°C., which is also the temperature of the external 
surface, the electric resistance of the wire per linear cm. is 


4 
R, =—4 ohms at. C: - (5) 


and at the temperature finally reached by the wire (¢+6)° C.. 
the resistance is 


4 1 
Rite = Satoh) ohms (6) 


where a is the temperature coefficient of resistivity of the wire 


for the initial temperature ¢ C., and? i 338.141 
‘ e initial temperature 7° C., and’ is equal to 938 sick se 


7The Resistivity Temperature-Coefficient of Copper. Electrical 


World, June 30, 1906. 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 975 


The total flow of heat, or thermal current, passing radially 
through a linear centimetre of the insulator in the steady state, 
with a current of J amperes in the Wire, is 


IS= I? Riso watts percm. (7) 


This thermal energy current follows a law similar to Ohm’s 
aw, or 


0 
JS = = watts percm. (8) 
0 
and by (4) JS = SaaS) watts percm. (9) 
2 Be a 
2 
and by (6) AP oe: (dt+ad) _ Y 
m a? a D 
De eg 
watts percm. (10) 
p 200; log. 
Consequently Pusat ah 2 p d2 degrees C. (11) 
or g =KK P d C 12 
ay egrees C. (12) 


where K is a constant for a conductor of given dimensions, if 
the thermal resistivity o may be taken as constant. We know 
that o may vary with temperature in many substances, but 
- there is evidence in this report to show that it is substantially 
constant in various insulating substances, between the limits of 
0° C. and 100° C. 

Equations (11) and (12) express the relation between the 
final temperature of any wire carrying a continuous current, 
under the conditions of Fig. 2. Equation (12) must apply 
to any uniform wire carrying a continuous current in the steady 
state, no matter how many successive layers of insulator there 
may be, provided only that the heat escapes by conduction, as 
distinguished from radiation and convection, and also provided 
that the thermal resistivities of the successive insulators may 


976 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: {June 25 


be taken as constant within the range of their working tem- 
peratures. Formula (12) applies, therefore, to all buried con- 
tinuous-current cables, and also to insulated wires in water. 
It also applies fairly well to insulated wires in wooden moulding. 
It is the fundamental equation of electric heating of concealed 
wires, carrying continuous currents, from the temperature ?° C. 
of surrounding objects to the final temperature (t+0)° C., when 
the temperature elevation @ does not exceed, say, 100° C. 

The temperature coefficient a varies with the initial tem- 
perature 2° C. 


For an initial temperature t = 12°C. a = 0.004 
comet « “ #= 18°C. a =0.00389 
“« « “ “ t = 25° C. -a = 0.00388 


If we take t = 18°C., as an average initial temperature in 
practice, equation (12) becomes: 


aa0ss? =k PP degrees C. (13) 

This means that the final temperature elevation 6 of a wire 
carrying a continuous current J] amperes, increases somewhat 
more rapidly than the square of the current, and the deviation 
from the square is greater, the greater the temperature eleva- 
tion. This relation may also be rendered evident in a graphical 
way as follows: Logarizing both sides of (13), we have 


log 0 - log (1+0.0039 0) = 2'‘log [+k (14) 


where k = log kK, and is a constant for a given size of wire and 
succession of insulating coatings. 

If we plot log J (Fig. 3) against log 0, we draw the straight 
line ef, making with ex an angle 63° 26’ whose tangent is 2. 
This represents the locus of log #. We then lay off a curved line 
ABCD, such that its distance from the straight line E F is 
everywhere 4 log (1+0.0039 0). By deducting these distances 
from ef, we obtain the final curve abcd, which, by (14), is 
the graph of log @ in relation to log J. Joining the points a 
and d by the broken straight line ad, we find that this is in- 
clined to the ex axis by an angle whose tangent is 2.289; so 
that the final temperature elevations of 10° and 100° C., in 
accordance with (13), represent an increase of temperature in 
the ratio of J?”**, or the exponent of 2.289 for the currents. 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 977 


In other words, judging from these two observations alone, it 
would appear that the temperature increased as the 2.289th 
power of the current. If, however, we consider the points 
a and ¢ on the curve, corresponding to the temperature eleva- 
tions 10° and 50° C. respectively, the dotted straight line ac 
makes with e x an angle whose tangent is 2.19. This represents 
an increase of temperature elevation according to J?*® so far 
as concerns these particular points. 


@ °CENTIGRADE 


Fic. 3—Diagram indicating the graphical relation between 
current and temperature elevation when plotted on 
logarithm paper 


[f then we plot log @ against log Z, in accordance with (13) 
and (14), the graph will be a flat curve commencing at an angle 
tan-12, and bending slowly upward in such a way that, on the 
10°-50° range, @ varies approximately as [??; whereas taking 
the 10°-100° range, @ varies approximately as [?”. The exact 
value of the exponent will depend both on ¢ and on @_ If we 
limit our enquiry to temperature elevations of 50° C., we may 


978 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


expect to find the observations on logarithm paper fall nearly 
on a straight line, making an angle tan* 2.2 with the axis of 
abscissas. If, however, we extend the range of observation 
to @ = 100° C., the mean straight line on logarithm paper will 
be somewhat steeper, and approach the angle tan” 2.3. 


Thus ift = 6°C. 6@«/?°* between 0 10 and 100° C. 
ift = 19° ee 0 oa [2-298 “ a ee “ “ 
ift= ree C 0 ve [2-289 “ epee “ “ 
if ¢ = 25° C. (mes [2-282 “ hee “ “ 


For practical purposes, therefore, with temperature elevations 
averaging about 50°C., we may regard the theoretical graph 
of temperature elevation against current strength on logarithm 
paper as conforming fairly well with a straight line making an 
angle tan“! 2.2, or 65° 33’, with the axis of abscissas, or 


log 6 = 2.2logI+k (15) 
corresponding to 


6 =K I? deg.C. (16) 


Measurements of Temperature Elevation in Rubber-Covered 
Wires. Five sizes of new rubber-covered and braided code wire, 
all from the same factory, were used in these tests, immersed 
in running water. The dimensions of these wires are given in 
the following table: 


TABLE I. 
DIMENSIONS OF RUBBER-COVERED AND BRAIDED CoDE WIRES 


Size of | Diameter of Copper Wire Diameter over Rubber Diameter over Braid 
Wire ; 
A, W. G. cm, Inch fs em. Inch em. Inch 
8 0.3263 0.1285 0.6348 0.25 0.7365 0.290 
10 0.2552 0.1005 0.4952 0.195 0.6223 0.245 
12 0.2032 0 0800 0.4382 0.170 0.5715 0.225 
14 0.1626 0.064 0.3987 0.157 0.482 0.190 
16 0.1296 C051 2895 0.114 0.381 0.150 


A length of about 5 metres of each of the above wires had 
pressure wires soldered to the conductor, and was then immersed 
in running water during the test. The time required to attain 
a practically steady temperature after the application of a con- 
tinuous current was only about 5 minutes under these condi- 
tions. Table II gives the recorded observations in the case 


979 


HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 


1907] 


” 26°09 LSE 0 2° OFT ” 
i 60°F9 | 6622°0 | asst f 
” 69° 9 9L1Z°0 0° 98T » 
” I F9 SPOT O € PEL ” 
” cI 89 F6IT'O L°GET ” 
g 2-821 | | 60FF0"O 
‘NG “m0 O+1y7 zl | saiyororur suryo 
1a}em jo Jeoutl] ‘uio Jed] “uy “wd | “quy pry 
duwiay, jO “Say sjyzem:| Jad atm | prepueys 
1 jemieyy I JO soy jo ‘say 
Ww O17 


‘WO 0¢¢ SAMI M TUASSAUd NIGMIagG GONVISIG “OD o¢ LV MALY ONINNOY NI GaSHaNK] @YIM GadIvug GNV dauaaog-wagany “Dy 


‘Do 


‘OILM JO 
UOTIeATTA 
‘dura 9 


0FLL0°0 0860°T LLP 
70920°0 8&20°T OZPI 
98F20°0 0L¢0°T OLET 
06820°0 CSF0'1 OSEI 
00€20°0 T20°T Z6Z1 
18020°0 “4 00zT 
“stuyo eseorIouy 5 uy q 
“4quyT jo ILM 
OTM orney 0% peppe 
JO “sayy *SaQy 


‘Il AITaVL 


€S8I 9LLT 


a ) 


LV & SOD 
“IATVD) JO ‘say 


os beta 
cP 96 
OF GS 
g¢é ST 
0€ Z 
g 0 
‘due basaacod 
“q43U98119 “q7e4S 
quating uIoI} 
oury, 


—OeeeeeeSSSSSSFEe 


“MV 9T ‘ON 40 SISZ], 


980 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


of the No. 16 wire, and is a fair example of the measurements 
taken collectively. The second column gives the current 
strength steadily applied. The initial balance was obtained by 
a brief application of a current of 3 amperes. A current of 30 
amperes was then applied at the start and the balance again 
observed after 7 minutes. The current was then increased to 
35 amperes for 8 minutes, and so on. 


45 


30 
w 
2 
5 + 
= 25 
a 
eS 
“We 8 
= 20 eres a 
“19 < S 
38 | 3 els : 
217 
& 16 oj § 2] = Ss 
3 15 > 
wl 14 
213 
< 
$12 
a 
Toh 
= 
= 10 at = 
z rr 

9 4 ttt 

8 -| ap 

“ 

| 
6 
(ane 
5 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120 140 160 180 200 


AMPERES 


Fic. 4—Observed temperature e:evations of different sizes of 
code rubber-covered wires in water 


The last column but one gives the thermal resistance of a 
linear centimetre of dielectric and braid. Its mean value is 63.9 
thermal-ohm-cm. 

The temperature elevations 0 in the above table are plotted 
as black circles in Fig. 4 on logarithm paper. The straight line, 
marked No. 16 braided, is drawn through the 30-ampere point 
to make an angle of 65° 33’, or tan“ 2.2, with the axis of ab- 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 981 


scissas. This straight line corresponds, therefore, to formulas 
(15) and (16) derived from the theory already outlined. The 
agreement of the observation points with the theoretical straight 
line is seen to be satisfactory. 

Table III contains all the final temperature elevations 
computed from the measurements made on the samples of wire 
scheduled in Table I, and also contains the corresponding 
thermal resistances in one linear centimetre. The final tem- 
perature elevations are all plotted in Fig. 4 as ordinates, against 
currents as abscissas, to logarithmic scales, the straight lines 
being drawn parallel to each other according to formulas (15). 


TABLE III 
TEMPERATURE ELEVATIONS OF DIFFERENT SIZES OF RUBBER-COVERED WIRES IN WATER 
I II Iil IV Vv 
No. 16 Braided | No. 14 Braided No. 14 Un- No. 12 Braided | No 10 Braided 
t=5° t=5.5° braided t=5° t=4.59 t=4,5° 
ai Gly 8 R 8 R foe 0 g 


Temp.|Thermal |Temp.|Thermal |Temp.|Thermal |Temp.|Thermal |Temp.|Thermal 
Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res, 


7.54 63.15 
10.58 64.31 
63.69 | 7.4 


17.94 | 64.09 
22.61 | 64.27 10.91 | 52.88] 8.8 | 42.93 |. 
16.22 | 53.47 113.3 | 44.31 |11.16 | 59.45 


22.46 53.12 |18.6 44.56 |15.43 59.37 | 7.16 45.8 
30.32 53.17 |25.86 46.15 
23.77 (3) Or a fe i 47.46 


\ 
ge =| 2ae| Bee | 
Be Eee) ESS Current Amp, 
ae 
oo 
00 
ro 


100 35.16 | 61.59 {15.26 | 46.32 
115 ; 20.86 | 46.87 
125 25.13 | 47.03 
Means ‘| 63.90 53.21 44.50 60.13 46.70 


and (16). With the exception of one doubtful observation on 
the No. 14 braided wire, all the points are in satisfactory 
conformity with these parallel straight lines, thus confirming 
the theory already outlined, as expressed in formulas (11), (12), 
(13), and (14). 

A comparison of columns II and III in Table III, or of the 
corresponding lines in Fig. 4, shows that the addition of a 
coating of cotton braid about 0.4 mm. (1/64 inch) increased the 
temperature of the No. 14 wire about 2°C. with 50 amperes, 
and about 4.5°C. with 80 amperes, the wire being immersed 

in water in each case. The braid also added 8.7 thermal-ohm- 


982 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


cm. (3.76 thermal-ohm-inches) to the linear thermal resistance. 


of the covering of this particular wire. : 

Taking the internal and external diameters of the braiding 
of No. 14 wire from Table I as 0.3987 cm. (0.157 1n.) and 0.482 cm. 
(0.190 in.) respectively, we obtain by formula (4) the thermal 
resistivity ¢ = 287.1 thermal-ohm-cm., when soaked in water 
at 5° C. 

With this thermal resistivity for the soaked braid, the thermal 
resistivity of the rubber covering on the wires was deduced, as 
in the following table: 


TABLE IV. 
THERMAL RESISTANCES AND RESISTIVITIES OF WIRE COVERINGS 
Thermal Resistance of Wire 


nSize z A 3 Thermal resistivity 
te, in a linear centimetre 


pe Wine Sea es SEP es Or BE ee 
A. W.G 
rubber + braid braid rubber braid rubber - 
ohms-cm, ohms-cm. ohms-cm. ohms-cm. ohms-cm, 
10 46.7 10.47 36.23 287.1 343.5 
12 60.13 12.82 47.31 2 394.4 
14 53.21 8.71 44.50 311.6 
16 63.90 TOBE 51.39 es 401.5 
Mean = 387.8 


The mean resistivity of the ‘‘ rubber ’’ covering of these wires 
was therefore 387.8 thermal-ohm-cm.; but, since this material 
in code rubber-covered wires is largely composed of filling 
material other than rubber, different compositions are likely 
to vary considerably in thermal resistivity. 

_The thermal resistance ® in a linear centimetre of any size 
of such braided and rubber-covered wire is readily determinable 


from the dimensions of the wire and the above mean thermal 


resistivities by the aid of formula (4), and the probable tem- 
perature elevation for a given current strength then follows 
from formula (8). If the wire is buried in the ground, the ad- 
ditional thermal resistance of the ground must be added, taking 
into account the heat that may be liberated by any active wires 
buried in the same trench or conduit. 

Heating of Code Rubber-Covered Wires in Wooden Moulding. 
When rubber-covered wires are laid in wooden moulding, the 
heat generated by continuous currents in each wire has to pass 
in succession through the rubber, dry braiding, air-space, wooden 
moulding, and finally through wall, ceiling or air. Owing to 
the complex geometrical relations of these successive thermal 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 983 


resistances, they are not easy to compute, even when the ther- 
mal resistivities of the respective substances are correctly stated. 
The best plan is, therefore, to measure the thermal resistance 
of the series combinations under different conditions such as 
occur in practice, and then to tabulate the safe carrying capacity 
of such wires from the measurements directly, as in the report 
of 1889, above referred to. 

The moulding used in the tests here reported was of pine 
wood, of the cross-section shown in Fig. 5. Its length was 3.86 
metres (12.67 feet) and its weight was 720 gm. per metre 
(0.48 Ib. per foot). It was lightly nailed down flat upon the 
wooden floor of the testing room. The wire to be tested was 
laid in a loop along the moulding so as to occupy the two out- 
side grooves, as indicated in the figure, leaving the middle 
groove vacant. Pressure wires were connected to the test wire 


uy 


~-------------~-, 6.8 cms.=2.675--------——~~--- 


Fic. 5—Cross-section of wooden moulding 


at points about 5 metres apart. The temperature elevation 
became substantially constant thirty minutes after the applica- 
tion of each testing current strength. The initial temperature 
t?C. varied from 19.0° C. to 21.0°C. in the different series of 
tests. The results of the measurements are recorded in Table V 
in terms of the final temperature elevation and of the linear 
thermal resistance for each size of wire. 

It is to be observed that the temperature elevations of these 
wires, whose dimensions were substantially the same as those 
appearing in Table I for the lengths tested in water, are more 
than ten times greater than those for the corresponding steady 
current strengths in Table III. 

The linear thermal resistance of the rubber, as above deduced, 
is deducted in Table V from the mean linear thermal resistance 
of each moulded wire. The balance is the inferred linear 
thermal resistance in series of dry braid, air, wood, and external 


984 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


air. This extra linear thermal resistance steadily diminished 
from 466.6 thermal-ohms in one linear centimetre (183.5 thermal- 
ohm-inches), with No. 16 wire, to 343.9 thermal-ohm-cm., (135.3 
thermal-ohm-inches) with No. 8 wire. This reduction in linear 
thermal resistance may be accounted for by the reduction in 
the thickness of the air-space between braid and wooden- 
moulding walls, as the size of the wire was increased. With 
these particular sizes of wire, composition of “‘ rubber,”’ size and 
quality of moulding, the linear thermal resistance of the entire 
series was about ten times as great as that of the rubber alone, and 


TABLE V 
TEMPERATURE ELEVATIONS AND THERMAL RESISTANCES OF WIRES IN MOULDING 


No. 16 A. W.G. |No. 14 A. W. G.|No. 12 A. W. G.|No. 10 A. W. G.| No. 8 A. W. G. 
t=21.1°C, #=19.1°C. =19.9°C. t=19°9C, t=19° C, 
6 R 6 R 0 R a R 6 KR 
Temp.| Thermal/Temp.} Thermal}/Temp.| Thermal|/Temp.| Thermal|Temp.| Thermal 
Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res. Elev. Res. 


15} 17.4 543.4 
20 17.6 479.9 
35] 83.3 523.3 | 47.3 617.6 | 23.7 455.1 | 14.2 461.3 
“40 173.7 | 487.5 | 93.2 | 498.3|51.7| 507.3; =| £4. | 
45 31.6 434.0 | 16.9 381.5 
0 162.1 463.5 | 85.1 482.6 
60 Cribs 1 kin 
65 41.2 409 
75 106.4 417.9 
85 72.5) 381. 
100 105.2 363.2 
Mean 518 490. 481.7 435 385 
Rubber 
51.4 44.5 47.3 36.2 41.1 
Braid, Air & 
Wood 466.6 445.5 434.4 | 398.8 343.9 


consequently for a given linear thermal current J, or linear J? R 
heat loss in the wire, the oR drop, or temperature elevation 0, 
would be correspondingly increased about ten times. But at 
the higher temperature thus attained, the linear copper resist- 
ance R would be greater for a given electric current strength: 
so that in relation to electric current, the temperature elevation 
would be increased more than ten times by taking the wires 
out of the water and placing them dry in this wooden moulding. 

The observed temperature elevations below 110° C. in Table V 
are plotted on logarithm paper in Fig. 6. The para'lel straight 


1907) HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 985 


lines there shown, fairly connecting the various series of observa- 
tion points, are drawn to make an angle of 66° 28’ or the anti- 
tangent of 2.29. It has been pointed out that over a range 
of 100°C. the temperature elevation 0, above ¢ = 18°C., in- 
creases theoretically as J*”°; whereas over a range of 50°C., 
as in Fig. 4, the temperature elevation @ increases as [?”. While 
the agreement between theory and observation is not so good 


33 
+ 
= : 


MM 
Ht 
iM 


 @ 
i 


“CENTIGRADE 


Dos 
Oo 


Ol; 


0. 


! {ttt ! | i 


& 


oo 
So 


CM] 
oQ 


@ TEMPERATURE ELEVATION DEGREES 


rary 
or 
iw 
[ 
FSi) 


mise Pa yy OUNNMUNONOUOUONGWOWNGUUGHONHVOVOU/IOIN 
T | 
Ts ot St AMM 
/ ALOT iI! [| 

HEE ees mu i 

a0 PEA A A ead RUST TROL AR LAT ADUUT HAITI i l 

10 15 20 € 30 40 30 60 70 80 90 100 
CURRENT AMPERES 


Fic. 6—Final temperature elevations of wires in moulding 


Sal 


in Fig. 6 as in Fig. 4, yet it may be regarded as practically 
setisfactory. By comparing Fics. 4 and 6, it is evident that 
these braided wires would carry with a civen final temperature 
elevation some three times more current in water than in this 
moulding. With the braiding removed, they would carry in 
water nearly 3.3 times more current than when braided and 
in this dry wooden moulding, with the same temperature ele- 


vation. In all cases of wires cooled entirely by thermal con- 


986 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


duction, the electric current strength J amperes which | will 
produce a given final temperature elevation 0, above a given 
initial temperature ¢° C., must, by formulas (11) and (12), vary 
as 1/\/@, or inversely as the square root of the linear thermal 
resistance, assuming that the thermal resistivities in the series 
are substantially constant throughout their working range of 
temperature. Thus in Table V. the mean linear thermal re- 
sistance ® of the rubber covering alone is shown to be 47.3 
thermal-ohm-cms. (18.7 thermal-ohm-inches) for No. 12 wire, 
which would be the total linear thermal resistance of this size 
of wire in running water, unbraided. But in moulding, the 
mean linear thermal resistance of this braided wire increased to 
481.7 thermal-ohm-cm. (190 thermal-ohm-inches). The ratio 
of increase in linear thermal resistance in the two cases would 
481.7 


be 47.3 


= 10.2 and the steady electric current strength, which 


Fic. 7—Longitudinal section of water-jacketed pipe con- 
taining a test wire packed in sand, soil, or gravel 


the wire could carry with an assigned temperature elevation 
6° C., would be changed in the proportion fe Biot aoe 

V10.2 3.2 
times; 7.e., 3.2 times more current in the water than in the 
moulding. 

Measurements with Bare Wires Surrounded by Sand, Soil or 
Gravel. The heating of underground wires and cables depends, 
as is already known, upon the depth below the surface at which 
the wires are laid, and upon the thermal resistivity of the soil; 
as well as upon the dimensions of the wires and the currents 
they carry. The measurement of the thermal resistivity of 

* The Carrying Capacity of Electric Cables, Submerged, Buried, or 
Suspended in Air,” by A. E. Kennelly. Minutes of the Ninth Annual 
Meeting, Association of Edison Illuminating Companies, 1893, p. 79. 


‘* Die Berechnung Elektrischer Leitungsnetze ’’ Herzog-Feldmann, Vol. 
Il, p. 130. : 


-1907] . HEATING OF COPPER WIRES > GENS 


the soil presents some difficulty. A series of- observations was 
made on the thermal resistivity of several varieties of sand, 
gravel, and plaster of paris. 

For the above purpose, an iron pipe A B, Bigas7? 27162 0m: 
{9.1 ft.) long and 8.92 cm. (3.5 in.) in external diameter, was pro- 
vided with a water-jacket external cast-iron pipe C DE, 210 
em. (6.89 ft.) long and 15.24 cm. (6 in.) inside diameter, as indi- 
cated in Fig. 8. A steady stream of tap water was allowed to 
flow through the water-jacket during each test, the water enter- 
ing at the inlet J and issuing at the outlet O. The internal 
diameter of the pipe A B was measured both by calipers, and 
by finding the mass of water held by the pipe between the 
wooden end-plugs PP. This mean internal diameter was 
7.77 cm. (8.06 in.). 


Fic. 8—Enlarged cross-section of water-jacketed pipe through DD‘ Fig 7. 


The copper wire WW under test was held at or near the 
axis of the tube, and smaller pressure wires p p were soldered 
to it at points 2 metres apart (78.74in.). The mean diameter 
of the wire was 0.3256 cm. (0.1282 in. or No.8 A.W.G.). Other 
sizes of wire were also used. 

The first substance tested was a yellow sand, of moderately 
fine grain, obtained from a pit in a field near the Pierce Hall 
laboratory and may be taken as a fair sample of sandy soil. 
This sand was carefully dried and packed, while still warm, into 
the pipe A B, Fig. 7, around the bare wire WW. A steady 
current of water was then allowed to flow through the water- 
jacket for some hours, so as to bring the temperature of the ap- 
paratus substantially to 16°C., the temperature of the tap 


988 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


water. A strong current was then passed through the wire 
W W with the connections of Fig. 1, and steadily maintained 
until the resistance of this wire, between pressure taps, showed 
that the .final temperature had been very nearly attained. 
Observations of resistance were obtained at frequent intervals. 
Table VI gives a particular series of observations obtained with 
a current of 128.2 amperes kept steadily flowing through the 
test-wire, the initial resistance balance being secured with 15 
amperes. Column I gives the clock time of each observation, 


‘TABLE VI. 
OBSERVATIONS WITH 128.2 AMPERES PASSING THROUGH COPPER WIRE OF Diam. 3.26 MM., 
in Dry SAND, WATER-JACKET MAINTAINED AT 16° C. 


it II III IV Vv VI Vil VIII IX 
Time Resistance Res. of Temp. 
from Res. r_ jadeded test wire |Temp. of] rise of 

Time start to C side D side Int. test wire] test wire 

h. m. s.} seconds | B.A.U. B.A.U.| B.A. U.| microhms | t+06° C.}| 0° C, 

11 30 00 0 30 |grid D 850 985 4141 16. 0.° 
30 15 15 0 — 955 4271 24. 8. 

31 00 60 50 |wire C 900 “ 4522 39.4 23.4 

31 615 75 70 ¥ 920 : 4623 45.6 29.6 

SLisbh 115 90 4 940 ee 4723 5137 35.7 

34 15 255 130 4 980 ” 4924 64.1 48.1 

35 35 335 144 I 994 _ 4995 68.4 52.4 

37 00 420 153 ci 1003 : 5040 71.2 55.2 

38 40 520 160 S 1010 “ 5076 73.4 57.4 

43 00 780 174 Mf 1024 Fs 5146 i erp (ih RAY 

46 00 960 183 a 1033 = 5191 80.4 64.4 

51 40) 1360 192 ¥ 1042 4 5236 83.2 67.2 

54 O00} 1440 195 1045 a 5251 84.1 68.1 

12 01 30] 1890 204 ‘ 1054 “ 5296 86.9 70.9 

5 30} 2130 207 5 1057 if: 5312 87.9 71.9 

12 12) 25382 210 be 1060 5327 88.8 72.8 

22 30} 3150 213 bs 1063 3 5336 89.4 73.4 

27 O00} 3420 215 si 1065 is) 5351 90.3- 74.3 

36 00} 3960 218 Ms 1068 iS 5366 91.2 75.2 

46 O00} 4560 220 i 1070 5377 91.8 75.8 

13 27 OO} 7020 229 2 1079 % 5422 94.6 78.6 

36 00] 7560 229 %; 1079 S 5422 94 6 78.6 

6 6 


50 00} 8400 229 ¢ 1079 4 5422 94 


column II the elapsed time from the closing of the circuit, 
column III the balancing resistance r, Fig. 1, column IV the 
side to which that resistance was added, columns V and VI 
show the respective resistances of the two galvanometer circuits, 
column VII gives the resistance of the 2 metres of test wire. 
column VIII gives the inferred temperature of the test wire, 
and the last column, the inferred rise of temperature. 

The resistance of the standard german-silver grid D, Fig. 1, 
in the above series of measurements was 4799 int. microhms. 


a 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 989 


Fig. 9 shows at A the graph of the observations in the above 
table. The curves B, C, and D are the corresponding graphs 
of similar series of measurements with 100, 77.2 and 50 amperes 
respectively. These four curves show the rise of temperature 


PERES 
9000 


| 
77.2 AM 
8000 


128.2 AMPERES 


| 


| 
uss 
6000 


| 
| i 
| 


5000 
TIME SECONDS 


. 
| 


3000 


oo E 


ee ee SS SG SiR ROR AR * 


BQVYOILNSO. aYIM SO NOILVAR13 SUNLVeadWaL 


in the wire during the first 7,000 seconds of steady electric 
current fow. About half of the final temperature elevation was 
reached by the wire in 150 seconds. The initial rate of tem- 
perature elevation with 128.2 amperes was about 0.5° C. per 


Fic. 9—Heating of wire in sand and pipe. 


990 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


second. After 100 seconds, this rate fell to 0.1° C. per second, 
and after 1000 seconds to 0.01° C. per second. 

In Fig. 10, the curves indicate the temperature elevation of 
another copper wire No. 10 A. W. G. (diam. 0.256 cm. or 0.1008 in.) 


90 amperes. 


of No. 10 A.W G. bare copper 


TIME SECONDS 


wire in dry white sand. 


Fic. 10—Heating and cooling curves, 


SC Rmamtewa= So SoS BB ORS ues 


BOVYDILN3Q, 3YIM 4O NOILVAR13 SUNLVNAdWaL 


in relation to time, after applying a steady current of 90 amperes,,. 
and also after interrupting the current. In the practically 
steady state, with a temperature of 6° C. in the water circulating . 
through the water-jacket and a temperature in the wire of 78.1° 
C. or 72.1° C. temperature elevation, the linear thermal current 


1907] HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 991 


was 0.3354 watts per cm. (0.852 watts per inch) and the linear 
thermal resistance 215 thermal-ohm-cm. (84.6 thermal-ohm- 
inches). By the use of formula (4), taking d = 0.256 cm. and 
D =7.77 cm., the thermal resistivity of the sand was 395.9 
thermal-ohm-cm. 

The curves of heating and cooling for a No. 17 A.W.G. copper 


70 


65 


60 


pe 


TEMPERATURE ELEVATION OF WIRE °CENTIGRADE 


——-_ 
1000 - 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 
TIME: SECONDS 


F1c.11—Curves showing the heating and cooling of No. 17 A.W.G. wire 
double-cotton covered and bare in fine quartz sand. 


wire of diameter 0.1132 cm. (0.0445 in.) double-cotton-covered to 
0.1346 cm. (0.053 in.) are given in Fig. 11. The heating current 
in each case was held at 32 amperes. The upper curve shows 
the rise of temperature elevation with the wire when cotton- 
covered and packed in fine dry white quartz sand. The lower 
curve gives the corresponding temperature elevation rise, after 


992 KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: [June 25 


the cotton covering had been removed from the wire and the 
same replaced in the pipe with the same quartz packing. The 
descending curve gives the cooling in the latter condition. 
It will be observed that, both in this figure and in Fig. 10, the 
cooling occurs more rapidly than the heating. That is, the 
cooling falls to 1° C. remaining temperature elevation in about 
half the time that the heating process requires to attain within 
1° C. of the final temperature elevation. 

The thermal resistivity of the dry cotton covering on the wire 
appears to have been 2373 thermal-ohm-cm., tne ene re- 
sistivity of any of the substances tested. 

The accompanying table gives a collection of all the measure- 
ments of thermal resistivity made with the water-jacketed pipe. 

Column I in the above table describes the material employed 
in packing the pipe, or the nature of the thermal insulator 
tested. The size of the square aperture in a wire screen sieve 
through which the bulk of the material would pass is also given. 
Column II states the condition of the material as to dryness. 
The additions of liquid referred to are in percentages of volume. 
Column V gives the strength of the continuous current used 
in cach test, and column VI, the temperature elevation 0° C.., 
thereby finally produced, with water usually at or near 5°C. 
circulating in the cooling jacket. The diameter of the bare 
copper wire used is given in column VII. 

Column VIII shows the computed thermal resistivity o of 
the material, as deduced from the temperature elevation 0, 
and the linear thermal current in watts per cm. Column IX 
gives the thermal resistivity o’, as deduced from the linear 
thermal current when expressed in lesser calories, or water- 
gram-ceg.-cent. per linear cm. The thermal resistivity of a 
substance expressed in calorie measure is 4.186 times greater 
than when expressed in watt measure, 1 gram-calorie per second 
being taken as 4.186 watts. Column X contains the thermal con- 
ductivity of the substances in watt measure, or the reciprocal 
of oin column VIII. Column XI contains the thermal conduc- 
tivity of the substances in calorie measure, or the reciprocal 
of o’ in column IX. 

It will be observed that the thermal resistivity varied be- 
tween 161.4 thermal-ohm-cm. for quartz sand with 20% water 
and 761.7 thermal-ohm-cm. for dry powdered plaster of paris. 
The dry cotton covering of the wire whose heating is shown 
in Fig. 11, had, however, a resistivity of 2373 thermal-ohm-em., 


TABLE VII 


THERMAL RESISTIVITIES OF MATERIALS TESTED IN WATER-JACKETED Pipr 


ee 


Dry 


I II IV V VI VII VIII IX x XI 
Test- Temp. | Diam.) Thermal Resistivity Thermal Conductivity 
Condi- Sp. ing Eleva- of ohm-em, 
Material tion G. Cur- tion Test watt calorie watt. calorie 
Dry. # rent 0 Wire, | measure measure measure measure 
amp. ae mi. a a’ k k’ 
- Yellow sandy soil containing quartz, mica, loam Dry 1.63 128.2 78.6 13.256 349.6 
and other materials. Average mesh 0.4 mm. x or 100. 42.9 352.4 
OE Sen re ase Sc. | arena mah ea a corrected He 26. a 385.2 
for air 50. 8.4 < 312.4 
2.54: ° 80. 87255 122053 350.8 
75. 774A ¥ 367.9 
60. 42.8 x 302.0 
40. 16.6 » 341.4 
Mean 351.5 1471, 0.002845 | .6.798x10-4 
“Fine white quartz sand obtained from N. Y. State Dry 1.46 90. GS. Ae: 2256, 395.9 
; sii ¥ 1.46 70.5 38.5 yy 386.7 
Mean 391.3 1638. 0.002556 | 6,105x10-4 
20% water corrected | 90. 26.7 12.56 173.4 
rod 2.57 70. dase, Fi 149.3 
Mean 161.4 675.6 -| 0.006196 | 14.8 x10-4 
( : LON 2% 100. 46.4 |2.56 229.3 
Average mesh 0.25 mm.x 0.25 mm.............. € 90. 38.0 s 237.8 
3 $0. 28.0 + 230.7 
4 70. 20060 i at 227.1 ; 
bs 60. 14.3 os 221.3 
Mean 229.2 959.4 0.004363 10.42x10-4 
10% 100. | 63.9. |2.56 298.1 
; * kerosene 80. 36.4 ts} 291.4 
ad a 60, 19.0 Z 287.8 
Mean | 292.4 | 1224. 0.003420 | 8.17 x10- 
Dry: 1.46 32. 55.8 11.132 402.2 1684. 0.002486 9.938x10% 
tad suas thes PAs nik ee a ‘Dry £283 °° | 100. 62.1 12.56 292.0 
di ie Maly geet ad TDs 82.5 sd 300.8 
Mean| 296.4 | 1241. | 0.003374 | 8.058x10-4 
ae hed t iO Aten aero tode ate Dry 1.50 100. 55.2 12.56 265 .2 
s ae ie = = gaa > j ‘ . 75, 23.7 = 269.4 
f { Mean 267.3 1119. 0.003741 | 8.937x10-* 
Fine gravel containing sand mesh, 0.5 mm. ese Dry 1.69 <5), 38.0 12.56 345.0 1444. 0.002899 | 6.925x10 
oi Maree AN: SoM yi Pena is eg Te oe 100. Bsa es 273.1 
Bch ere Bee _|.. ‘water. ; 75. 28.5 < 264.2 
Gi rig ke See pee Bane : Mean | ~ 268.6 | 1124. | 0.003728 | 8.g97x10-4 
Pie ae eau, Se eee ome a es aha tae De Fi 75. 58.8 |2.56 490.4 2053. 0.002039 | 4.871x10-4 
oe er eee eee B60, wait 75. Ap 2° 355.9 | 1490.. | 0.002810 | 6.711x10-4 
RON Bie athe ib Ve 75... 10623 12.56 761.7 | 3188. | 0.001313 | 3.137x10-4 


7 wr ESATO BIAWaTAM TO @aITIvITaled7l JAMASHL Cre. Awd 


r June 25 
{airst8M ire and the 
sing. The 


pee tOnN 
creol .soier .sitsup gainistnos lioz ybase Yer the 
f com &.0 dese sgetsvA — .2lsirotenr ‘atito 


-- ag t.0 the 
n in about 
tain within 


on the wire 


he measure- 
cketed pipe. 
al employed 
al insulator 
sereen sieve 
s also given. 
to dryness. 
_. .ciretr 88.0 % .cowe 88.0. der agatey Ae. 
current used 
vation 0° i, 
sr near 5° C. 
UB. 425.104 of the bare 
sistivity o of 
elevation 6, 
Column IX 
un_the linear 
. +. tie 38.0 deom ;stxeup, bodaurQs r_ 
esistivity of a 

6 times greater 

_ trrect 22.0 lester BIB WewAN.A 
1e thermal con- 
the reciprocal 


egg 8.0 sles brea cataints 9VsTR oni i_) 
, the reciprocal 


ivity varied be- 

Artz | with 20% water 
ee | lana hile gaaz is. 
beating is shown 


pmtintin ity, 28.  Sidlisdleimalekancets. 


Ox hint 


1907] _ HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 993 


which corresponds to a thermal conductivity of 4.214x10~! ther- 
mal-mhos-per-cm. in watt measure, or 1.007x10-4 thermal- 
mhos-per-cm. in gram-calorie measure. This agrees witn the 
value for cotton wool given by Peclet.® . 

Fig. 12 shows the relation of the observations with the tem- 
perature elevation of wires in the water-jacketed pipe to the 
steady current strength when plotted on. logarithmic paper. 
The parallel straight lines are drawn to make an angle of 66° 30’ 
or the anti-tangent of 2.3, to cover a range of 100°C. tém- 
perature elevation from an initial temperature of 6°C., in ac- 
cordance with formula (15) adapted to 100°C. instead of 50° C. 
The agreement between the observation points and these straight 
lines of average exponent 2.3 is fairly satisfactory from an en- 
gineering standpoint. 

The following conclusions may be, drawn from the observa- 
tions here reported: 

(1) The fundamental formula for the direct-current final 
heating of a wire that cools by conduction is (12) 


i] 


a8 2 
l+a0 ae 


where K is a constant for the wire determined by the total 
linear thermal resistance. This formula applies to concealed 
wires, 7.¢., to insulated wires in water, in the ground, or in wooden 
moulding. 

(2) The thermal resistivities of the various substances tested 
with different temperature elevations, including rubber com- 
position, braiding, moulding, and various soils, may; for prac- 
tical purposes, be regarded as constant, 7.e., not appreciably 
affected by temperatures up to 100°C. 

(3) Wet braiding on a No. 14 rubber-covered wire added ¢ 
linear thermal resistance of 8.7 thermal-ohm-cm. (2.46 thermal- 
ohm-inches) and raised the final temperature of the wire im- 
mersed in water by about 2° C. with 50 amperes. 

(4) The linear thermal resistance of the rubber-covered wires 
in dry wooden moulding was about 10 times greater than when 
immersed in water, thus increasing their temperature cleva- 
tions more than 10 times with a given current or reducing 
their current-carrying capacity more than 3 times for a given 
temperature elevation. 

9“ C. G.S. System of Units,” by Everett—Heat Conduction of 
Woolly Substances, p. 128. London, 1891. 


KENNELLY AND SHEPARD: 


994 


BZOVYSILNIO, @ NOILVA313 SUNLVYSdW3L TYNIS 
oS 


= or) 


Es e = ; —— 


a 
Saal 
S 

S 


Ss et amen oon Gt Se se le Se 


70 


40 
ne 


30 
= 


AMPERES 


ter-jacketed 


pipe, with different packings, 


Fic. 12—Final temperature elevations of bare wires in wa 


1907] , HEATING OF COPPER WIRES 995 


(5) When plotted on logarithm paper, the final temperature 
elevation of a wire in relation to steady current strength is 
nearly a straight line of inclination tan+ 2.2 (Fig. 4) for tem- 
perature elevations not exceeding 50°C., and not far from a 
straight line of inclination tan 2.3 for temperature elevations 
not exceeding 100° C. (Figs. 6 and 12). 

(6) A No. 12 A.W.G. copper wire, rubber-covered, and im- 
mersed in water substantially attained its final temperature 
elevation in 300 seconds, or 5 minutes, after applying a steady 
current. The same wire in dry wooden moulding took 1800 
seconds, or 30 minutes, and the same wire, bared but packed in 
sand within a water-jacketed pipe of 7.77 cm. (3.06 in.) internal 
diameter, took about 7800 seconds, or 130 minutes, to reach a 
similar approximation to final temperature elevation. 

(7) The wires in the water-jacketed pipe cooled more quickly 
than they heated. 

(8) Changing the size of the wire in the water-jacketed pipe 
from No. 8 (0.326 cm.) to No. 12 (0.205 cm.) did not appre- 
ciably affect the thermal resistivity of sandy soil as measured 
with these wires (351 thermal-ohm-cm.) Similarly, changing 
the size from No. 10 (0.256 cm.) to No. 17 (0.113 cm.) did not 
appreciably affect the thermal resistivity of dry quartz sand as 
measured by those wires (400 thermal-ohm-cm.). 

(9) The thermal resistivity of the sandy soils tested was 
greatest when those soils were dry, and diminished with the 
addition of water or oil to them. 

(10) The thermal resistivity of a sample of crushed quartz 
was greater with the material in a coarse condition. Crushing 
the particles of quartz to about half their previous linear dimen- 
sions reduced the thermal resistivity of the material about 10%. 

(11) The lowest thermal resistivity observed was that of quartz 
sand with 20% of water added by volume (161.4 thermal- 
ohm-cms) the highest was that of the white dry double cotton 
covering of a wire (2373 thermal-ohm-cm.), both in watt 
measure. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrica! En- 
gineers, Niagara Fells, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907, by A. I. E. E, 


POWER-FACTOR, ALTERNATING-CURRENT INDUCTIVE 
CAPACITY, CHEMICAL, AND OTHER TESTS OF RUBBER- 
COVERED WIRES OF DIFFERENT MANUFACTURERS 


BY HENRY W. FISHER 


Probably no form of insulating material for wires has been so 
frequently discussed as india rubber and its component ingreci- 
ents, known commercially as ‘‘ rubber.’”’ Very many tests have 
been devised to determine the percentageof rubber and other 
materials, and especially the amount of fine para. 

In a compound containing both pure para and other grades 
of rubber, it will probably never be possible to tell the relative 
percentages of each. If the amount of inferior grades of rubber 
is considerable, an indication of the fact can be obtained from 
some of the various tests now used. 

Specifications have been devised with a view to securing, by 
the application of certain well defined tests, an absolutely 
certain percentage of pure para. In some of these cases, the 
manufacturer could have furnished a better compound con- 
taining wax or similar solid hydrocarbons mixed with the dry 
mineral filler, but the presence of such materials would make it 
impossible to tell how much of the rubber was fine para. 

In view of these rather complicated conditions, several of the 
manufacturers of rubber-covered wire framed a set of specifica- 
tions which would ensure 30% para and give at the same time lati- 
tude to the manufacturer to use such other ingredients as in his 
experience would make a compound having toughness, elasticity, 
resistance against high voltages, and other desirable qualities. 
These specifications were brought to the attention of the In- 
stitute in a paper by Mr. Wallace Clark, read in New York on 


April 27, 1906, 
997 


998 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


The object of the present paper is to give the results of certain 
tests which, while not strictly new, have not been applied com- 
mercially to rubber-covered wires. One reason for conducting 
this investigation was to see if power-factor tests would not live 
an insight into the qualities of different makes of rubber-insulated 
Wire. 

The definition of power-factor, as here used, is the ratio of the 
power absorbed in the rubber compound to the apparent loss as 
found by multiplying the charging current by the applied volts. 
Practically speaking, it may be considered as an indicator of the 
loss in the dielectric around the wire and therefore a low power- 
factor is desirable. 

A considerable amount of work has been done by various 
experimenters to determine how the losses in condensers and 
cables vary with the applied volts, frequency, capacity, etc. 
One of the most recent investigations of this sort was given in 
the paper of Dr. Paul Humann which appeared in the “ Elek- 
trische Bahnen U. Betriebe’”’ from August 24 to September 24, 
1906. 

Dr. Humann’s formula for the loss in the dielectric of paper- 
insulated cables is as follows: 


W=KEnC (1) 
Where W = the loss in watts, 
K =a constant varying with different insulating 
compounds, 
E = the effective pressure in volts, 
n =the frequency of the alternating current, 
C =the inductive capacity of the cable. 


The proof of the above formula is as follows: 


power-factor = pj.= Jali (2) 
PE 
I = the charging current = sant s (3) 
Substituting and transposing, 
Wa P1OF ren =K EAC ; (4) 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES - 999 


Se 
where K = eee The loss is in watts and it varies 


in direct proportion to the frequency, capacity and power-factor 
and to the square of the electromotive force. 

The methods adapted by Dr. Humann were somewhat in- 
volved and complicated, but nevertheless ingenious. In order 
to get true readings he had to expurgate the harmonics of the 
alternating-current voltage, producing thereby a true sine-wave 
electromotive force. 

The writer is much indebted to Dr. Rosa, of the Bureau of 
Standards, for outlining some extremely simple methods to 
determine power-factors, capacities, inductances, etc. This led 
to the design of a special form of bridge having non-inductive 
resistances with minimum inductive capacities, and suitable 
binding-posts for the various apparatus employed. The rest of 
the outfit consisted of a vibration galvanometer, and a motor- 
generator the speed of which was kept absolutely constant by 
an electrically driven tuning-fork. The rate of vibration of the 
tuning-fork could be varied by the application of weights near 
the end of the forks. f 

By careful adjustment of both the tuning-fork and gal- 
vanometer they could be brought into synchronism, when the 
latter becomes a most sensitive instrument for indicating minute 
alternating currents. Moreover, as the galvanometer needle 
responds only to the fundamental period of the alternating- 
current circuit, and is not at all affected by existing harmonics, 
it is unnecessary to employ a sine-wave electromotive force for 
measurements of capacity, inductance, and power-factor. 

The method employed in these researches is based on the 
fact that a cable or condenser, the absorption and leakage of 
which is not zero, is equivalent to a cable or condenser with 
zero absorption in series with a resistance, called the “‘ equivalent 
resistance,’’ such that the angle of lead between the electromotive 
force and current shall be 90°-0. 

With a perfect condenser 4 =o0. The power-factor = cos 
(90-0) = sin 0. (5) 

Fig. 1 shows the diagram of the connections and arrangement 
of the various instruments. 

Rand R’ are the ratio arms of the bridge; R” is the resistance 
which is placed in series with the standard condenser C; A. C. 
is the alternating-current source; and G is the vibration gal- 
vanometer. The plan of procedure is first to vary R or R’ until 


1000 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


a partial balance is obtained, then adjust R” and R until the 
galvanometer mirror ceases to vibrate, when the power-factor 
of the cable = 


Inn R"C 


Power-factor of condenser + PIES TT OTE (6) 


R 
and capacity of cable = RX C 
Where » = the cycles per second and C = the capacity of the 
standard condenser. 


Fig. ft. 


AC. 


The reflection from the galvanometer mirror of a lamp fila- 
ment was used until a balance was practically obtained, then the 
reflection of a scale was observed, and the resistances varied 
until the scale divisions were sharp and well-defined. 

This method is so extremely sensitive that in making tests of 
cables it was generally impossible to adjust the bridge for any 
length of time so that the galvanometer mirror did not vibrate. 
There is apt to be a continual slight variation in capacity and 
power-factor. With perfect standard condensers, capacities can 
be compared to within one point in 5000. 


1907} FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1001 


Owing to some peculiar factory vibration which affected the 
- vibration galvanometer, it was impossible to make the tests at a 
frequency of 60 cycles per second as originally intended, and 


Cn 
SB BRSYISSRRSARSSRRLARKRS 


| 


16 
4 
2 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
120 


4 


110 


100 


mie 
| 
80 690 


70 
TEMPERATURE IN ° FAHRENHEIT 


ey 


1 3 
0 | 
5 r 
\ ile = r | 
\ — | 3 
wu eae o 
ies ia EL 8 
a [| wees oe s 
Y es a — S =~ 
[| Bae: | ae 
= =f = a 
LSS SS PREC 3 
Sis ik = 3 in | a 
E ~fa~ ita y Paice _ S ore 
sel ot te. col . “ moet wl a E 
Oo [ | [ Sse PN SiS = a 
ee [o's] 
| We ] a *b Birr | silk 


/ 
mL, 
/ 
Hf 
va 
yr 
ease 
oft 
v 
750 .800 


¢ 
ig 
to 
L. 
t 
w 
7 
‘7 
6 
700 


INDUCTIVE CAPACITY BY A.C. METHOD 


ioe lol” 
500 650 .600 .650 


RSRKRISSRRARBRRRAKRRSRS ARROWS 
YaLVYM NI SAVG JO ‘ON 


hence after considerable adjustment a frequency of 53.5 cycles 


was employed throughout the tests. 
Coils of rubber-covered wire of various manufacturers were 


1002 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


purchased in different cities. These were cut into lengths of 
210 ft. and placed in a metallic tank which was afterwards 
filled with a strong saline solution. Each curve represents 
therefore the results of tests on two or more coils of wire. 


BRLS 
| 


20 


110 


100 


TEMPERATURE IN °FAHRENHE!IT 


|_| 
| 
.y 
|_| 
| | 
|_| 
C4 
|_| 
& 


80 690 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
cL 


70 


60 


ae et 


—-— 


600 .700 .800 .900 1.000 1.100 1.200 1.800 1.400 1.500 1.600 1.700 1.800 


INDUCTIVE CAPACITY BY GALVANOMETER METHODSG, (mf. PERMILE) | 


2! 


BBIGIASSSSRBSRRARRARARSVPO™ 
YBLVM NI SAVG 4O ‘ON 


The voltage tests were made on four samples of each original 
coil. The samples were four feet long, three feet of which was 
under water for 24 hours before the test was applied. Samples 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1008 


of each coil were reserved for chemical analysis, but owing to 
the time required for this work returns were not received from 
all coils. Sufficient tests were made, however, to permit of a 
general comparison between most of the samples. 

Table I gives the general dimensions of the rubber-covered 
wire and the average break-down voltage tests. 

Table II gives the results of the chemical analysis. The 
different samples are represented by letters, and the different 
materials by numbers. 


TABLE NO, I. 
DIMENSIONS AND BREAK-DOWN VOLTAGES OF SAMPLES. 
Size of Diameter in mils over 
Sample Wire B. and S. Thickness Break-down 

Letter G. Braid Rubber of Rubber Voltage 
A 10 323 209 53.5 22860 
es 10 280 204 51 23100 
C 10 293 209 53.5 15960 

c 10 302 202 50 14450 
D 10 303 213 55.5 16750 
d : 10 292 205 51.5 16300 

E 10 285 194.5 46 13600 

e 10 303 201 | 49.5 16770 

F 10 300 209 53.5 22040 

ji 10 306 209 * 53.5 15120 

G 10 245 195 . 46.5 23600 
H 10 249.5 193.5 45.75 18355 

h 10 246 197 47.5 12825 

fi 10 252.5 199 48.5 17775 

@ 10 257 201 49.5 18650 
J 12 235 7 23035 
K 12 234 76.5 22500 


Chemical tests of rubber are difficult to make, and owing to the 
fact that several of the ingredients are slightly soluble in solvents 
other than those particularly used for each, there is a pos- 
sibility of slight errors in the amount reported. No. 2 is the 
acetone extract and No. 3 the pyridine extract. The tests were 
most carefully made each in the same manner and by a person 
the accuracy of whose analysis had previously been checked by 
his reports ot sampies having known ingredients. 

In designating the wire of any one manufacturer the large 
character represents the higher priced wire and the small character 


{June 25 


RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


FISHER 


1004 


8€°S9| €9°9| 09°19| Zo 19 | 80°+9| 1Z°Z9| 19° IL| 29°99] 9L°s9| Ee°sS| 19°99) 09°9| 8g° Lg] L2°8¢ €0's9] ct se99eW TeseurW | «(OL 
ore’0 | TF'0 | &F°0 | 02°0 £0 | #8°0 | SI°O | 12°0 | 29°0 | $20 | 01Z'0 | 0€'0O | 9F'0 | F2°0 FEO, [oe oe SAO SO TG 
— | — | $4'0 | 99°0 8Z'0 | €F'0 | #9°0 | 89°0 | 84°0 | 06'0 | 29°0 | €F'0 | 26°0 | 29°0 8€°0 (JeyeM UT I[qGnjOs) 
4 oDis <9 sent *anaaor o1uesIQ, 8 
pxak , 
OF'O | Z8°0 | Sz°0 | gz'0 ze°0 | #Z'0 | £2°0 |-02'0 | IL'0 | FF'0 | 020 | 020 | 9F°0 | 9S°0 eo'o | cc tt anydyng eery | ZL 
9°3 | OS'S | G9°S | F9'E L4e°¢ | 10°S | 10'S | Shh | 8P'S | 24H°S | 9S'F | E8'E | 80'S | IPE Ips | °°" *anydjng peuiquiog | 9 
00°0 | c&°0 | #2°0 | 81°0 09°0 | 8L°0 | #F'0 | 06'0 | €8°0 | 20'S | EBT | SIL | ZO T | 99°0 T3'O Joe me sseey Aned | g 
s[lIo UMOTg 
8z'0 | sg°0 | €2°0 | 0¢'0 gé°0 | 1¢°0 | 4h°0 | S€°0 | 2z°0 | FEO | ¥9°0 | Zot | 26°0 |S16°0 oog’O J peagxg wey | F 
GLE°0 |S2€°0 | 66°T | 86°% Go's | GLI | 29°S | OST | 69'S | ThE | 06'S | 98° | 62'T | FST 91's | °° saourysqng greet oe € 
66°% | OLS | SFL | FOL OL'9 | 6F's | T9°S | 69°F | 06'OT] BELT] LIL | 08'S | SL°6 | 26°6 CER eae suoqieo-o1pAH PHOS | & 
saxem ‘SUISEY ‘S[IO eety 
96°22] 08°82] EF SZ] EE Sz G8°1Z| SE°LZ| OS LT] SIOZ! SL°9T| 29°91] SS"ST) 49°02) Sh ss) GEES $8790 S08 3 (89 %FH) Joqqny | TT 
LEST PL OLD [eSL TNSSOLSe | 167.) 18° 00199" Tp LOE) OSL. | OS tb laoner CLT [ott  Aqaerg oypedg 
SS Sr ae ee al ee an Pree le LS ce a cee (isa a ae ce ee ne on *I0q 
a f + I y H ca) { a a a P a a “a a Vv Bae 
[eHe}e Jo euleN jeu 
Ps ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee Se -37e KL 


[euayeyy jo % pure soyeqy aduresg 


en ——— eee 


uaaanyY dO NOILISOGNOD ANV ALIAVA‘) DIdIDadg 


Il GTadvL 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1005 


of the same letter the lower priced wire of the same manufacturer. 

The measurements made, which are represented by curves, 
were as follows. 

A, the inductive capacity by alternating-current method ; 
G, the inductive capacity by the ballistic-galvanometer 
method ; 

The insulation resistance after one minute’s electrification, 
by direct deflection method; 

P.F., the power-factor; 

W, the total loss at a frequency of 53.5 cycles and electro- 
motive force = 75 volts. 

For convenience in comparison the loss W is multiplied by 50, 

making it equal to that of 50 miles of wire, when the lowest loss 
is about one watt. 
- Owing to the time required to complete these tests, it was 
necessary to make two sets of measurements on two different 
lots of wires and hence the reason for two sets of curves. On 
account of the great variation in insulation resistances, two 
sheets with different scales had to be used. These are given in 
Fig. 4 and 5, and to get a relative comparison between the two 
sets of curves the insulation resistance of wire e is shown in 
both figures. 

On the right-hand side of each set of curves is given the 
variation of temperature with time. It was impracticable to 
keep the temperature at the same point throughout the tests, 
but the variation in temperature would make little difference in 
all the various tests, except possibly those of insulation resistance. 
As the variation of temperature was alike with all coils, the rela- 
tive average results may be considered sufficiently correct for the 
purposes of this paper, which deals with comparisons rather than 
with absolute values. The last two tests were taken at tem- 
peratures of about 90° and 115° fahr., thus affording a chance of 
comparing the various temperature coefficients. 

Some explanation of the curves represented by the term A/G 
is here necessary. This is the ratio of the inductive capacity 
measured by the alternating-current method to that measured 
by the usual galvanometer method. In a paper by the writer, 
read two yearsago at the Asheville convention, the statement was 
made that the dielectric loss in a cable seems to increase as the 
above ratio becomes smaller. This appears to be generally true 


here, too. f ga 
Inductive capacities are usually measured by the ballistic 


1006 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


galvanometer method and A/G is the factor by which said capaci- 
ties must be multiplied in order to get the true alternating current 
capacity. 


BSRSSISSRRARSRRARRARARSPONR 


BS 
3s 
che 
a 
aie 
jaa 
x = 
ee 
Zz = 
- ime 
ce | [ EE 3 
a | [ a 
wis — 3 
| ey [ | ip 
g eg 3 
a 
a= I— co. 1a0 
| C 32 
| a 
a 
ina 8 
| | | 5 
sECEEE Z °F 
o 35 
a me 2 
| g 
| | : 
v mY 
= 
Sa 
fa a 
| 3= 
| H ttt ls 
espe Todas x 
/ os 2 


BBRGIRISRRSRSRRAKRRVSARS wow 
YBLVM NI SAY JO ‘ON 


In a paper of this kind which deals with so many different tests, 
perhaps the most difficult undertaking is the attempt to make 
correct deductions and comparisons. For the present con fining 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1007 
our remarks to Fig. 2 to 8 inclusive, it is at once noticeable 
that the insulation resistance, power factor, and A/G decrease 


with the time of immersion in water, and the others increase 


6 BIGIIVSSRASSRRIHRSRSARQrowe 
- 


60 50 


i— 


PEE 


BEER EEEH EH 


c | 
+ | H 
oom 208 I ae el 
. eel 
| 
| 


70 


100 9 80 


110 
TEMPERATURE IN “FAHRENHEIT 


Ee) | | al 


120 


| 
a 
100 


ry | 2 
witir an :| ib il al 
aaaias aaa an coy 2 
J : | a 3% 
we i ry 
a oo er + pepe 3 
ead aea SB AA a3 

EEE Deer errr |e 2 
ls isl Lt] eet R2 


ee 
: 
+ 


SowWw~O Mt aN 
B@SIAISRSRSSRBRRARRAAARAS 


YalvM NI SAYG 4O ‘ON 


52 fix 


with the time of immersion. This is what one would naturally 
expect, because all the samples were braided and therefore the 
water would take some time to fill all the interstices around the 


rubber. 


[June 25 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


1008 


It is also evident that the rate of change is generally less where 
the percentage of rubber is high, as with samples A, B,C, andD. 


but it evidently contained a large per- 


? 


B was not analyzed 
centage of rubber. 


—y 


ose ata) ByuNlvysdW3l ; is a 
06 08 OL 098 or 


‘S'd = YOLOVS-YBMOd JO LN39D Y3d 
8 L 9 gs F & 3 T 


Ate NI SAVd JO 


f ese aVansne ss SCC, 
an FREE rea: edad OO we Ss es A eS 
2 ES a ABE See POPPE ATA 
SA a EG om Se CECE CECA 
Feta sie abalone eh POCA TT 
ES 6 BE A COCO ha 
oS 2 A OB Sante /7janenaseaty 
se fa ee Oo Tap WEDS Be Sema ar Fa ae 
ek SE a SA BYSSTe ee arene Rec 
oD 2 9 il De Ase eee 
oS SS aS 
no a SS a a 
83 a 86 
cs os 
FE iad 
9¢ a 98 
8¢ 8& 
OF OF 
GP oP 
FF tPF 
= — |] Cocco 
a DB eS pia x 
diet nemsag aSEere _ 
Geese Gist Pare) cae 

Remsen muse ea 


It will also be seen that while the curves do not always follow 
in the same order, yet there is a certain amount of regularity 


among them; for instance, A and B are at one extreme and f at 


1907) FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1009 
the other. The general tendency is for the insulation resistance 


to vary inversely as the capacity. There are, however, some 
notable exceptions which will be considered in due time. 


QR > ott & © + 
OE SA Se SE Ve i 


120 


| 
1 


+t 
as, 
LI 
[ot 
80 
TEMPERATURE IN °FAHRENHEIT 


100 


90 


VJ 
2. 
70 


-| 


_ 
it 


TP See 


Ty RY eee CPeY eye, 


| 


L 
sual 
1 
Tels 
eke 
— 
8 


rire Ne 
ad 
1 
T 
I 
1 
! 
L 
c 
E 
4 
ij 
A 
ee 
lee 
5 
ENERGY LOSS PER 50 MILES OF WIRE AT 75 VOLTS & 53.5 CYCLES. (W) 


RSSQLGISSRSARBSZRARAKRRAGAAA 


YaLVM NI SAVG JO ‘ON 


We may here ask the pertinent question; what are the de- 
sirable qualities of a rubber insulating compound? This might 
be answered as follows: 1, good materials and uniformity of 
structure; 2, great electrical strength; 3, good lasting proper- 


[June 25 


1010 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 
Insulation and capacity tests give us some idea of the 


first, high-voltage tests of the second, and while long-time. 
tests are essential for the third, yet power-factor or loss-tests 


ties. 


ueleeess 


YALVM NI SAYG JO 'ON 


covering a shorter period of time may indicate any tendency to 


gradual disintegration. 


Now, making some general comparisons, we find that A and B 
have high insulation resistance, high resistance to voltage, small 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1011 


1907] 


LISHN38HV4, NI SYNLVESdWSL 


Oct OTT O0r 06 08 02 09 OOTT OSO'T O0O'T 0G6" 006° 098° O08” OSs COL Oso" O09 


(2TIW Yad FW) ‘Vs GOHLAW 'D'V Ag ALIOVdVD BAILONGN 


S ort Ce 


s 


oo st 
Rua sw 


YSLVM NI SAVG 4O ‘ON 


{June 25 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


1012 


“LISGHNSYHVdSo NI SYNLVYSdNSL CSTW 43d‘s'W) 9 = GOHLAW YSLAWONYATYS AG ALIOVdYD AAILONGNI 
OeT OIT = 00T 06 08 oL 09 006°T 008" O0L'T 09'T GOST O0F'T one't@ 00% I Cort 000°T 006" 008" 004" 009" 


FI 
9T 
81 
06 
os 
z 
‘ Bees 
‘2 Bee 

ai “i 
a oa Bee 
reg 
ARGEM Re Ra Roe: 
AS I So 
ECE EEE CHEER : 
. Ee ee Steere ciemnia 
. Pa saneeeaeoaoaeo ao Sara % 

a PERE ae Hop 
ames Fo b=> | ops p foade ahr fetes fe fan pe au ape 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 1013 


energy loss, and A shows a higher percentage of rubber. F, on 
the contrary, while having about equally good resistance to 
voltage, has much less rubber, much less insulation resistance, 
and greater energy loss. The percentage of rubber in C lies 
about midway between A and F and yet C withstands much less 
voltage, has an insulation resistance about equal to F, but the 
energy loss is nearer that of A than that of F. In trying to 
account for this, we see that A and F have about the same com- 
bined amount of materials 2 and 3, while C has almost 4% more 
of those materials. It therefore seems that the addition of too 
much waxes, pitches, etc. is not beneficial. 

The most notable cases of excessive amounts of materials 
2and 3 are Eande. E withstood the lowest voltage test but 
this may be entirely due to its thinner rubber wall, and yet its 
~ insulation resistance was third from the highest. This shows 
that the insulation resistance does not depend entirely on the 
amount of rubber. C had 23% rubber and E about 17%, and 
yet the insulation resistance of the latter was best. The energy 
loss of &, however, was much greater than that of C. The 
writer fully realizes that some of these differences may be 
partly due to the quality of the rubber employed. 

Through an oversight, the letters H and e were reversed, e 
being the higher priced compound and E£ the cheaper grade. In 
ali the figures except those giving power-factor and energy loss, 
e, the better grade, is further from A than E.; e withstood a 
higher voltage than E, and hence with these wires the energy test 
and voltage test were the true indications of quality. 

D and d are consistent throughout the whole series of curves, 
and yet the break-down voltage of D is not as highapparently as 
one would expect. 

_ The writer can give no definite reason why F and f should 
almost invariably test worse than the other samples. In 
break-down voltage tests, they were practically as good or better 
than first and second grades of other wires. The use of an 
inferior grade of rubber might partly account for it, but, because 
of the high dielectric strength of F, the writer is of the opinion 
that the materials 2, 3, and 5 employed, had properties which 
made the insulation resistance low, the capacity high, and the 
energy-loss and power-factor high. The writer is fully aware of the 
fact that insulation, resistance, and capacity are affected by the 
conditions and time of vulcanization, which might be the cause of 
some of these discrepancies. It is hardly likely, however, that 


[June 25 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


1014 


(SWHODSW STIN) SONVISISSY NOILYINSNI 
OORT COZE OOTT O00T 006 008 O00 009 00¢ 00F 008 008 00T 


! ees 
F 

9 

8 Nd 


a 


en 


LJISHN3YHYVS. NI SYN LVYAdW3L 


YaLVM NI SAVd JO ‘ON’ 


BRARRAR 


1907] FISHER: RUBBER COVERED WIRES 1015 


F and} were vulcanized at the same time, and hence the theory of 
slightly defective material is probably the nearest correct. 

It is interesting to note the peculiar change of insulation re- 
sistance of sample A. There was first a gradual decrease and then 
an increase to the time when heat was applied, when the insula- 
tion again became less. After rubber covered wire is vulcanized, 
there seems to be a tendency for the insulation resistance to in- 
crease and the capacity to decrease. This probably accounts for 
the above effect. There are other samples which show this 
tendency to improvement after the lapse of time, but in a less 
marked degree. 

Referring once more to the break-down voltages, it is well to 
bear in mind the fact that long coils of wire will not withstand 
anything like the break-down voltages which punctured the four- 


_ foot samples. In a few cases, some of the four-foot samples 


* 


broke down at a much lower voltage than the average of the 
others made by the same manufacturer. 

The second lot of samples are designated as follows: G, H, h, 
I,zi, Jand K. The curves representing tests made on these are 
found in Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. 

Samples H, h, and J, « were tested for 14 days when two 
samples, the average of which is given by the G curves, were put 
in the same tank. At the end of 23 days, the samples kK, L 
were put in the tank. There are, therefore, three sets of time 
figures, but under two of these are placed the letters of the samples 
to which they refer, and the third set must be used for H, h, I, 7. 

The sample G seems, from the chemical analysis, to be reason- 
ably close to 30% rubber. The thickness of rubberisthe smallest, 
and yet the break-down voltage was the largest. 

All the curves of G show but a slight tendency to variation 
after the lapse of a few days, and there is a general indication of a 
gradual improvement with time. 

The insulation resistance of G is not so high as that of A and B. 
This difference is partly accounted for by the difference in the 
rubber wall, and partly by the amounts and kind of materials 
2 and 3. The power-factor and the energy-loss of G are also 
greater than those of A and B, but this is probably partly due 
to the smaller amount of materials 2 and 3. (See remarks 
later on about J and K.) 

All the insulation resistances given in Fig. 11 become better 
near the end of the tests, this is partly due to a drop in tem- 
perature which occurred for the two tests prior to increasing the 


{June 25 


1016 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


LAISHNSYHVS, NI SYNLVYSdGW3L é 
Oot OT = O0T 06 08 aL 09 Or 6 8 ZL 9 S v § 3S T 


‘SBRRAKRRARSTRQGrMOwWwRG 


Y3LVM NI SAVG 4O ‘ON 


1017 


FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES 


1907] 


eT 


“LIBHNSYHVA o NI SYR LVYSdNSL 


(M)'SBIDAD SES GNV SLIOA SL Lv SYIM SO SSTIW OS Usd SSOT ADYSNS 


« 


or O00. 06 08 ob 09 08 OF CO Pe ee A er eee ea 
zs its ae ha Dh SS hea 9 A ee 
La e Wks 
iS Hick = are SP: 
a cot spa tel 2 pa 
EEEEEE EE ecco A 
Gage ES % ae ig 
EEEEEEREEEEE CEP EEE 
RET ee Sis | Lee Ta [yp lp 


1018 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


temperature at the end of the series. There is sufficient evidence, 
however, to show that before the above happened, the insulation 
resistance of all these samples had ceased to drop, and, in fact, 
was slightly improving. This is probably because all the samples 
analyzed had over 20% of rubber. Some of the insulation 
resistance curves are odd in appearance, but this may to some 
extent be due to errors or surface leakage. In measuring the 
insulation resistance of only about 200 ft. of wire, a high degree 
of accuracy cannot be expected. 

‘““T,”’ contained slightly more rubber than H, and in most cases 
the former tests best. In like manner, 7 is better than h in the 
larger number of curves: h was white-core and this may partly 
account for its low break-down voltage. 

c, d and f were also white-core rubber, and the break-down 
voltages of these were also among the lowest. The white-core 
part of the insulation was not analyzed, the reported ingredients 
being those contained in the black-rubber portion. 

And now, we come to curves J and K which are perhaps the 
most interesting of the series. J was made of 15% fine para 
rubber and 15% african rubber. K had 30% fine para. The 
rest of the materials in both samples was about 1% wax and dry 
mineral matter. The analysis does not show quite 30% 
rubber, but this is partly due to the extractive matter contained 
in the rubber. On all sheets, curves J and K are reasonably 
close to each other. 

The power-factor and energy loss of K are less than those of VP 
Several of the curves are, however, erratic in appearance, showing 
a tendency to an unstable condition. 

In two prominent points, break-down voltage, and power- 
factor and energy-loss, these samples are inferior to A, B and G. 

1. Break-down voltage. The thickness of rubber on the 
samples J and K was about 50% more than that of the other 
wires, and yet the break-down voltage of J and K was about the 
same as those of A, B and G. 

Thinking that this might be partly due to the greater electric 
density around the smaller wire (No. 12) which formed the con- 
ductor of J and K, the writer tested several samples of No. 14 
wire with 51 mils rubber wall, containing about 22% rubber; 
the average break-down voltage was 19,000 volts, which agrees 
closely with the other sample containing about the same amount 
of rubber. 


2. Power-factor and energy loss. The tests of J and K were 


FISHER: RUBBER-COV ERED WIRES 1019 


1907] 


9 
006" oss" 008° . og" 002" oc" 009° sic ose? «Ses anes 
fa 
I 
F 
he ae | / : 
at cI mal — 7 | OT 
a Bel } ; al 
= a. ] FI 
| ae +H EN em 
{REE il Ia u 
an A y ; f 2 
5 Vail aes [ [ ig ] rt tZ 
Ht | igi l ; / |_| 
| aa —| 88 
: me tN Hy are a 
i} | \ 
of H] 2 10 th 7 aS: = — 9 
1 ‘ a 8& 
7 <r ; | OP 
| ae ae ae ie 
a lea re = lai Sy tag 


097509 SS Ole 08) 06 ~~ 0OL, «OIL Cet 
LIBHNSYHVS,NI SUNLVaSdWaL 


YaLVM NI SAVG JO ‘ON 


1020 FISHER: RUBBER-COVERED WIRES [June 25 


not carried on for so long a time as those of the others, and yet 
the power-factors were greater at the end of the series than those 
of any of the others, and there was a marked indication of still 
further increase. 

The energy-loss of J and K is not so great as that of some 
other wires; this is due to the fact that the capacity of J and 
K is much smaller on account of their greater thickness of 
rubber. No doubt, if these samples had a thickness of rubber of 
about 50 mils, they would have tested worse in most respects than 
any of the samples of the series. 

It therefore appears that the addition of certain materials 
to arubber-insulating compound (containing say 30% of rubber), 
which upon chemical analysis will show a high percentage of 
extractive matter, may resultin a much better quality of rubber- 
insulating material than one composed of 30% para and show- 
ing but a low percentage of extractive matter. 

This paper has been prepared in great haste and therefore 
matters of importance may have been overlooked or omitted. 
In conclusion, the writer wishes to express his appreciation of 
the ample facilities afforded him for this investigation, by the 
Standard Underground Cable Co. He also wishes to ac- 
knowledge the valuable assistance rendered by the following 
persons: Messrs. H. D. Shakarian, T. D. Waring, H. Barbour 
and G. D. Eustachio. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS ; 1021 


Discussion on ‘‘ Power-Factor, ALTERNATING-CURRENT In- 
DUCTIVE Capacity, CHEMICAL AND OTHER TESTS OF RU BBER- 
CovERED WIRES OF DIFFERENT MANUFACTURERS,” AT 
NiaGara Fatts, June 25, 1907 


Henry W. Fisher: In presenting this paper to the Institute I 
wish it to be clearly understood that no attempt has been made 
to say anything or do anything that would be discourteous to 
the manufacturers of rubber-covered wire. The main object 
of the paper is to compare a large variety of rubber-covered wires, 
especially with reference to power-factor and dielectric loss. So 
far as I know these tests have not been applied commercially 
to any extent here. 

A careful examination of the results given in the paper will 
show that power-factor tests are valuable in helping to determine 
the quality of rubber-covered wires, but that they cannot be 
relied upon to indicate the amount of fine Para. All the tests 
given are essential, especially the chemical, voltage, and insula- 
tion resistance tests. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: This paper is interesting in giving what 
may lead to an advance in our method of judging cables. It 
proposes to investigate the character of cables by measuring the 
energy loss in the cable as represented by the power-factor. 
The energy loss in the cable appears to me a very important 
quantity. However, I do not believe it would be safe to judge 
cables merely by this energy loss. What is important in a cable 
or any condenser is 1: the disrupted strength; that is, that the 
cable stands the operating voltage with a sufficiently high limit 
of safety, and 2: the deterioration, that the cable does not 
deteriorate at the operating voltage within a reasonable time. 
Deterioration is the effect of energy consumed in the dielectric 
of the cable, Therefore, if one could imagine a cable which has 
no energy loss whatever in the dielectric or zero power-factor, 
such cable would not deteriorate. This shows the importance 
of the energy loss in the cable. However, the deterioration is 
not necessarily, and probably in general is not proportional to 
this energy loss. 

We do not know much, to tell the truth, of this energy loss in 
the dielectric in the alternating field. We suppose there is 
some kind of a dielectric molecular friction similar to the mole- 
cular magnetic friction of iron; that is, a conversion of electric 
energy into heat during cyclic changes of static stress. This 
dielectric hysteresis is harmless, regarding deterioration, because 
it is a conversion of the energy into heat and merely raises the 
temperature of the cable slightly, just as the current existing in a 
conductor raises it, and, if we keep the temperature of the cable 
sufficiently low, no deterioration will take place owing to this 
heat. So the production of this additional heat by dielectric 
hysteresis, must be taken in consideration in designing a cable 


system. 


1022 RUBBER COVERED WIRES [June 25 


There is, however, a phenomenon, no analogy of which exists 
in the magnetic field, that is, a conversion of energy not directly 
into heat, but into chemical action, and that probably is what 
leads to the deterioration, the destruction of the dielectric. It 
is a chemical action exerted upon the dielectric proper, or upon 
gases included in the dielectric, either absorbed or as air bubbles, 
etc. If we could separate the energy corverted into chemical 
action from the energy converted directiy into heat, we could 
draw conclusions, the former may give us a clue to the probable 
life of the cable or condenser. But even then it may not give a 
direct estimate of the life, because the distribution of the de- 
structive energy is all important. We may have cases in which 
the energy converted into chemical action, that is destructive 
energy, is moderately high but uniformly distributed over the 
whole cable, and the cable so has a good life, while in other 
cable in which much less energy is acting destructively, may 
rapidly go to pieces, because the total chemical action, although 
less is concentrated in a few spots, some air bubbles there weaken 
the dielectric, rapid oxidation of the rubber etc., takes place, 
and so disruption. That latter feature is well known to any one 
who has attempted to build electiostatic condensers for very 
high voltage. There the chemical energy is localized at some 
few spots where air bubbles have remained in the dielectric, and 
destroys it. 

While we do not yet know much concerning the laws of energy 
loss in dielectrics, we know that a part of it, the dielectric hy- 
steresis proper, probably does not vary proportionately to the 
square of the voltage, and so does pot give a constant power- 
factor independent of the voltage, but a power-factor which 
probably decreases with increase of voltage, while from other 
observations and theoretical reasons it appears probable that the 
chemical destructive action at higher voltages increases more 
rapidly than the square of the voltage; that is, the power-factor 
increases with increasing voltage, and it appears to me, any con- 
clusion which could be drawn from measurement of the power- 
factor of the cable could be drawn only if the power-factor is 
measured at the operating voltage, at which the cable is to be 
run, and that is the main objection I have to the paper, although 
in general I agree with the trend of it. I think that power-factor 
and energy measurement are made at 75 volts, if I am not mis- 
taken. I believe they should be made at the voltage at which 
the cable is supposed to operate. 

I wish to call attention to the statement that the condenser 
with the internal energy loss can be represented by a perfect 
condenser in series with a non-inductive resistance. I do not 
think that is quite correct. I think an imperfect condenser 
can be represented by a perfect condenser, shunted by a high re- 
sistance. If we consider the extreme case, where there is a very 
high loss, a series resistance would mean the wattless component 
of voltage is reduced thereby, which is hardly probable. In the 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1023 


present case it makes no difference because the non-inductive 
resistance is very small, compared with the remaining wattless 
effect, but, where there is a very considerable energy loss, I 
think the safer way is to put it that the imperfect condenser 
1s represented by a perfect condenser shunted by a non-inductive 
conductance. 

The paper certainly refers to a feature that has not always 
been given proper attention; that is, the importance of the 
energy loss in the cable, not for the sake of the efficiency of the 
plant, but for the sake of its possible effect on the life of the 
cable. One great difficulty in this matter is the method of 
measuring the loss, which the paper says is difficult and com- 
plicated, and not very easy to do under usual factory conditions. 

E. W. Stevenson: In the early part of the paper Mr. Fisher 
mentions something about the change of dielectric with the tem- 
perature. I would ask him if it is an admitted fact that the 
smaller change of dielectric resistance due to temperature 
shows a higher percentage of pure para? The reason I ask this 
is because recently I read a specification that called for a very 
small change of dielectric resistance per degree of increase or 
decrease in temperature. That is the first time such a require- 
ment has been called for. There has been considerable argu- 
ment upon it, whether it is so or not. 

Henry W. Fisher: The temperature coefficients vary with the 
-ingredients mixed with the rubber, and probably also with the 
steam temperature and pressure and time of vulcanization. The 
coefficients are generally less the higher the percentage of fine 
Para rubber. The coefficients are not uniform throughout a 
considerable difference of temperature. In some cases the 
curves representing the coefficients in terms of temperature are 
of double curvature and sometimes single curvature. I pre- 
sented curves showing these peculiarities at the Asheville meeting 
two years ago. . 

Henry G. Stott: This is a subject in which I take a great deal 
of interest. It seems to me that the paper starts in from the 
wrong point of view. A number of different types of wire are 
taken and analyzed as closely as possible, and then the results 
of various tests are given to show just how the various charac- 
teristics varied with a change in composition. I think we could 
get a great deal more information if the manufacturers would 
start out with a definite composition and increase just one in- 
gredient at a time, and follow that up so that we could get a 
complete curve of variation due to various percentages of that 
ingredient and so on, following through with the percentage of 
para, various extracts, mineral matter, etc. But if we could 
start on a definite basis and build up first one characteristic 
and then another, I think we would arrive at something very 
definite upon which specifications could be based. _ 

The paper on specifications for rubber-covered wires by Mr. 
Langan, read a little over a year ago, assumed to give such speci- 


1024 RUBBER COVERED WIRES [June 25 


fications. On trying to carry out the specifications enumerated, 
stretching tests and others, I found that the same results could 
be duplicated by entirely different compounds, African rubbers, 
mixtures of various sorts, reclaimed rubber could be made to 
give practically the same characteristics as 30 per cent. or 40 
per cent. para rubber, and based on that I published a series of 
tests made on different types of compound to show how impossi- 
ble it was to depend on anything at the present time except on 
the manufacturer’s word, as to what the wire contained. Chem- 
ists all agree that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, in 
any analysis to say exactly what the constitutents are in any 
given rubber compound. 

Henry W. Fisher: Iam interested in Dr. Steinmetz’s remarks 
and fully agree with him that tests of this sort should be con- 
ducted at higher voltages. However, at the time these tests 
were made the apparatus available was designed for low voltages, 
and the wires tested were those used generaily on 100-volt lines. 

It is my intention, however, soon to use higher voltages, in 
connection with which special apparatus like condensers, trans- 
formers, etc., will have to be designed. Probably the apparatus 
most difficult to obtain would be a good mica condenser of low 
power-factor and high capacity to operate continuously at from 
6,000 to 10,000 volts. : 

Answering Dr. Steinmetz’s criticism relative to the method 
of connecting the resistance in the standard condenser circuit— - 
in getting the power-factor it is immaterial whether the re- 
sistance is in multiple or series, so long as the right formula for 
each case is employed. This formula for series connection was 
obtained from Dr. Rosa, of the Bureau of Standards and un- 
doubtedly is correct. The resistance is used in series with the 
standard condenser to make the phases of the currents in the 
two branches of the bridge the same. 

I will ask Dr. Steinmetz if he has treated this problem analyti- 
cally to see if the series resistance method is incorrect, or whether 
he reasons from analogy that the resistance should be in multiple 
with the condenser? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: In the magnetic circuit, the resistanee 
which represents the equivalent of the loss of power in the magne- 
tic cycle, is in shunt to the circuit. In the electrostatic field we 
do not know enough to say whether there is a series component, 
but the assumption is justified that there is an electrostatic 
hysteresis similar to the magnetic hysteresis, and, in this case, 
the wattless component and the energy component should be 
shunted to each other, as in the case of the magnetic circuit. 

I may say that, as the formula was worked out by Prof. Rosa, 
it was undoubtedly worked out for a case like this, where the 
energy quantity is very small, and where, therefore, in the first 
approximation, it is immaterial whether you put the resistance 
in series or in shunt. The question would become of importance 
when the energy component is considerable compared with the 
wattless component. 


hk ea a \\ ee 


~ To 


die ah te’ se a i ees eal 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1025 


E. W. Stevenson (by letter): At the end of Mr. Fisher’s 
paper he lays particular stress on the low breakdown voltage of 
the white coresamples. Thisis a very interesting fact, especially 
as it comes from such an authority as Mr. Fisher. I certainly 
admire his courage in making the statement. I have always 
been strongly of the opinion that white core is nothing more than 
a fad. Of course it is generally understood that the white core 
does not contain sulphur, and therefore is used for the purpose 
of preventing the sulphur of vulcanization attacking the copper 
of the conductor. But of course all copper in rubber-covered 
wire is tinned, and this tinning, as everybody knows, is merely 
for the purpose of preventing this action, therefore if the tinning 
is done properly what is the use of complicating the covering 
process by putting on a white core? 

The British navy requirements call for a pure para next to 
the conductor, a second covering, called a filler, in which there is 


no sulphur, and.a third covering of vulcanized rubber on the 


outside, thus making three separate covers. This forces the 
manufacturer to use strip method of covering which, as many 
of us know, is not the best for all cases. 


4 


ae 


wot a ; 
aS ~ SAAT 
. 
Pri 


are aa wa 


ee Tae 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


INTERACTION OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 


A GRAPHICAL SOLUTION BY MEANS oF A New CrrcLe DIAGRAM 


BY MORGAN BROOKS 


When two synchronous machines are in operation as gen- 
erator and motor, the amount of power demanded of the motor 
causes it to assume a definite phase relation to the generator, 
somewhat dependent also upon their relative excitation and 
upon the impedance of the circuit including the two machines. 
When such machines are operating in parallel, there is theoret- 
ically no power to be transferred, but this ideal condition can 
only exist when the excitation and phase relation of the ma- 
chines are identical; if these differ, even by a small amount, 
transfer of power must take place between generator and 
motor. The power required by the motor causes a certain vector 
difference; conversely, the presence of a vector difference points 


to a definite transfer of power from one machine to the other. 


The object of this paper is to present a new circle diagram 
showing the physical relation of the quantities and conditions 
involved, to derive and interpret the fundamental equations, 
and to develop simple loci for solving graphically or numerically 
the problems of synchronous operation. While based upon 
strict mathematical analysis, it is hoped that the simplified 
diagram here shown will be found so direct and rational as to 
make the analytical method more easily understood and gen- 
erally serviceable. 

The elementary theory of synchronous alternating machines 
assumes that successive instantaneous values of electromotive 
force and current follow one another in a manner strictly har- 
monic. Oscillograph records from normal alternators so closely 
approximate sine-wave forms as to justify the theory. Irregu- 

1027 


1028 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [Tune 25 


larities, if considerable, indicate an unsatisfactory machine, 
one not amenable to-simple calculations; but if slight they may 
usually be neglected, or the irregular wave be replaced for the 
purposes of calculation, where circuits have small reactance, 
by what is known as its “‘ equivalent sine wave,” having the 
same effective value. 

A true sine wave is determined by the projection upon a 
fixed axis, usually vertical, of a uniformly rotating vector, 
whose length gives the value and whose period is the frequency 
of the harmonic quantity represented. Such a rotating vector 
could not be seen by the eye, and in order to make use of it 
an imaginary snap-shot is taken of it, giving the position of the 
vector at a certain instant. A picture or diagram of this sort, 
showing the relation of two or more machines as they exist at 
a given instant, illustrates the interaction of synchronous ma- 
chiries, and may even allow us to make satisfactory calcula- 
tions as to operating conditions. 

In Fig. 1 let the line O A, or briefly A, represent the electro- 
motive force (preferably the measured or efiective rather than 
the maximum value) of a single-phase alternator, and let O B, 
or briefly B, represent the value and relative position of the 
electromotive force of another alternator. If the machines so 
represented are running separately, their vectors may assume 
any angular relation and need not be of the same length, since 
the machines may not be equally excited or driven at pre- 
cisely the same speed. Such a diagram would be understood 
to mean merely that the machines are adapted to operate to- 
gether, and are running at approximately the same speed and 
excitation. For convenience, our snap-shot will always be 
taken when machine vector A is vertical, so that the relative 
difference of vector position is confined to B. If the two ma- 
chines represented in Fig. 1 are about to be connected in parallel, 
it is understood that the vectors should be found nearly coin- 
cident before the paralleling switch is closed, after which the 
machines should continue to run with vectors coincident, or 
‘nearly so. If hunting should exist, its vector representation 
would be in the oscillating position of the two vectors, now 
one ahead slightly, now the other, their possible separation in- 
dicating the greatest amplitude. of the hunting action. The 
position of B with reference to A in Fig. 1 might represent 
either an extreme position of hunting, or a limiting position 
for switching into parallel. If two machines, equally excited, 


ea 


1907] BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1029 


were thrown into parallel when their vectors were coincident 
connection being understood both at O and at A B, no current 
would flow in the local circuit; but if the machine vectors were 


= 
fe) 
i) 
+ 
°o 
Gs 
vu 
pe 
s 
x 
Vv 
ie 
VY 
= 
vu 
_— 
= 
a 
oO 
Vv 


a little out of exact coincidence, as A and B in Fig. 1, then a 
current would flow between the machines, owing to the vector- 
difference voltage, A B, existing in the local circuit, since 1t is pos- 


Fic. 2—Circle diagram 


Fic. 1—Vector diagram 


1030 ‘BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


sible to take A-B to represent the vector difference of the voltage 
O-A of machine A, and voltage O-B of machine B. A-B rep- 
resents the only electromotive force acting and we may use E 
in place of A-B. The current, J, that E will drive through the 
circuit, depends upon the impedance, Z, of the local circuit, 
which includes both machines as well as the line connecting 
them. Since the impedance of a synchronous machine is of 
such a value as to allow full-load current to flow on applying 
about one-third normal voltage, when two machines are coupled 
directly together in one circuit about two-thirds of the normal 
voltage of one machine is required to produce full-load current. 
When E£, or A-B, is equal to two-thirds of O-A, which occurs when 
angle A-O-B = 39°, approximately full-load current will flow. 
This “ circulating current ’’ acts to diminish the angle between 
the vectors; that is, to bring the machines more nearly into 
phase, and normally the two machines operating in parallel 
will be maintained closely in phase, since much less than full- 
load current is required to compel proper phase relation. It is 
to be noted, however, that there isno compelling action whatever 
when phase coincidence exists with equal excitation. The 
current prevents a separation but does not hold the machines 
firmly together as often supposed. 

Assuming counter-clockwise or trigonometrical rotation of 
our machine vectors, A and B, the machine whose position is 
in advance; that is, A in Fig. 1, is a generator, and is retarded 
by reason of giving out power; while the machine whose position 
is behind; that is, B in Fig. 1, is a motor, and is accelerated by 
the power received. The tendency is to bring the machines 
into step. If the action should be strong enough to drive B 
ahead of A, the circulation of current is reversed; B would be 
retarded by becoming a generator, while A would be accelerated 
as a motor. It is easy to see that hunting might occur from 
excessi7e action and reaction. Synchronous machines oper- 
ating in parallel are then held together by a sort of elastic 
band, not under tension when the machines are in step, but 
preventing them from pulling far out of step by a rapidly in- 
creasing force, a force that may prove unnecessarily strong, 
causing a hunting action. 

The value of the synchronizing force under working conditions 
may be calculated, as will be shown. When two machines are 
operating together under light load, if one loses its driving 
power it will fall behind its normal parallel vector position only 


1907] BROOKS; SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1031 


jest far enough to enable it to receive current to maintain it 
in step. No noticeable change in running occurs. It is often 
supposed that when a generator becomes a motor it falls behind 
180 electrical degrees, while in fact it falls behind a very small 
angle, perhaps 10°. When two machines are transmitting power 
in the relation of generator and motor, the current flowing 
between the machines is no longer called circulating current. 
The motor takes a vector position sufficiently behind the gen- 
erator to produce the vector difference, E, required to drive 
the current corresponding to the power demanded of the motor. 
In parallel operation the machines are usually contiguous, and 
the current which may ‘‘circulate’’ has in general only the im- 
pedance of the machines to limit it; while in generator-motor 
operation a transmission line with transformers and potential 
regulators is commonly included, producing a condition as to 
impedance quite different from parallel connection. 

A number of synchronous machines may be operated together, 
some as generators and some as motors, and the machines may 
vary greatly in size. To simplify the problem two identical 
single-phase machines, A acting as generator and B acting as 
motor, will be considered as connected in a single circuit, so 
_that any current generated in A must pass through the arma- 
ture of B. The problem commonly provides that the terminal 
potential of the generator shall be maintained constant, while 
the excitation of the motor shall be under control. Constant 
frequency or speed is assumed. The line is assumed to have 
its resistance, 7, and its reactance, x, [=22fL neglecting 
capacity effects] constant, and the motor resistance and reactance 
are also assumed as constant. To include the capacity reactance 
of a transmission line would change the assumption that all 
the current generated must pass through the motor, since the 
capacity of the line acts as an alternative path. The capacity 
or line-charging current being nearly wattless, the power deter- 
minations of the problem are not greatly affected by their 
omission under load conditions of operation. A correction may 
be made to obtain the total current required of the generator. 
The assumption of constant impedance for the synchronous 
motor, while not precisely true, is akin to the assumption of 
constant friction loss in engine operation. Except for ab- 
normal conditions, it is believed that no great error is thus intro- 
duced. This gives the ratio of R to .Z [R/Z = cos 6], or the 
power-factor of the circrit a3 a known constant, and enables a 
simple diagram to be rl: tied. 


1032 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


The regular equations of synchronous operation will now be 
developed by means of Fig. 2, which differs from Fig. 1 only in 
the drawing of a circle, whose diameter is A/cos 0, so centered 
as to make A a chord, in the extension of vectors B and E to 
intersect the reference circle at F and G, and in projection of 
the electromotive-force vectors, A B, and E upon the circle’s 
diameter AD and upon the chord F D, the utility of which 
projections will presently appear. 


NotraTION 


A, short for O A, a vector representing generator terminal 
voltage, assumed to be kept constant. Vertical position chosen 
for convenience. 

B, short for OB, a vector representing the induced motor 
voltage, variable both as to length and direction. Position 
shown in Fig. 2 indicates any position whatever in its relation 
to A. 

E, or A B, a vector representing the vector difference of A 
and B, or the net voltage acting in the circuit which includes 
the motor. 

I, the current produced by FE. I =E/Z. 

R, the resistance of the motor and circuit. 

X,[ =22fL] the reactance of the motor and circuit. 

Z =/R?4X?2 the impedance of the motor and circuit. 

0, the angle between E and J. It is a constant determined 
by the condition, 

cos 0 = R/Z, the power-factor of the circuit, often confused 
with cosa, below. 

6 appears in Fig. 2 as the angle made by the lines A C and 
OC with vector A; the reference circle is determined by 
having their intersection C as its center. 

$, the angle between A and B, a variable, assumed positive 
when B lags behind A as shown, the usual condition of opera- 
tion, when B is a motor. 

4+, the angle between B and AC, since @ is the angle 
between A C and A, and ¢ that between A and B. 

0-¢, the angle between A and the chord F D, which lags 
behind A C D by the angle ¢. 

a, the angle between A and J, a variable, considered positive 
when J lags behind A due to B being under-excited. 

cos a, the generator power-factor, sometimes confused with 
cos @ above. 


1907] BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1033 


The angle a, appears on the reference diagram as the angle 
BAC, or the angle between ACand FE. A lags 6° behind AC 
by construction, J lags 0° behind E by definition, hence it is seen 
that angle BAC is also the zero angle of I to A. Normal 
excitation reduces this angle to O, and cosa = 1. 

a—¢. the angle between B and J, since B lags ¢° behind A. 
This angle is usually negative, as a is normally small, that is, 
I usually leads B. 

The angle a—¢ appears on the reference diagram as A M F, 
or the angle between E and chord F D. 

cos (a- ) =cos (b—,a) might be called the motor power- 
factor. 

These angles are conveniently measured by half the inter- 
cepted arcs, as indicated in the diagram, Fig. 2. 


~P’, the power output of the generator = A I cosa. 
P”, the power intake of the motor = BI cos (a- 9). 
The diagrams are calculated for values as follows: 


A = 1000 volts, and 
Re = Iohm: 


Where @ = 45°, X =1o0hm also, and Z = 1.41 ohm 
“ 6 =60°, X = 1.73 ohm, and Z = 2 ohms, 
ef = (5°, & = 3.13 ohms, and Z = 3.86-ohms, 


With the above data, the power figures in Figs. 4b and 6 . 
are in kilowatts. 

From the projections of A, B and FE on diameter A D, Fig. 2, 
it is evident that A J/—H J =A H, or as 


Acos0—Bcos (0+¢) =Ecosae (1) 


multiplying by A/Z, 


A’? cos 0— AB cos (0+ ¢) = 
Z 


AF cosa =Alcos a =f PF) (2) 


the generator output. 
From the projections of A. B and E upon the chord F D, it 


is evident that 
| PL Kk bia Bo Kot 
A cos (@—¢) — Bcos 6 = Ecos (a — 4). (3) 


1034 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 
Multiplying by B/Z, 


A Bcos(6@—¢) —B’cosO _ 
Z 


BZ cos (a —¢) 


; = BI cos(a—¢) =P” (4) 


the motor intake. 

The difference between generator output and motor intake 
is lost in heat, as with direct-current machines; this is 
shown in equations (2) and (4): 


A? cos 0+ B? cos 0— 2 A Boos 0 cos $ 


ha Dig 
PES P: Z 


RE 
Zz 


— 5 [42+ B*— 2A Bos ¢] = =RP (5) 


Equations (2), (4) and (5) above, are the well-known fundamen- 
tal equations of synchronous machine operation, and, while derived 
from the relation of two machines operating as generator and 
motor, they apply to two machines in parallel operation, pro- 
vided the current be now understood as circulating current only.* 


Power Output.— 


Interpretation of equation (2) above, 


P= AF cosa 
or, 


Pre 
Ecosa = aay) 
a constant for any given value of generator output, P’. Hence, 
for constant P’, E cos a, the projection of EF on diameter A D, is 
constant, or the locus of B lies in a line perpendicular to A D, 
such as N Q, Fig. 8. The equation is the regular polar equation 
of a straight line. The power output of generator P’ is directly 
proportional to the length of the projection on A C, and hence 
measured thereby. Parallel lines drawn at equal distances 


*Compare Franklin & Williamson, Alternating Currents, page 189. 
Second Edition. 


a 


1907] BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1035 


apart, serve as a chart for reading the value of P’ when the po- 
sition of B is known. 

With P’ =O, the locus becomes the tangent to the refer- 
ence circle at A. For positive values of P’, that is, generator 
action, the parallels are to the right of this tangent; for nega- 
tive values of P”, that is, for motor action, reversing the ordi- 
nary conditions of the problem, parallels may be drawn to the 
left of the tangent, shown in dotted lines in Fig. 3. For such 
positions of B making A a motor, it is evident that machine B 
must become the generator, as will be demonstrated under power 
intake. Mathematically there is no limit to the possible values of 
P’, either positive or negative. Operating values are limited by 
the possible excitation of B,and normal operating values of P’ 
would not ordinarily exceed corresponding values of P”, the 
motor intake, by more than 25%, the condition for 80% efficiency. 
Excessive values of P’ will exist momentarily in synchronizing 

. two machines if the switch be closed at an unfavorable vector 
position. 


eh a ‘a ok ie | 


Power Intake. 
Interpretation of equation (4), 


A Bcos (6— ¢) - B’? cos @ 
Zz ; 


: 
: 
Z 
3 
é 
: 
4 
Z 
+ 
: 
4 
: 
3 
J 


rele 


transposing, 


PXZ 


cos @ 


Bt— By c0s (0 - ) == (6) 


a constant for given intake, P”. This equation is the polar 
equation of a circle, as may readily be seen from Fig. 2 as fol- 


lows: 

Substituting for A/cos @ its value, 2(OC), adding (OC)? 
to both members, and writing (O B) for B, 
PY 


(0.0)2+ (0 B)?=2 (OC) (OB) cos (0-4) = (06)? 


cos 0 


The first member evidently gives the remaining side of the 
triangle OC B, and we have 


y 


(C B)? af CO)? = a or (OC By = Jo cp- 4 (7) 


1036 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


The second member is constant for constant load on motor, 
hence, for such load, the locus of B lies in a circle centered at C 
and of radius determined by the radical. 


ul Load —— 


£ 


/ 
/ 


Por PY =O, B lies in the circumference of the reference 
circle, which has C for its center, and OC for radius. This 


Fic. 4c—Same for 9 = 75° 


Fic. 4b—Same for 9 = 60°. 


Fic. 4a—Locus of B for constant motor intake. 


1907] BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1037 


is evident since I lags 90° behind B for any point in the 
circumference. There may be a large current, and the R I? losses 
are supplied by the generated power P’. 

Negative values of P”, meaning that machine B has its func- 
tion reversed and acts as a generator, bring B necessarily out- 
side the reference circle, as at B’ and B’, Fig. 4a. There is no 
mathematical limit for such external values. If the position 
of B is also to the left of the tangent ST, as at B’, the func- 
tion of machine A is also reversed, being a motor, while, if the 
position lies to the right of the tangent, S T, but outside the 
circle, as at B”, A remains a generator, and both machines act 
as generators to supply the large FR I? losses of such a position. 

Positive values of P”, that is, normal motor action, give 
loci for B within the reference circle, the value of C B dimin- 

ishing with increasing load, as can be seen from equation (7). 
The locus for any given load is a definite circle, whose radius 
is readily determined. Loci differing by equal amounts, as 
loci for 50, 100, 150, and 200 kilowatts, will be separated in 


such manner as to have equal areas in the rings included between 
Ud 


successive loci. In equation (7), if ae exceeds the value of O C?, 


the value of C Bis an imaginary quantity; that is, the motor must 
fall out of step when such an excessive load is applied. 


Ze 
Chew bm (2-6)? 

is the limiting case, the maximum load which the motor will 
theoretically carry. CB =O; that is, the point C is the locus 
of B for this load, which is several times fullload. At this point 
BY cos 0 

zZ 

power for the same point as follows: 


B= OC and P” = Equation (2) gives the generator 


aes » cos 8 
ipy =AcsaZ=Z=28B 7 


It will be noted that this is just twice the value of P”, showing 
50% efficiency, as with direct-current motors at maximum load. 
Loci for nermal loads are circles but little smaller than the 


reference circle. 


1038 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


Efficiency! 
Interpretation of equation (5), 


2 
Pra pr i 


Dividing by P’, which by equation (2) = A E/Z cosa 


re PEST OEP Reese 
P' ZAcosa Acosa’ 
Transposing, 
A | Sad E 
cos 6 (1 5 a) ~ cosa (8) 


For a given value of efficiency, P”/P’, the first member 
becomes constant, and the equation is the polar equation of a 
circle. For different efficiencies, circles of different diameters 
are found, but all pass through the common point A, which is 
common to all positions of /; they are all tangent to S T at A. 

For efficiency = 1 the locus of B is reduced to the point A. 

For efficiency = 0.9 the locus of B lies in a circle whose diam- 
eter is 0.1 A/cos a. 

For efficiency = 0.8 the locus of B lies in a circle whose diam- 
eter is 0.2 A/cos a. 

For efficiency = 0.5 the locus of B lies in a circle whose diam- 
eter is 0.5 A/cos a. 

For efficiency = 0 the locus of B lies in a circle whose diam- 
eter is 1. A/cos a. 

These loci are sufficient to indicate any desired efficiency. 
For zero efficiency the locus coincides with the reference circle, 
which is also the locus of zero intake of machine B. Fig. 5 
shows loci for given efficiencies as marked. 

Heat Loss. Equation (5), P’— P”= R I*, shows that the machine 
A not only furnishes the power P” to machine B, but also supplies 
the heat losses R J? of the circuit. These losses should include 
the core losses of transformer and motor, and for better inter- 
pretation the second member might read RJ?+H, meaning 
by H the core losses, which are approximately constant and 
independent of current. It is seen that the R J? losses proper, 
or copper losses, assuming R as constant, depend upon J?, hence 


ore 


1907] . BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1039 


Angle between Tand B Const B Constant 


Fic. 3—Locus of B for constant generator output 
Fic. 5—Locus of B for constant efficiency 
Fic. 6.—Locus of B for constant /?R loss 
Fic. 7—Locus of B for given current angle referred to generator 
Fic. 8—Locus of B for current referred to motor 
Fic. 9—Locus of B, when of constant value, 


1040 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES . [June 25 


upon 7, and upon FE, which produces J. For any given loss, 
whether or not including core losses, the locus of B will be at a 


constant distance from A, that is, a circle centered at A and ; 


readily determined; see Fig. 6. 

Power Loci. It is easier to calculate values of P” from con- 
siderations of efficiency, than from equation (7). What consti- 
tutes full load for a given motor is a matter of engineering judg- 
ment, commonly called “‘rating.’’ For normal power trans- 
mission an average of copper losses may be taken at 10%, 
whence the efficiency, as here defined, is 90%. This does not 
include losses in the generator. In Fig. 5, the efficiency locus 


for 90% is shown. At the point where this efficiency circle. 


cuts the line A C, a line marked 100, parallel to S T, marks the 
locus of P’, while the circle marked 90 marks the locus of P”. 
The power ratings will be in the ratio of 100 to 90 to produce 
an efficiency of 90%. The 90 circle may fairly represent full 
load on the motor. The next parallel, marked 200, is the locus 
of P’, and the circle touching it, marked 160, is the locus of 
motor intake, 160 being 80% of 200. In the same way parallels 
300, 400 and 500, and the circles 210, 240 and the point 250 
are determined. The maximum of P” in every case is at the 
point C. The maximum intake of the motor on this basis is 
250/90 = 2.8 times the full-load rating. The current flowing 
is just five times that required for full load. By a different 
rating of the motor, other ratios would be found. 

Lag and Lead. Combinations of two or more sets of loci 
give many other interesting facts. For any given power, the 
locus in general has two intersections with a given efficiency 
circle, showing that there are two positions of B for the same 
efficiency of load. A point between can be found where more 
power is transmitted at higher efficiency. Where an efficiency 
circle touches a power circle is the highest efficiency for that 
power. All such points of tangency lie in the line AC, the 
locus of B, to bring current in phase with A, the generator e.m.f. 
Here angle a is zero. With angle a positive, B lies below or 
to the left of the line A C, indicating that current lags behind 
the vector A; with angle a negative, B lies above or to the 
right of AC, causing current to lead vector A. The locus for 
any required lag or lead is easily drawn by merely passing a 
line through A, making the desired angle with A C , the normal 
line. Such loci are shown in Fig. 7. 

The loci for current in phase with B, or at any desired angle 


+ acer etme 


1907] BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1041 


with B, are drawn almost as easily. They are arcs of circles 
passing through A and O, and tangent to the corresponding 
straight loci for same angles with respect to current and A, as 
shown in Fig. 8. 

B Constant. Loci for given values of excitation of B are 
simply circles with radius centered at O, Fig. 9. If the two 
synchronous machines are operating as generator and motor, 
it is evident that the intersection of such locus of B, representing 
given excitation with the locus of the load P” of the motor, 
will show the vector position of B for the conditions given. 
If the load be increased, the intersection must be with a smaller 
power circle representing the increased load. The machine B 
falls back slightly until this intersection is reached. Since in 
general falling behind places the motor in a region of greater 
power intake, the action is stable. If, however, the load is in- 
creased so much that the vector does not intersect the required 
load circle until it has come into line with the diameter OC V, 
running is unstable, because the slightest falling behind brings 
less power to the motor, and it necessarily falls out of step. 

The diameter O V appears as a definite boundary for stable 
running, but as armature reaction is not taken into account in 
the analysis, it is not to be entirely relied upon. From Fig. 4a 
it would appear that a demagnetizing armature reaction would 
bring the vector B, if equal to A, more nearly to the point C, 
the locus for greatest-intake of power; while in Fig. 4c demag- 
netizing reaction would carry the vector B further away from 
that point. Currents that are in phase with A, meaning normal 
positions of B for maximum efficiency along the line A C, are 
demagnetizing for B. Since the action of the current is normally 
demagnetizing upon the motor, a satisfactory operating angle 
for 6 is somewhat less than 60°, a condition fairly well shown 
in Fig. 2. If B exceeds A/cos 0, the diameter of reference 
circle, the machine B is incapable of operating as a motor, since 
B must then fall outside all possible loci of power intake. 

Reactors. The use of a reactance coil increases the angle 0. 
For long lines, where owing to resistance 0 may be small, its 
use is justified. For proper operation it is easy to use too: 
powerful a regulator, as seen from Fig. 4c where 0 = 75°. Here 
it is only possible to obtain the large values of motor intake 
by exciting the motor greatly beyond the value of A. Hence 
if only moderately excited, the motor would fall out of step too 
easily. Effort should be made to make 0 about 55° to avoid 


1042 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


manipulation of field rheostats. Where the transmission line 
is short, the angle will probably exceed this, but to reduce the 
angle by the introduction of resistance would of course be very 
objectionable, as it would decrease the efficiency. It might be 
possible to select a machine with lower inductance than usual 
for such short line conditions, as for operation in parallel. 

Condenser Action. The above paragraph must not be confused 
with the question of over-excitation to produce the so-called 
‘“‘ condenser effect,’’ giving a leading-current in respect to A. 
Over-excitation makes the angle a negative; that is, it is ex- 
citation carrying vector B beyond the line AC, the normal 
excitation locus. It is seen that this is not a constant excita- 
tion, but depends upon the other conditions of the circuit, 
load, etc. With @ greater than 60°, over-excitation means as a 
rule, excitation of B greater than that of A; while with @ less 
than 60°, B may be over-excited, and yet be less excited than A. 
Under-excitation is less than normal, making the current lag. 
due to a positive angle a. It is possible to have under-excita- 
tion, and yet an excitation greater than that of the generator. 
This may be the case at heavy loads with a large angle 0. It 
may be remarked that ‘‘ condenser effect ’’ is not a true ca- 
pacity action, since such effect would not tend to increase the 
triple-frequency component of current, as would be the case 
with true capacity. 

Converters. Synchronous converters may be compound-wound, 
and so operate successfully on circuits where the angle @ is con- 
siderably more than 60°. For short lines, where @ is large, 
the converter series-winding should be cumulatively con- 
nected, to increase the excitation when loaded. This will be 
the proper condition for such a machine serving lighting circuits, 
where over-compounding is desired. For long lines powerful 
reactors may be required to make the use of compound-wound 
converters feasible. For railway service, where precision of 
direct-current voltage is less important, it may be satisfactory 
in the case of a low value of angle @ to reverse the series-winding, 
making it differential. Operation at least would be more satis- 
factory. A shunt-wound converter is often preferred, and 
should act well on moderately long lines. Diagrams for large 
and small angles 0 show why there has been a spirited discus 
sion of the relative advantages of cumulative and differentizc 
connection of the series-winding in converters, the difference in 
action being due to external conditions. 


ee aS — sr. 


1907) BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1043 


Synchronizing. The constants determining the diagram for 
showing the behavior of synchronous machines in operation, 
even under the abnormal condition of falling out of step, are 
not applicable in making a diagram to predict the initial cir- 
culating current upon connecting the same machines in par- 
allel. If two machines are pulled out of step without opening 
the circuit, it is unusual for any damage to the machines to 
result, although they pass through all possible phase relations. 
Yet experience proves that it is unsafe to close a paralleling 
switch except at or near coincidence of phase. The reactance 
of an inductive circuit upon first closing the switch depends 
upon the coil-winding, as if it were without iron, while as soon 
as the core becomes synchronized full ‘“‘ synchronous reactance ”’ 
takes effect. The initial current is several times that which would 
flow at corresponding unfavorable phase position under operat- 
ing conditions and lasts long enough to produce electrical and 
mechanical strains which sometimes result in disaster. By using 
a value for Z, the impedance, perhaps only 15 to 25 per cent. 
of normal, and a correspondingly small angle 0, a diagram may 
be constructed that will properly indicate the dangers of im- 
perfect synchronizing. : 

For safe and effective synchronizing, the circuit may be first 
closed through a coreless reactance coil of moderate dimensions, 
as explained in a paper entitled ‘‘ The Self-synchronizing of 
Alternators,’ presented by Mr. M. K. Akers and myself before 
the Institute in May, 1906. The diagram for showing self- 
synchronizing employs a value for Z about twice the normal and 
a large angle 0, and shows that shocks may be eliminated with- 
out reducing the useful synchronizing power in the same degree. 

Synchronizing Power. - The synchronizing power, tending to 
bring two machines into phase, may be derived from equations 
(2) and (4): 

Equation (2) 


PREZ (Arcos? —A B (cos 0 cos ¢ — sin @ sin $)] 


P’ positive shows that the load upon machine A tends to 


- retard it. 


Equation (4) 
Pp" =1/Z[A B (cos 8 cos $ +sia 8 sin ) — B’ cos 8] 
P” positive shows that the driving upon machine B tends to 


accelerate it. With P’ and P” both positive, or both negative, 


1044 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


the machines are forced together with a power found by adding 
the two equations: 


P'+P" =1/Z[(A?—B?) cos0+2A Bsin Osin ¢] (9) 


The first term of the second member appears to be negligible, 
not only because B is usually about equal to A, but also because 
cos 8 is small. The synchronizing power is often taken as 


1/Z[2 A Bsin Osin ¢] (10) 


If 6, the angle between the machine vectors, is the only vari- 
able, the value of (10) varies with sind. There is no power 
acting to hold the machines together, but only to prevent them 
from moving apart. The effect is a maximum at ¢ = 90°, and 
diminishes up to the unstable position of 180°, where it is again 
zero. The effect, apparently negative beyond 180°, means that 
the action is to increase the angle toward 360° or 0°. 

The above discussion concerns itself only with synchronizing 
forces. The first term of equation (8) appears negligible, yet its 
derivation from equation (2) and (4) shows that 1/Z[A? cos 0] 
and 1/Z[—B’cos 6] represent powers acting in the same 
sense, that is, to retard both machines, A and B. 

With angle @ large, as in normal operation, the retarding 
powers are small, but with Z and angle @ both small, the con- 
dition which exists momentarily at the instant of switch-closing, 
both machines may be so suddenly retarded as to wreck them, 
since under the condition of small value of @ the braking effect 
is at its maximum, and the “A B”’ terms of equations (2) and (4) 
are a minimum. When coreless reactors are used, it is im- 
possible for Z and @ to be small, even momentarily, and the 
shock to the machines is prevented. No synchronizing effect 
is obtained without some reactance. The effect is a maximum 
for. large angles of @. Introducing reactance to increase the 
angle @ means also an increase in the value of Z, which might 
result in limiting the current too much. A’ satisfactory com- 
promise may be effected by trial, but the diagram will indicate 
readily the proper value of reactance to employ. 

There should be a distinction drawn between paralleling 
alternators, and synchronizing a motor or converter with a 
distant generator. To bring into action an additional generator 
especially when the object is to relieve an overload on the 
machines in operation, care should be taken not to close the 


1907] _ BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 1045 


switch with the incoming machine in motor, or “ B vector, 
position. This will be best accomplished by having the in- 
coming machine running slightly above synchronous speed, 
and closing the switch not too early. For placing a converter 
in service, on the other hand, the incoming motor is to receive 
power, and should not be switched in as a generator or in “ 4 ”- 
vector position. This is best accomplished by having the 
machine running slightly below synchronous speed, and closing 
the switch not too early. 


Comparison with ‘‘ V-Curves.”’ The loci of B for various 
powers as shown in Figs. 4a, 4b, and 4c correspond. precisely 
with the irregular shaped curves called ‘ phase characteristics ” 
or more commonly “ V-curves.”’ In the circle diagram, excita- 
tion and current are measured by proper scales radially from 
O and from A (a double polar diagram). In the usual form of 
V-curves, the plotting is by rectilinear codrdinates. The circle 
diagram may be rapidly constructed by ruler and compasses, 
while the V-curves have to be calculated ‘and then carefully 
plotted. That they are identical will be evident to anyone 
comparing the diagrams. If the curves are derived from ex- 
periment, two observations at given load will suffice to determine 
the circle with considerable accuracy, while a multitude of ob- 
servations are needed to prepare a good V-curve. Of course not 
all observations will fall accurately in an exact circle, but the 
moderate deviation of normal power loci shows the essential 
reliability of the circles. It seems possible that a few ob- 
servations carefully plotted in a circle diagram will serve to 
determine the “‘ constants’ of a transmission line, or of a ma- 
chine, even better than the usual ‘‘ synchronous impedance ”’ 
tests. The method has the advantage of making the measure- 
ments under operating conditions. 

The use of the circle diagram is not confined to two synchron- 
ous machines of single phase. Two or three phases may be 
represented. Moreover, the diagram may be applied to a non- 
motor load, such as a transformer with any sort of load on the 
‘secondary. It suggests a method of graphically estimating the 
angular phase difference between the secondaries of transformers 
used for different services, or between the primary and sec- 
ondary of-a single transformer, and at all loads. In the case 
of a transformer, the angle @ changes greatly with the load, and 
several diagrams might be required where one would suffice in 
synchronous machine operation. Indeed the use of previously 


6e 


1046 BROOKS: SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 
prepared diagrams, or charts, outlined for different values of @ 
would make the rapid graphical solution of synchronous prob- 
lems a pleasure instead of a task. The calculations and dia- 
grams assume pure sine curves of electromotive force and 
current, and some allowance may be required where these curves 
are distorted. 

That the vector relations shown by the circle diagram actu- 
ally exist, at least approximately, has been recently shown by 
a mechanical phase indicator attached to two machines running 
in parallel. The problems involved in the operation of alter- 
nating-current machines are often obscure, since the real forces 
are not subject to direct measurement, and it is hoped that 
this presentation of the circle diagram will serve a useful pur- 
pose in the interpretation of the interaction of synchronous 
machines. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1047 


Discussion oN “‘ INTERACTION OF SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES he 
AT Niacara Fatts, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


E. J. Berg: Any paper which tells in a simple way how to 
calculate the characteristics of two thachines in parallel is valu- 
able, especially when the equations or diagrams give the syn- 
chronizing power. From this we can determine the stability 
and the natural period of the machine, in other words we can 
predict something about its hunting tendencies. I doubt, 
however, if this paper will give this information and I ask Pro- 
fessor Brooks for some explanations. Professor Brooks uses the 
reactance and the resistance in the total circuit. It must be 
remembered that machines having the same synchronous im- 
pedance, which means substantially the same synchronous react- 
ance, have widely different characteristics. For instance, a 
machine of definite pole construction and a given synchronous 
_ impedance may have an angular displacement of the armature 

at full load of 15 degrees, whereas another machine of the wound 
rotor type having substantially uniform magnetic reluctance 
may have 30 degrees displacement with the same impedance. 
It is obvious therefore, that any calculations based upon the 
reactance are of little value in determining its characteristics. 

I hope that I am mistaken in thus interpreting the paper and 
that Professor Brooks can explain that he has taken into con- 
sideration not only the true reactance of the armature, but the 
armature reaction, that is the demagnetizing or magnetizing 
effect of the armature current on the field. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I agree with Mr. Berg that these diagrams, 
and also the original diagram of mine that has been referred to, 
apply not to existing but to ideal machines. To illustrate; 
with change of field excitation the current rises—on one side 
leading, on the other side lagging: but they are not suitable to 
predetermine exact values, because they apply to a machine in 
which the reactance is constant, the armature reaction constant, 
the magnetic inductance, as brought out by Mr. Berg, constant 
in all directions. Such machines do not exist. Try experiment- 
ally to reproduce the diagrams I gave in my paper many years 
ago and you find near the non-inductive load, near the minimum 
point, you get about the same shape, but toward much lower or 
higher excitation you get values which may not be exactly the 
same as calculated. 

For higher values of excitation, the experimental curve more 
and more deviates from the calculated, due to magnetic satura- 
tion. For low values of excitation, the curve should bend back 
before reaching the zero line of voltage. Instead of this, the 
experimental curve can sometimes be made to ¢ross the zero 
line. If at constant impressed voltage you gradually lower the 
field excitation from that corresponding to minimum current down 
to zero, and then reverse the field, the machine keeps in step 
and you may bring up the field in opposite direction, until you 


1048 SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES [June 25 


have a very high reversed field excitation, and still the machine 
runs in the same step, with the armature reaction producing 
the field against the opposing magnetomotive force of the field 
circuit, until suddenly the machine slips one pole back and with 
the same field excitation, everything remaining the same, the cur- 
rent drops down to the value which corresponds to the positive 
value of excitation. Now, that no diagram shows because it is 
the effect of the asymmetrical magnetic structure, that is the 
magnetic flux is not in line with the resultant magnetomotive 
force, but differs therefrom by a certain angle, being closerto the 
center line of the field pole, and this feature throws any simple 
calculation out, and requires a much more complicated system of 
diagrams in which you have to consider the two separate compo- 
nents of magnetic inductance,.and of armature reaction. The 
reactance is not a constant, but a function of the position, has 
different values in two directions at right angles to each other 
and the magnetic reluctance of the circuit also has two values. 
You must divide the system into two components, which can 
be done, but makes it a little more complicated. 

Comfort A. Adams (by letter): Without wishing to subtract 
in any way from the credit due Professor Brooks for his very in- 
teresting paper on ‘“‘ The Interaction of Synchronous Machines ”’, 
it is only fair to state that the principle diagrams there described 
were published by Professor Blondel in 1895 in ‘‘ L’Industrie 
Electrique ’”’, and later in his book on “‘ Synchronous Motors ’’. 
The writer has used the Blondel diagram for the last twelve 
years in his classes and has found it a great aid in making clear 
the operation of synchronous machinery. He therefore appre- 
ciates most highly the interesting additions to this diagram 
made by Professor Brooks. 

The quantitative relations between the armature resistance 
and reactance shown in this paper lead one to assume that the 
leakage reactance was chosen in place of the synchronons reactance 
which should have been employed. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven. 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E, 


PROTECTIVE APPARATUS ENGINEERING 


BY E. E. F. CREIGHTON 


The main object of this paper is to describe the methods 
which have been in use in the development of lightning apparatus, 
so that some or all of these methods may be adopted or recom- 
mended as standard in the investigation of the value of any 
particular apparatus. As an introduction, it is pertinent to 
point out the differences and identities in the operation of the 
arrester in test as compared with its operation in actual service. 
Generators, motors, arc lights, practically all electrical apparatus 
except lightning-arresters—are tested under the conditions, 
under which they are to operate. The lightning-arrester in 
service comes into action only intermittently, with long intervals 
between operations, and each operation is under conditions 
more or less different from the previous ones. It protects, 
fails, or is destroyed according to its adaptation to meet the im- 
posed conditions. The arrester may operate for years before it en- 
counters conditions which it is incapable of meeting. The con- 
ditions which caused the failure are usually unknown, therefore 
little or ‘no progress can be made in the design without studying 
the actual conditions which caused the failure of the arrester. 
Since this cannot be done at present with cloud lightning, we must 
experiment with artificial lightning in the laboratory until this con- 
dition causing failureis found. Simply noting whether an arres- 
ter failsand then making an adjustment, elimination, or addition 
of parts of the arrester is a cut-and-try method and has already 
been carried to the limit of its efficacy in the development of 


protective apparatus. 
1049 


1050 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


In making a plea for the recognition of the value of laboratory 
tests, it is pertinent to look at the subject from several viewpoints. 
Lightning-arresters are but auxiliary devices to the large ex- 
pensive machines of electrical transmission systems and the 
receipts therefrom to the manufacturer are small in proportion. 
The successful and continuous operation of electrical systems, 
however, depends greatly upon the efficiency of the protective 
devices. Great expenditures have been made in the develop- 
ment of protective apparatus, not on account of the intrinsic 
commercial value of the arrester business, but on account of the 
broader scope it gives to the electrical industries. Station 
managers should realize that to them has been given each year 
the very best apparatus that could be developed, and that the 
manufacturer of large apparatus is even more desirous than they 
toinstall an arrester which operates perfectly. Failures of 
arresters are comparatively infrequent, and in order to eliminate 
these last faults the intelligent coéperation of many station 
managers is desirable. In a short time, instructions and ap- 
paratus for studying the operation of lightning arresters in service 
will be ready to send to managers, and conscientious efforts of 
many will show the rare instances where the arrester fails and 
will indicate the complete solution of the problem. If the insu- 
lation of electrical apparatus has been seriously deteriorated 
by overheating, a manager should make an effort to ascertain 
this fact and not befog the problem by laying the fault to the 
arrester. Furthermore, there is always a necessity for engineer- 
ing in the choice and location of arresters to give the best con- 
ditions of protection. 

Up tothe present, the design of electrical transmission apparatus 
and that of protective apparatus have gone hand in hand. For 
example, when the arrester was adjusted to its maximum per- 
missible sensitiveness and failed to protect the end-turns of a 
transformer, the transformer designer came to the rescue by 
adding extra insulation to the end-turns. At present, the 
designers of protective apparatus are endeavoring to design 
arresters for each potential, that will limit the rise to 150% of 
normal. That arresters have been faulty is conceded, but the 
designer has too often to meet the condition of weak insulation 
and the occurrence of rare lightning phenomena. The problem 
is further complicated by the varied demands of protection at 
different voltages of transmissions. 

A brief survey of the relation of line voltage to the problem 
of protection is herewith given. 


1907] CREIGH TON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1051 


Line potential and the problem of protection. As a thunder- 
cloud approaches a transmission line, each lightning discharge 
increases the severity of the induced stroke on the line. In 
this wide range of intensity, it is easy to imagine that there is an 
average value of potential, due to discharges to the earth within a 
mile of the line, and yet not actually striking the line, which 
occurs frequently. Its value is unknown, but, judging from the 
fact that it does not jump over the insulators, it is less than the 
spark-potential of the insulator and therefore, in general, less 
than 200 kilovolts. The indications are, however, that it is 
probably not less than 100 kilovolts. 

The thunder-cloud takes no account of the potential of the 
line, so that a 500-volt trolley wire will get the same induced light- 
ning stroke as a 60-kilovolt transmission in the same location. 
100 kilovolts would be harmless to the insulation of the 60- 
kilovolt line, but an arrester must operate instantly and rapidly 
on a low-voltage line to bring this potential down to a safe 
value before the relatively weak insulation is damaged. On 
high-potential lines, furthermore, the brush discharge potential 
of the line conductor is not much above the line potential, so 
abnormal potentials may lose an appreciable part of their 
dangerous peak values through the energy thus lost in the at- 
mosphere. There is one compensating condition in the protec- 
tion of low-voltage systems, in the greater factor of safety in the 
insulation customarily used in the construction. It is not 
unusual to find a 2,000-volt transformer with a factor of safety 
of 5 to 10 and a lightning-arrester with a spark potential of twice 
normal, whereas a 60-kilovolt transformer may have a factor of 
safety little greater than two, and the arrester must be adjusted 
within this limit. 

Effect of location of circuits on the problem of protec- 
tion. There is another compensating condition favoring the 
design of arresters for low-potential circuits; namely in the 
shorter lengths and favorable locations, both due to natural engi- 
neering requirements. For example, 2300-volt circuits are 
usually short and confined to the streets of a city where the 
houses and overhanging trees protect the lines from lightning 
charges induced by the storm clouds. Trolley wires are often 
overhung with feeders and have an additional compensation in 
leaky insulators. The numerous supports of the trolley wire 
each with a low-insulated, leaky-surfaced insulator help to dis- 
charge the static electricity to ground at the point where it is 


1052 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS JJune 25 
freed. Unfortunately, 2300-volt circuits and trolley lines are not 
confined to shady avenues and city streets, but are often carried 
into the open country. Thisis the part of the circuit which needs 
special care and protection against cloud lightning. A striking 
illustration of this necessity was shown last summer at a coast 
city The city trolley was connected with a beach line. A storm 
passed over the city, disabling more than a dozen carson the 
beach but none of the cars on the city streets. All these cars 
carried arresters of antiquated design. Another trolley circuit, 
an interurban, in a lightning storm district passes along miles of 
road with many large trees oneach side. Inconsequence, with the 
ordinary protective apparatus, burn-outs of motots from light- 
ning are so infrequent as to cause no disturbing increase in the 
repair expense. 

Factor of damaged insulation. In the matter of satisfactory 
protection, a factor enters which is beyond the control of 
the lightning-arrester designer. This is the effect of the | 
abuse of the insulation of electrical apparatus. These abuses 
are usually confined to overheating and wetting the insu- 
lation. Overheating produces a gradual weakening which 
will finally cause a short-circuit even at normal voltages. This 
final catastrophy, if due to normal voltages, will not be affected 
by the presence of the lightning-arrester, but the arrester, ac- 
cording to its efficiency, will lengthen the time during which 
the insulation can withstand abnormally high potentials. 


Guarantees. Because of the necessity for the insertion of a 
conditional clause stating that the insulation has not deteriorated, 
no form of useful guarantee that the arrester will protect the 
insulation can be given by the manufacturer, even when an ab- 
solutely perfect and universally applicable lightning-arrester is 
in commercial service. A guarantee that an arrester will not be 
destroyed within a given time, say one year of service, could be 
given, but it would put a premium on making the arrester safe, 
even, at the expense of the apparatus, and is therefore objection- 
able. , 

Regarding service tests. The final criterion of success of an 
arrester is infallible protection under every condition of service. 
Perfect operation in one location does not prove the success of 
an arrester unless it can be shown that the lightning in that 
location was severe and of widely variable nature. There is an 
element of luck with storm-centers away from the line; specially 
high factors of safety of insulation, favorable location of lines, — 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1053 


and freedom from resonant conditions must be taken into 
account. A considerable expenditure of money and time 
must be made before any conclusion can be drawn from a service 
test The information from a laboratory test, while not final in 
its conclusions, gives immediate results and brings an earlier 
solution. 


Trouble inspection. Furthermore, the service test alone gives 
no information regarding improvement of design; Ii “the 
arrester is destroyed, the designer is often called in to inspect 
and investigate the cause of the trouble. There are perhaps a 
few pieces of fused metal, arc holes, broken chunks of porcelain, 
burned insulation of the leads, and a disgruntled manager. 
The results are visible. The cause‘of the trouble disappeared as 
rapidly as the air vibration of explanation. One goes over a series 
of possible causes like the presence of bugs, bad condition of the 
arrester due to previous operation and lack of inspection, col- 
lection of dirt on the bushings, grounded phase, direct stroke, 
line-to-line surge or line-to-ground surge, standing wave, and 
faulty design. On the other hand, if the failure of the arrester 
was the failure to protect the apparatus, speculations are made 
on the nature of the stroke of lightning, its natural frequency, 
duration, quantity of electricity, standing wave, and resonance. 
If the puncture was internal, there is sometimes the question of 
abnormally weak insulation due to poor workmanship, or abuse 
in the form of overheating, wetting or mechanical injury. 
Possibly the arrester was not at fault. I£fthe trouble was a stand- 
ing wave, it might have been in a poor location to protect. The 
earth connection may have been bad, and so on. 

If the insulation was punctured at the bushing, or the spark 
jumped through the air, there is seldom a question of damaged 
insulation and the fault must be laid to the arrester circuit. 
There are at least four leading questions of interest to the engi- 
neer. 

1. Subject of quantity and frequency. Was the arrester re- 
sistance too high? 

2. Subject of frequency. Was the stiealent needle-gap too 
high at the particular natural frequency of the discharge? 
(Some atresters vary in equivalent needle-gap with a variation in 
natural frequency of the lightning surge.) 

3. Subject of earth connection. Was the resistance of the 
earth connection abnormally high, or was the distance between 
the earth connection and arrester abnormally long? 


1054 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


4. Subject of resonance. Was there a standing wave with a 
node at or near the arrester and an anti-node or peak at the 
point of puncture? 

The first three subjects are matters of design. The fourth 
subject is a matter of the location of arrester and choke-coils. 
Unless the trouble inspector enters the field with predetermined 
knowledge of the action of an arrester under the strains of 
different kinds of lightning strokes, the inspection is fruitless. 
Such a knowledge can be obtained only through laboratory 
tests with artificial lightning. 


Example of interpretation from inspections. As an example 
of interpretation from an inspection, the following is given. 
Arresters of special design, set very close to line potential, were 
_installed on a long system operating at 13,000 volts. Near the 
“generating station, the arresters were arranged to give less pos- 
sibility of short-circuit under heavy lightning than in the sub- 
stations. During the entire winter the line superintendent 
conscientiously examined and removed tell-tale papers in the 
arrester gaps. About the only information gained during all 
this time was that the arresters were sufficiently sensitive to 
-operate from the internal lightning caused by switching and 
other accidental disturbances. A short time ago a lightning 
storm occurred. The tell-tale papers at one sub-station showed 
discharges through the arrester. At another sub-station two 
current transformers were punctured, but the tell-tale papers in 
the arresters at the cable terminal house near the sub-station, and 
in the arresters in the sub-station itself, showed no discharge. 
In other words, the discharge passed two sets of lightning- 
arresters adjusted close to normal line potential and punctured 
the two transformers. Why did the arresters fail? What kind 
of lightning stroke was it? 

To answer these questions, the predetermined fact is known 
that these arresters are not sensitive to the first half-cycle of the 
lightning discharge and therefore not sensitive to low-frequency 
high-potential surges. When these arresters were installed, the 
designer knew nothing of the fact nor how to overcome it. It is 
also known that these arresters are exceedingly sensitive to 
high-frequency discharges. 

A probable explanation is that high-frequency cloud-light- 
ning caused’a discharge over the entire arrester, cutting out all 
resistance. A low-frequency surge followed which passed the 
other arresters and damaged the current transformers, the 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 105 


or 


weakest insulation in the sub-station. There is one other possi- 
ble explanation; there may have been a standing wave with the 
nodes at the arresters. This seems improbable, however, 
because there were two arresters, and, furthermore, the same 
phenomenon has been observed in several other cases where the 
insensibility of this type of arrester to low frequency seems to be 
the fault. 

In another paper, the method of correcting the design of the 
arrester considered above is given. Ifa manager of a transmis- 
sion system assumes the untenable position that the manufac- 
turer has sold a piece of apparatus which will not take care of all 
lightning conditions and is responsible for replacement of 
arresters, an embarassing commercial situation arises which 
cuts off free intercourse between the engineers and consequently 
‘impedes progress. Perhaps a manager has decided that the 
arresters are an unnecessary evil and has taken them all off the 
system. With good luck, such a system may run several months 
without trouble from lightning, but each high-potential surge 
which enters the station will do a definite amount of irreparable 
damage to such insulation as is not self-repairing. Sooner or 
later, enough strokes of high potential occur at one point to cause 
a puncture, and all other points weakened by overstraining are 
likely to give way under the secondary strains of the energy 
surges of dynamic potential coming from the initial short-circuit. 

Unless the cause of the failure of the arrester can be traced 
to something specific, little improvement of design is possible. 
We have already come to the stage where accurate measurement 
is the life of further progress. It is necessary to produce arti- 
ficial lightning of varying potential, quantity, frequency, and 
duration in the laboratory, and to study with it the character- 
istic behavior of a lightning-arrester. By applying considerable 
dynamic energy to the arrester at the same time, the secondary 
effects of dynamic current discharge and the endurance of the 
arrester may be determined. Knowing the characteristic 
behavior of an arrester under varying conditions, it is often possi- 
ble to make a very plausible surmise of the nature of the cause of 
the failure. The engineer who advances the argument, as has 
been done, that ‘‘ it is only a laboratory test and does not prove 

the value of the arrester’’ loses the proper viewpoint. The 
object of the laboratory test, aside from the educational experi- 
ence it gives, is to prove the converse condition regarding an 
arfester; that is to say, if the arrester will not withstand reason- 


1056 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


able laboratory tests in conjunction with the insulation which it is 
designed to protect, it is sure to fail sooner or later on the line. 
If the laboratory test shows the arrester weak in some par- 
ticular point, and that point only, it does not necessarily condemn 
the arrester, for it may be due to a condition which may be taken 
care of by some other kind of arrester or one that may not occur 
onthe circuit in years. But, if such an arrester fails, it often seems 
permissible to attribute the cause to this weakness. With such 
knowledge, it is possible to employ to great advantage a par- 
ticular type of arrester on certain kinds of circuits or in certain 
locations. 


An analysis preliminary to standardization recommendations. 
Before attempting to write standardization rules, it is pertinent 
to review the necessities of the situation. 

First of all is the selection of names for the apparatus and 
the general terminology as a means of common intercourse. 

The second consideration is the nature of the lightning so far 
as known, and the strain which must be relieved by the pro- 
tective apparatus. 

The third consideration is the nature and characteristics of 
the insulation to be protected 

The fourth consideration is the characteristics of the pro- 
tective apparatus. 

The fifth consideration is the nature of the test with artificial 
lightning, which will demonstrate the characteristics of, the pro- 
tective apparatus. 
1. TERMINOLOGY 

Lightning. Lightning is a general term to express surges of 
potential anywhere of dangerously abnormal value. The sub- 
‘divisions of lightning are external and internal. Cloud lightning 
is external lightning. Dangerous surges due to switching, etc., 
are internal lightning. 


Protective apparatus. There is required a general term to 
cover all devices which give protection. Protective apparatus 
is suggestive, clear, and brief. 


Lightning-arresters. A name is required for devices con- 
nected not only between lines but also between lines and ground. 
So far, “ lightning-arresters ” is the commonly used term, and 
it seems desirable to retain this to avoid confusion. 


Internal-surge protectors. Another device, which may be of 
the same form as a lightning-arrester, is connected only between 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1057 


line and line, not to ground directly. There are a great many of 
these devices installed at the present time, and it is desirable 
to have a convenient special term to distinguish them from 
lightning-arresters. The term “static protector” has been 
frequently used. The term is not suggestive of the nature of 
the device, and may be confused with the apparatus known for a 
long time as a “ static discharger.” “‘ Static ” means specifically 
the displacement in a dielectric medium. There are static 
strains which may be distinguished from one another. There 
is the normal static strain of potential between line and line, 
which varies every instant with the wave of electromotive force 
of the generator. There is also the excessive static strain be- 
tween line and ground due to cloud-lightning strokes. There is, 
still further, the excessive static strain between line and line, due 
to the stoppage of a dynamic flow of electricity in a number 
of ways; and there is, finally, the excessive static strain between 
line and ground, due to the gradually accumulated static electric- 
ity from wind, rain, etc., coming in contact with the transmission 
line. This last form of static will not be released at all by the 
‘static protector, so there seems to be no reason for standardizing 
this false nomenclature. Devices for carrying off the gradually 
accumulated static usually have low current-carrying strength 
and have been known for years as “ static dischargers.”” Since 
this form of static is directly generated in the line and the word 
“static” is suggestive of rest, it seems desirable to retain this term 
“ static discharger ” for the discharges of gradually accumulated 
static electricity. Conversely, since the other static stresses are 
indirectly generated from electromagnetic stresses, and, further- 
more, since this electrostatic stress is continually being trans- 
formed into electromagnetic stress and back again in the form ° 
of surges, it seems desirable to adopt a term like “ internal-surge 
protector.” It lacks brevity but there is no doubt of its meaning. 

A lightning-arrester is always more or less of an internal 
surge protector according to its design, and it may have auxiliary 
devices which make a static discharger of it also. On the other 
hand, an operator should not deceive himself into a sense’ of 
security because a static discharger has been sold to him under 
the misnomer of a lightning-arrester. Again, an operator cannot 
expect an internal-surge protector to protect against surges of 
an external origin, as, for example, cloud-lightning. 


Earths (connections, resistances, etc). The word “ earths ” 
is used here specifically to mean the connection between the 


1058 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


conductor and the earth in which it is buried. On overhead 
lines, it is usually the only ‘“‘ ground’’ connection. (See below, 
“* Grounds,’’) 

Length of the earth connection of an arrester is the distance 
from the arrester to the conducting stratum of the earth. 

The earth resistance of a lightning-arrester is the ohmic re- 
sistance from the arrester to the conducting stratum of earth. 
Its value may be obtained by measurement between three earthed 
conductors, 


Grounds. ‘‘ Grounds” is a more general term than earths. 
g 


A phase may become grounded without being earthed; for 
example, a cable having its armor insulated from the earth may 
become “ grounded ”’ by having one of its conductors connected 
with thearmor. The armor may be “earthed” by connecting it 
with a conductor buried in conducting earth; in this case, we may 
still speak of the phase as grounded. If the transmission system 
is a mixed cable and overhead system, “earthing” the armor 
may make a considerable change in the surges through the sys- 
tem. 


Sparks. An electric spark is the phenomenon of conduction of 
electricity by a luminous gas. 


Arc, An arc is the phenomenon of conduction of electricity 
by the heated vapor or vapors of the electrode. 


Dielectric-spark lag. Is the time elapsing between the appli- 
cation of the sparking potential and the complete formation of 
a spark, 


Natural or proper frequency of a circuit is the number of oscilla- 
tions per second of potential or current which will take place if the 
circuit is allowed to discharge without interference from excessive 
damping or extraneous power. Such a circuit involves the 
presence of both capacity and inductance. 


Continuous and continual, as applied to the electrical terms, 
retain their defined sense. A continuous oscillation is one 
which appears without a break. Continual oscillations are 
successive sets of oscillations with more or less interval between 
the sets. A generator furnishes continuous alternations, a 
Tesla transformer produces continual oscillations. Continuous 
lightning is sometimes produced by one phase of a generator 
when another phase is short-circuited. Continual lightning is 
produced on a non-grounded neutral system when one phase is 


SI, Be he ere ee 


1907] ¢ CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1059 


connected to ground through an arc. Both continuous and 
continual lightning may be temporary, but should be dis- 
tinguished from transitory lightning. 


Recurrent surges is a term synonymous with continual 
surges. 


Surges. Electrical surges is a term having a sense a little 
more general than lightning. Any unusual rush of current or 
potential is a surge. If the surge potential reaches a dan- 
gerous value, it is lightning. 


Transitory. Transitory, as applied to electrical terms, retains 
its defined sense. Cloud-lightning gives transitory lightning on 
a transmission line. -Many lightning-arresters are designed for 


transitory lightning but not for continual lightning. 


Equivalent spark-gap. This is a general term to express the 
puncture-potential equivalent of a piece of apparatus or insula- 
tion. The gap is in parallel with the device and of such value as 
to cause at least 90% of the spark discharges to pass through the 
device, and not more than 10% across the gap. The equivalent 
spark-gap is the only means of directly indicating the potential 
of a transitory charge. The specific terms are equivalent 
needle-gap and equivalent sphere-gap. 


Equivalent needle-gap. Is the gap of the value explained 
above when the electrodes of the gap are needles. 


Equivalent sphere-gap. Is the gap of the value explained 
above when the electrodes are spheres. It is necessary to state 
the diameter of the spheres; for example, equivalent 2-inch 
sphere-gap. : 

Equivalent spark-gap characteristic curve. This is the rela- 
tion of the applied potentials as represented by gap-lengths 
(abscissas) to the equivalent spark-gap (ordinates). In this 
expression, the specific words “needle” or “ sphere’ may be 
substituted for “ spark.” 


Dynamic. Used as an adjective to the words current, voltage, 
wattage, energy, etc., designates the current, voltage etc., 
which come directly from the dynamos or generators, as dis- 
tinguished from the current, voltage, etc., which come from 


‘static charges, electromagnetism, cloud-lightning, etc. ona line. 


The latter is of relatively small energy. There is no general 
term to express all the discharges that are not dynamic. ‘‘Static’”’ 
is a word used in this sense a number of times, “ lightning ” is 


1060 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


another; but they are both specific and not general. For 
example, the internal lightning from one phase of a generator 
when another phase is short-circuited is really dynamic potential, 
dynamic current, dynamic energy, etc. It is true that before a 
discharge takes place there is always a storage of energy in the 
static stress, in spite of the fact that the source of this static 
stress may have been due to the aforementioned condition, or to 
the sudden interruption of a dynamic current, and, therefore, 
static comes the nearest to expressing the general sense. Non- 
dynamic would be a general adjective covering the phenomena 
not directly derived from the generator. 

Static. This term was originally applied to the stationary 
charges of electricity on rubbed glass, wax, etc. The use of the 
term has been extended until it covers all forms of electric dis- 
placement in a dielectric. This electric displacement may 
be changing its value at every instant, and the electric charge 
istherefore not stationary. The variation in dielectric displace- 
ment gives the static current or condenser current. 

Non-dynamic. Is an adjective applied to the electrical 
terms to cover all effects which do not have their source directly 
in the generators. 


Accumulated static charge. This term applies to the charges 
of electricity which accumulate on a transmission line due to 
wind, rain, etc. and represents an electric displacement in the 
dielectric between line and earth. 

End-gap static. Discharges of a multigap arrester. On high- 
potential circuits, a few of the series gaps at each line connec- 
tion are bridged by tiny sparks which give out a buzzing sound. 
The number of gaps bridged by the sparks depends on several 
factors—applied potential, relative capacity of each cylinder 
to its adjacent cylinder and ground, and leakage through or 
over the surface of the supporting porcelain. 

Grounded neutral system, and non-grounded neutral system 
as applied to a transmission circuit are terms which are self- 
explanatory. A three-phase delta circuit may have an arti- 
ficial neutral made by the connection of auxiliary apparatus in Y 
relation, and this neutral may be grounded. The word neutral 
cannot be omitted in this expression without confusion with the 
continual lightning condition of an accidentally grounded phase. 

Forced oscillations. Forced electrical oscillations are oscilla- 
tions impressed on a circuit regardless of the free, natural, or 


—— 


—— =e 


~~ 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1061 


proper oscillations of the circuit. Alternations from a generator 
on a line are forced alternations. 


Resonance. If the forced oscillations have the same frequency 
as the natural oscillations of the circuit there is perfect resonance, 
or tuning, and both the current and potential will assume ab- 
normal values. | 


Standing wave. A standing wave is to be distinguished from 
a traveling wave. A standing wave is caused by traveling 
Waves moving in opposite directions and so timed that they 
pass each other always in the same relative position. The 
result will be nodes at certain points and anti-nodes at points 
midway between. The nodes remain at zero or normal 
potential, and the anti-nodes vary in potential from double the 
potential of a single wave in the positive sense to the same 
potential value in the negative sense. 


Rate of discharge is the current, J - 2. The rate of 


discharge is an important factions in connection with the resistance 


of a ‘lightning-arrester. 
Acceleration of discharge. Is the rate of change of current. 


Acceleration = ates Aaa The acceleration of discharge 


is an important factor in connection with the inductance of a 
lightning-arrester circuit. 

Recurrence. Recurrence is a convenient word to use to avoid 
confusion with the word frequency in a technical sense. The 
frequency (natural) of lightning may be about a million cycles 
per second, but the frequency of recurrence of lightning stroke 
may be expressed in minutes or months. 

Oscillogram. The tracings of wave-forms taken with an 
oscillograph. 

Multigap. Multigap expresses the condition of a number of 
gaps between conductors in series. 

Multipath. Multipath expresses the condition of a number of 
gaps or circuits in parallel. 


Multiplex connection. On a lightning-arrester, this com- 


mercial term means that there are certain cross-connections be- 


tween phases of the arrester above the earth connection. These 
cross-connections may or may not have an appreciable resistance. 


1062 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 
| ae 
No-gap aluminum arrester. An aluminum arrester composed 
of a series of aluminum electrolytic cells connected directly to 
the lines without the intervention of any gaps. 


Gap aluminum arrester. Is the same as above except there is 
a gap between each phase wire and the cells to prevent the 
natural capacity current of the cell from flowing continuously. 


Graded resistance arrester. A trade term to express the form 
of multigap arrester according to the 1907 design. A number of 
resistance circuits of variable ohmic value are thrown in parallel 
across the simple multigaps. These resistance circuits have a 
common connection at one end and tap in at different points on 
the muitigaps. 


Nature of lightning. In the A. I. E. E. Proceepincs, May, 
1906, the writer gave a brief outline of lightning effects as a basis 
for a laboratory study of methods of measurements. Dr. C. P. 
Steinmetz has given a very complete classification of lightning 
on transmission lines* from the broad standpoint of the analyst 
of the phenomena. While it is necessary to keep in mind the 
classification according to the phenomena, it is more direct for 
the designer of protective apparatus to analyze according to the 
effect of the lightning on the insulation and the lightning-arresters. 
Regardless of the cause of the lightning, the arrester and insula- 
tion take into account in the two kinds of lightning, transitory 
and continual, only the three factors—the frequency, the dura- 
tion, and the potential of the stroke. 

The nature of lightning on electrical transmission has been very 
little studied by direct measurements, on account of the lack of 
specific instruments with which to make the measurements, the 
erratic appearance, the transitory duration, and the danger in- 
volved. 


Frequency. By astudy of artificial lightning, it can be demon- 
strated that a transmission line may be subjected to any fre- 
quency of electrical oscillation ranging from one-half cycle per 
hour (gradually accumulated static electricity) to about a billion 
cycles per second. On many particular lines, the frequencies of 
oscillations will exist probably in groups of harmonics. The 
first and lowest group starts with the generator frequency and 
runs up in odd multiples thereof to all the higher harmonics. On 
account of the impossibility of getting very abrupt changes of 


*ProceEpincs of A, I, E. E., March 1907. 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1063 


magnetism in a generator (due to the relative permeability of 
iron and air) the upper harmonics from the generator wave very 
quickly become negligible. 

It is usual to assume that the fundamental wave of the 
generator will not’attain an abnormally dangerous value on 
account of the limitation of the exciter voltage, but, under the 
special condition of a short-circuited phase on a multiphase 
generator, the voltage of the phases not short-circuited may rise 
to a very dangerous value. Several. years ago Mr. L. Robinson, 
at the suggestion of Dr. C. P. Steinmetz, took oscillograms of this 
condition of operation in some large generators and found a rise 
of 250%. This surge requires special attention in the application 
of lightning-arresters. 

The second group of oscillations starts with the natural 
period of the electrical circuit, including in its factors the in- 
ductance and capacity (static) of transformers, cables, overhead 
lines, choke-coils, and translating devices of any kind in the 
common circuit. There are also the uppei harmonics of this 
group. The first group may overlap the second group. If any 
frequency of the first group coincides with that of the second 
group, then that particular oscillation of the second group is in 
resonance (or in tune) with the particular wave of the first group, 
and its free oscillation will be magnified until the natural energy 
losses of the oscillation are equal to the energy derived from the 
harmonic of the generator wave. 

The third group of oscillations includes those starting with the 
fundamental frequency of the transmission line or cable (not 
including the apparatus.) The line or cable may oscillate as 
one segment.or any odd multiple thereof, giving thereby all the 
upper harmanics. 

The fourth group of oscillations may be designated as mis- 
cellaneous. In this group are such oscillations as those be- 
tween the system and an isolated conductor. An example of 
this kind of oscillation is found in the multigap arrester. Usually, 
about a half-dozen gaps next to the line connection will have a 
spark-discharge across them continually. Each time the 
second cylinder is connected to the first, an oscillation is set up 
on the line, the results of which have been experimentally 
measured. 

The fifth group of oscillations comes from external sources and 
will oscillate independently of the line. In this group are the 
forced oscillations on the line derived from cloud-lightning. 


1064 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


The natural frequency of cloud-lightning, not yet having been 
measured, is presumably determined by the static capacity of 
the part of the cloud that is discharged and the ‘inductance of 
the discharge path between cloud and earth. Since both the 


inductance and capacity vary, the natural’frequency of the - 


cloud-lightning will also vary over a limited range. In this 
group come also the oscillations on a line from wireless tele- 
graphic signals and induction from adjacent transmission lines. 
If any of the oscillations of the previous groups are in tune or 
resonance with one of the fifth group, then such an oscillation 
may be enormously magnified. It is useless to speculate on 
whether or not cloud-lightning has any upper harmonics, 

Following isa summary of the five groups. 

First group. Generator frequency and harmonics. 

Second group. Natural frequency of the main circuit and 
harmonics. ° 

Third group. Natural frequency of the line circuit and 
harmonics. 

Fourth group. Miscellaneous oscillations. 

Fifth Group. Forced oscillations from an external source. 


Comments on the five groups. The generator and cloud- 
lightning are both sources of energy. The generator frequency 
is below any of the natural periods of the lines and therefore 
its fundamental wave is impressed on the line from end to end 
with only relatively slight modifications of form by inductance 
and capacity; the cloud-lightning frequency is. unknown, but 
there is reason to believe that it may be of the order of 100,000 
to 1,000,000 and consequently agrees with some of the 
possible oscillations of the other groups. The oscillations 
on a line due to cloud-lightning are of a double nature; there 
are, first, the forced oscillations due to the natural frequency of 
the cloud discharge, and, secondly, the free oscillations of the 
charge left on the line. 

1. These forced oscillations may be more or less magnified 
or nullified by interference. Unlike the generator forced 
wave, the cloud-lightning forced wave may be far above the 
natural frequency of the line, and the whole line cannot rise 
and fall simultaneously with the cloud-lightning oscillations. 
There will be a succession of waves which will be partly re- 
flected from the ends of the lines, and the reflected wave 
traveling in the opposite direction will combine algebraically 
with the waves it meets. If the line is an odd multiple of 


Wye Sgr 


SO tet AD ie tucks eee he 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1065 


a quarter wave-length, two waves traveling in the opposite direc- 
tion will meet at a certain point on the line and will neutralize 
each other; the succeeding wave will do the same at the same 
point; consequently this point of the line will remain at constant 


potential. At a quarter wave-length in either direction on 


the line, the potential is changing its value at every instant 
as the waves cross each other. The result is that the potential 
will vary gradually and harmonically from zero to twice the 
original height of the traveling wave. This effect has been 
called a standing wave. It is variable in value of potential 
at every instant, but is fixed in its position on the line. Three 
positions of such a wave are illustrated in Fig. 1. A and B 
are two points on the transmission line. The dotted curve repre- 
sents the reflected wave, and the broken curve the standing 
wave. The point A is zero for all positions of the waves and is 
therefore the node. The point B is zero in the top curves, 150% 
in the middle curves, and 200% of the traveling wave in the lower 
curve. 

If the length of the line is not an odd multiple of the quarter 
wave-length, then the reflected waves cause a jumble without 
definite form. 

If the induction from the clouds is electromagnetic (horizontal 
lightning stroke parallel to the line), there is no resultant 
quantity of electricity on the line and the surges set up will die 
out gradually by loss of the initially imparted energy; but, if the 
induction from the cloud is electrostatic, there will be a definite 
charge of electricity set free and left on the line. 

2. The free oscillation. When a thunder-cloud over a line 
discharges, it may set free a charge distributed over the line 
according to the area of the liberated charge on the cloud and its 
position relative to the line. The length of charged line may 
be perhaps of the order of 1000 ft. to 5000 ft. If the line had 
sufficiently high resistance, this charge, when liberated, would 
spread over the line as a bucket of water flows when thrown 
into an empty trough. The line resistance in reality is almost 
negligible, consequently the energy of the charge will be trans- 
formed into electromagnetic energy and back, continuing 
to oscillate until the waves are damped out. Neglecting leakage 
to ground, this charge will finally have changed its position 
from the occupancy of the capacity of a short length of the line, 
to the occupancy of the total capacity of the line, and in conse- 
quence its potential will have decreased proportionally, Mean- 


1066 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 
ANTI- 
NODE 
NODE NODE 


\ pp POTENTIAL 


LINE WIRE 


TRAVELING WAVE 


[June 25 | 


RS 


“_—e 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1067 


while, the waves have traveled in both directions on the line, 
giving the possibility of a standing wave. 

We can examine the condition giving a standing wave by 
assuming a fictitious line 100,000 ft. long and the length of the 
line covered by the induced charge at 2000 ft. The quarter 
wave-length then is 1000 ft. If the line is divided into imaginary 
1000-ft. sections, and, if the liberated charge should so occur 
as to cover exactly two of these sections, the reflected waves 
would be so timed*as to cause standing waves. If the charge 
were liberated in any fractional position of the 1000-ft. section, 


the standing wave would be more or less destroyed. 


Following out this line of reasoning, it is evident that a 
standing wave is a matter of chance not only in the relative loca- 
tion of the liberated charge on the line, but also in the relative 
length of the charge to the length of the line. If this theory is 
true, strokes of equal potential may vary greatly in their re- 
sultant effects. 

There is an important condition of surge, involving probably 
all the first three groups mentioned above. This has been 
mentioned elsewhere as the grounded-phase condition. In 
this, the generator is the source of energy, but it does not force the 
oscillation into the system. Owing to the grounded-phase condi- 
tion of capacity, the generator produces a static charge which 
is set free to vibrate by the making and breaking of the arc 
between the faulty phase and ground. The phenomenon is 
somewhat analogous to putting a spring under tension and sud- 
denly releasing it. As with the spring, the electrical oscillations 
die out, but may be renewed a number of times during a half- 
cycle of the generating wave. An oscillogram of this condition 
is shown in Figs. P, S, and T, ‘‘ Methods of Testing Protective 
Apparatus,’ PROCEEDINGS, American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, May, 1906. 


Duration of lightning. Nearly all lightning oscillations are 
individually of short duration. There is one notable exception; 
namely, the continuous surges set up on one line from a parallel 
line (e. g., telephone circuit under a power circuit). All the 
transitory surges have a logarithmic decrement of potential and 
current. The rate of decrease of the peaks of the lightning 
potential depends upon well-known laws; it is proportional to 
the rate of dissipation of the energy of the stroke. The energy 
of this electrical charge is dissipated in at least three ways; 
radiation, heat, and chemical transformations. 


~ 1068 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS . [June 25 


Hertz has shown that an open circuit is a good radiator of 
energy (wireless telegraphic waves) and therefore a poor oscilla- 
tor. On the contrary, a closed circuit is a poor radiator, but it 
will oscillate for probably several hundred cycles, provided the 
energy is not absorbed in resistance and arcs in the circuit. 
Hertzian waves are radiated only at extremely high frequencies. 
Lower frequencies radiate in the form of brush discharge only 
There is an analogy to the hertzian waves in sound vibration. 
If the air is not struck with a quick blow,-it slips around the 
vibrating material and does not send out asound wave. A trans- 
mission circuit may oscillate as either a closed circuit or an 
open circuit. Line-to-line oscillations are examples of the 
former; line-to-ground oscillations of the latter. 

The line wires, as closed circuit oscillators, have a very low 
ohmic resistance and therefore, as far as this factor is con- 
cerned, a small decrement of voltage. If the oscillation is 
low enough in frequency to pass through transformers, the 
hysteresis and eddy losses in the iron will very quickly de- 
stroy the free oscillations. In each of these cases the energy 
of the electrical discharge is transformed into heat. 

In arcs, especially the liquid-electrode types, and when the 
oscillating current is passed through electrolytes, such as the 
aluminum-cell type, more or less energy is absorbed in chemical 
dissociation. 


Decrement. What is the best value of decrement? This 
question is open to discussion. The shorter the duration of the 
oscillation, the less will be the liability of damage to the insula- 
tion; or the quicker the lightning-arrester operates after the 
potential rises, the less the likelihood of damage to the insulation. 

Without going into mathematical refinements, the duration 
of lightning, as affected by logarithmic decrement, can be demon- 
strated by simple curves. The subject of oscillating Vurrent 
is thoroughly treated in a number of text-books, but there are 
certain specific conditions concerning lightning which make some 
of the general statements regarding the surges inapplicable to 
lightning on transmission lines. As an example, the general 
statement is made that with a, fixed inductance, capacity, and 
quantity of electricity, the time of quickest discharge exists 
when the value of resistance in series is equal to the critical value 


4L tte ae ae 
R= e. This is not true for lightning on a transmission 


line without lightning-arresters, and it is further from the truth 


= Taser ee ee or ee 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1069 


for the lightning-arrester circuit itself. The duration of lightning 
on a transmission line without arresters will be shorter if the 
resistance (or its equivalent in other energy-absorbing power, 
as brush-discharge, electrochemical energy, etc.) is less than the 
critical value. The arrester is placed directly in.shunt with the 
transmission apparatus, and, although the surges on the line may 
continue for a longer time with negligible resistance in the 
arrester, the potential across the arrester is reduced quickly to a 
safe value in spite of the longer duration of current. The dura- 
tion of lightning is the time required for the potential to reduce 
to the safe value. The relations are shown graphically in Figs 
2,3, and 4. Fig. 2 shows two curves of a potential discharge 
when the only variable is the initial lightning potential. The 
resistance has a value above the critical value. The higher the 


ye DURATION OF LIGHTNING 


a5 SSS eas oS ae eee SAFE POTENTIAL 


* 


—------ = 55S = ==— — ——LINE POTENTIAL, 


Fig. 2 


initial lightning potential in this case, the longer will be the duration 
of the lightning. This corresponds to the discharge of lightning 
through an arrester or static discharger containing high series 
resistance. 

Fig. 3 shows two discharges, one non-oscillatory and the other 


_ oscillatory; for simplicity, these are given the same decrement. 


The resistance in the case of the oscillatory discharge is less 
than the critical value, and the duration of lightning is about the 
same as for the value of resistance above the critical value. 

Fig. 4 shows the condition of most rapid discharge of light- 


ning. The resistance lies between the two values of Fig. 3, 


but the rate of energy-loss is greater. The second half-cycle 
brings the potential to the safe value. If the energy is absorbed 
in electrochemical action, as in the aluminum cell, the energy 


loss is proportional to the quantity of electricity, and the re- 


1070 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


sistance may be zero without affecting the result. Further- 
more, the critical lightning potential of the aluminum and 
liquid-electrode arresters will prevent the potential from rising 
above the safe value on the first half-wave. To obtain the same 
result at the multigap arrester terminals, it must be possible 
to cut out all series resistance if the viciousness of the discharge 
demands it. The above discussion is made without reference 
to the dielectric spark-lag. 


Continual lightning. Recurrent surges. Although each light- 
ning surge is transient, in general there may be a succession 
of free oscillations with normal value of potential between them. 


These recurrent surges result invariably; for example, from a 
grounded phase on an insulated Y or delta system and from 
a loose contact on an alternating-current trolley system. Asa 
rule, the duration of each surge cannot even be guessed, but 
the total duration of the successive surges is limited only by 
the removal of the condition which caused them. 


Potential of the surge. This subject’is best treated under the 
‘two heads of transitory oscillations and continuous oscillations. 

In the case of free or natural oscillations, there is always a 
loss of energy and a consequent decrement in the successive 
peaks of potential. The only method of measuring potential 


a 


_—— 


sic aie le aa Hal 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1071 


in this case is by the equivalent spark-gap. If the oscillations are 
sufficiently low so that a quarter-cycle is not greater than the 
dielectric spark-lag of the gap, the gap may be expected to be 
proportional to the potential. On the other hand, if the 
frequency is exceedingly high, or the drop of potential is rapid, 
then the gap will no longer ricasure the peak value of potential, 
but some lesser value of potential depending on the two fac- 
tors, spark-lag and logarithmic decrement of discharge. An 
illustration of this was given in a paper by the writer, (PRo- 
CEEDINGS of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
May, 1906.) As a result of this condition, the maximum poten- 
tial cannot be determined and the nearest expression is to state 
the equivalent spark-gap. This dielectric spark-lag, with some 


SAFE POTENTIAL 


Fig. 4 


types of apparatus, has a bearing on the problem of protec- 


tion. The insulation to be protected has also a dielectric 


spark-lag, and, while it may not puncture before the arrester 
releases the strain, it may nevertheless receive an injurious 
blow. If the insulation has the property of “‘ self-repairing ”’ 
the injury is transient. 

Continuous oscillations must be distinguished from recurrent 
oscillations. The needle-gap in parallel will apparently 
measure the potential in this case, but, continuous oscilla- 
tions occur very seldom in lightning-arrester work. If re- 
current surges follow each other in very rapid succession, it 
seems reasonable to assume that the equivalent needle-gap is a 
close measure of the potential, but this condition of ‘‘ very rapid 


1072 UREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS _ [June 25 


succession ”’ is too indefinite to be relied upon. In consequence 
we shall necessarily be limited in this case also to expressing 
the potential, not in volts, but in equivalent spark-gap. 


Nature and characteristics of the insulation to be protected. 
Tests of dielectric strength have been made for years on insulations 
with continuously applied potentials, applications ranging in 
time from one second up. Much of this information is available 
in published form. Tests of insulation with transiently applied 
potentials are meager. 

Under transiently applied potentials the three types of insu- 
lation—solid, liquid, and gaseous—have properties not shown 
by the tests of continuously applied potential. This difference 
results from both the dielectric spark-lag and the property of 
self-repair. Solid, liquid, and gaseous insulations differ in 
degree in these two characteristics. When the disruptive 
potential applied to the oil insulation is removed, the injury 
inflicted is gradually repaired, provided a slight circulation at 
least of the oil is possible. Oil has also a comparatively high 
dielectric spark-lag. Air has the property of self-repair, but its di- 
electric spark-lag is much less than that of oil. Solids, in general, 
have no self-repairing property but have a dielectric spark-lag 
lying between the values for liquids and gases. The character- 
istics of any insulation are studied by the same methods as 
lightning-arresters. These methods are given farther on. 

The spots most vulnerable to lightning in electrical apparatus 
are the bushings of the leads, the end-turns, and the space 
between phases. Briefly stated, there are just two factors 
concerning lightning and insulation that should be known; 
namely, the potential, and the duration of its application at 
abnormal values. 


4. Characteristics of lightning-arresters. After what has pre- 
ceded, the qualities which an arrester must possess to protect 
insulation are fairly evident. The questions to be answered are: 

A. Is the equivalent needle-gap affected by the natural fre- 
quency of the oscillation? 

B. By the rate and acceleration of discharge? 

C. By the quantity of discharge? 

D. What is the nature of the dynamic current suppressing 
device? 

E. What is the endurance 1 to single strokes? 

to recurrent surges? 
F. Is there a dielectric spark-lag? 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1073 


Before attempting to answer these questions by the designa- 
tion of tests, a review is made of the simpler tests described 
by the writer in the PRocEEDINGs of the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers, May, 1906. To these tests some additions 
have been made. 


First test. Test of static discharger. This test is of less im- 
portance than those following. The source of energy, in Fig. 5, 
is a static machine. The equivalent spark-gap is the value 
of the gap G which causes the discharge to pass through the 
arrester. The spark-gap is necessarily a sphere-gap because 
the needle-gap will carry off the current of a small static ma- 
chine in brush-discharge as rapidly as it is generated, and thus 


STATIC MACHINE 


INSULATION 


re GROUND 
limit the potential to a small value. The condensers are some- 
times used as a convenience in observing the spark-distance. 
The report from the condenser-discharge cannot be confused 
with any brush-discharge. 

If the static-discharge has a high frequency, the measure- 
ment of the ohmic resistance will permit a calculation of the 
current flow at double the normal potential of the system. 
Double potential is here chosen, as in other similar cases to follow, 
with a specific object in view. For the present at least, it 
seems necessary to design the insulation of electrical apparatus 
with a minimum factor of safety of 2. Therefore, 200% gives 
the discharge current at the limiting value of potential. There 


1074 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


is a more important reason for choosing 200% potential for 
the calculations. Some types of arresters, especially the elec- 
trolytic types, have a small current discharge at normal poten- 
tials, but have a critical value of limiting potential above which 
the current flows freely. Choosing 200% normal potential for 
the purpose of calculation brings out the desirable characteristics 
of these arresters. 


Second test. Equivalent needle-gap at commercial frequency by 
step-up transformer. Fig. 6shows the recommended connections 
of the transformer, arrester, and needle-gap. The presence of 


ARRESTER 


NEEDLE 


Z 


INSULATION 
Fig.6 ——— 
GROUND 


= 


nsulation is not necessary, although it is sometimes desirable. 
The thickness and nature of the insulation, when used, is the 
same as the arrester is designed to protect. 

Two equivalent needle-gaps differing somewhat in value are 
obtained from this test. They are: 


a. Equivalent needle-gap (e.n.-g.) by transformation. 
b. Equivalent needle-gap (e.n.-g.) by needle-gap. 


The equivalent needle-gap by transforriation gives the po- 
tential of the fundamental wave, and the value by needle-gap 
gives approximately the peak of the superposed surges derived 


ee 


+ oe 
AAY 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1075 


from the various local oscillations of the high-potential circuit. 

There are three tests to be made, making six equivalent 
needle-gaps in all. 

First condition, no grounded phase; switch S open. 

Second condition, grounded phase: switch S closed. 

Third condition, arcing ground; switch S arcing to maxi- 
mum length of arc. 

Third test. Disruptive-stroke test. There are two simple 


forms of circuits which are recommended for this test. The 
principal difference between the two, lies in the use of a static 


STATIC MACHINE 
G 


CONDENSERS 


CHARGING 


RESISTANCE 


ARRESTER 


COONS 


Q 
Fig.7 


machine as a source of potential in one case and a transformer 
in the other; see Figs. 7 and 8. 

In Fig. 7, the potential. corresponding to the gap G is ap- 
parently the same as the spark potential obtained from tests 
with a transformer, and not the values corresponding to the 
direct-current potential.. 

Fig. 8 is a modification of the circuit used by Mr. Percy Thomas 
a number of years ago for starting the dynamic current across 
the arresters. The modification results from the different 
desideratum. The quantity sought is the equivalent spark-gap. 
It was found that the two gaps, corresponding to the gap G and 
insulating the arrester from the transformer until the spark 


1076 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS _ [June 25 


jumped both gaps, caused variations in the equivalent spark-gap 
according to the relative lengths of the two gaps. Some details 
of the tests which led to the adoption of this simpler circuit 
(Fig. 8) are given elsewhere in this paper. 

Method of disruptive stroke test with the static machine as 
source, Fig. 7. 

Choose a charging resistance of the order of a megohm and 
state its value if known. 

Before connecting the arrester to the circuit, make the equiv- 
alent spark-gap characteristic-curve of the charging resistance. 
This curve shows the limitations of the testing apparatus. 


TRANSFORMER 


CHARGING 


RESISTANCE 


OOOO 


ARRESTER 


GAP 


Fig.8 


The abscissas of this curve are the lengths of the setting of the 
gap G, and the ordinates are the corresponding values of the 
needle-gap or sphere-gap Q, which will allow not more than one 
in ten of the strokes at G to pass over the Q gap. This curve, 
once made, is good for all subsequent tests. 

Place the arrester in position, and take the equivalent spark- 
gap-characteristic-curve in the same way as for the charging 
resistance. 

The value of capacity to use in this test need not be stand- 
ardized. There is a certain minimum value of capacity which 
gives a discharge of sufficient energy to puncture the insulation 
which the arrester was designed to protect. The maximum 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1077 


value of capacity which may be used is determined entirely 
by the size of the static machine. When the leakage through 
the condenser equals the current generated by the static machine, 
it becomes impossible to raise the potential across the gap G 
to the spark value. For most of the tests, the writer has found 
four one-gallon Leyden jars (two on each side) sufficient, and an 
upper limit of the gap G of 5to 7in. This apparatus will send 
a spark over about 200 of the 1/32 in. multigaps under the 
usual conditions of installation, and the number of multigaps 
may be greatly increased by using antennae wires near the row 
of gaps. 

The terminals of the spark-gap Q should invariably be con- 
nected to the terminals of the arrester. The natural frequency 
of the oscillation will be of the order of a million, and consequently 
_a few inches of wire added to the arrester length will, in many 

cases, add very materially to the value of the equivalent spark- 
gap. 

There are a number of variations of the circuit of Fig. 7 
which have been used in research work, but such variations 
would complicate the methods of test without a corresponding 
gain in the knowledge of the operation of the arrester. Some 
of the results of these variations are given elsewhere by the 
writer. The variations consist in making such changes as re- 
placing the charging resistance by a charging reactance of a 
high value, and the introduction of reactance-coils in the cir- 
cuit at different points. 

Method of disruptive-stroke test with a transformer as source 
of potential. Fig. 8. The figure makes a description un- 
necessary. The same charging resistance and condensers may 
be used, and also the same gap G in the new location. 

The procedure is to set the gap G, and then increase the ex- 
citation of the generator (preferably of smooth wave-form) 
until G sparks and opens an automatic circuit-breaker. The 
excitation should then be slightly increased to overcome the 
effect of the dielectric spark-lag which gives a gradual break- 
down of the air in the gaps when the voltage barely reaches the 
spark voltage. The excitation-circuit, resistance, and voltage 
are then held constant. The excitation-switch is then opened 
until the circuit-breaker is closed and then closed again—and so 
on for each discharge. 

The equivalent spark-gap-characteristic-curve is made in 
this case as in the preceding one. The other precautions are the 
same. 


1078 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


The upper limit of the capacity of the condensers which may 
be used, is determined solely by the size of the generating appara- 
tus. The capacity of the condensers should be stated in the 
report. 

The two methods using the same condensers, charging resist- 
ance, and values of G gap give somewhat different values of 
equivalent spark-gap. The method of Fig. 5, using the trans- 
formers, gives the higher value. A plausible explanation of 
this may be found in the ionization of the needle-gap by the 


INDUCTANCE* 


INDUCTQ* 
RIUM. 


applied potential previous to the passage of the spark across 
the gap G. This does not occur in the circuit shown in Fig. 7. 
Since the spark at the gap G (Fig. 8) always takes place at 
peak values, the gap Q is always ionized, whereas in transmission 
practice the generator potential may be at zero potential when 
the lightning stroke occurs. This feature is unfavorable to the 
use of the method of test, but the employment of a transformer 
with its greater energy capacity and availability will often offset 
the disadvantage. On the other hand, the equivalent needle-gap 


ee 


—— 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS L079 


so found will be at its highest value, since the needle-gap, when 
it sparks, is ionized to a lightning-potential corresponding to at 
least two or three times the normal line potential of the arrester. 
The arrester gaps are also somewhat ionized by the potential. 


Fourth test. The Tesla transformer test, Fig. 9. 

The natural frequency of this oscillation transformer is usually 
of the order of 100,000 cycles per secénd and the continual dis- 
charges are good imitations of continual lightning or resonant 
surges, 


_ | RIUM. 
i 


1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
1 
; i INDUCTQ- 
1 
] 
i 
i 
I 
1 
1 


| CAPACITY 
ARRESTER 
OOQO0O00000 


POWER © 


ato TRANS. 


Fig.10 


If it is desired to measure the equivalent sphere-gap by this 
method, the connections of Fig. 9 seem to be the most desirable. 
The procedure is to close the switch S and then elongate the gap 
at G until the arrester takes all the discharge. A needle-gap 
cannot very well be used at G, on account of the energy lost in 
brush-discharge from the points. 

The Tesla transformer is specially adapted to give the effect 
of continual lightning. The method of connection to the 
dynamic circuit is shown in Fig. 10. Condensers are used be- 
tween the Tesla transformer and the arrester to prevent the 


1080 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


short-circuiting of the dynamic-current through the high-potential 
coil of the transformer. The high frequency passes through 
these condensers as easily as through a straight wire, but the 
current at generator frequency is comparatively insignificant. 
The discharge circuit is arranged so that the current passes in 
opposite directions, thus lessening the tendency to choose the 


path through the power transformer. This tendency is still — 


further minimized by connecting the condensers to points on 
the arrester somewhat away from the ends. These points of 


BATTERY 
SWITCH 


RESISTANCE 


NEEDLE 
GAP 


Y INSULATION 


Fig.11 


connection are determined by trial, the desideratum being to get 
a uniform continual discharge through the entire arrester. 


Fijth test. Half-wave test (Fig.11). This test for equivalent 
spark-gap is of great importance as it brings out the sensitiveness. 
of the arrester to the first impulse. An “‘ induction-coil ” gives. 
the same kind of discharge in rapid succession and may be used 
up to the limit of its capacity, instead of the power transformer 
of Fig. 11. The energy in the induction-coil is limited to a smail 
vaiue, and the observer must assure himself that the energy is 


—————— 


Tone 


a eee ee ee ey ee ee Ne 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1081 


sufficient to give the correct value of equivalent spark-gap. The 
variations of equivalent spark-gap are demonstrated in the tests 
given in the appendix of this paper, and are made evident by 
varying the value of direct current in the primary. 

In making this test the record should contain statements of 
the kilowatt capacity of the transformer, the ratio of trans- 
formation, and the nature of the primary circuit (battery or 
dynamo, and the total resistance of the primary circuit). Care 
should be taken to hold the switch in the primary closed long 
enough to allow the direct current to rise to its full value. 

If a spark occurs at the needle-gap on “‘ make,” a flaring arc 


-is formed, which with the 50-kw transformer has sufficient. 


energy to melt the points of the needles. The ‘‘ break” gives a 
higher potential and forms only a spark; consequently, it-is more 


‘convenient to use. 


Equivalent spark-gaps of resistances and closed-circuit ap- 
paratus cannot in general be obtained by this method, since the 
presence of such a closed connection on the secondary prevents 
the rise of potential to high values. 


Sixth test. Endurance test. The endurance of an arrester 
depends on the nature of the dynamic current-suppressing device. 
There are two factors concerning this device to be determined 
The first is the action due to transitory lightning. What is the 
nature of the suppressing device, the time required to suppress 
the dynamic, and the maximum current discharge? 

The second factor is the action due to continual lightning 
when the current-suppressing device is brought into continual 
action. Is this suppressing ability diminished by the passage 
of the dynamic current? 

Oscillograms of the current and voltage during discharge will 
give, with most types of arrester, enough information to make 
a fair answer to the questions of the previous paragraph. The 
oscillograms will show: 


a. The duration of the dynamic current, and the point of ex- 
tinction when the instant of starting the current is varied. 

b. The voltage across different parts of the arrester. 

c. The maximum value of current of the test. 

d. If the arrester did not drop the potential of the circuit, a 
generator of infinite kilowatt capacity could not have done 
more. If the arrester did drop the potential of the circuit, 
oscillograms will show where the potential was absorbed, and 
variations of the current of the test will show the law of relation 


1082 CREIGHTON: PROTECT1VE APPARATUS _ [June 25 


of current to impressed voltage. From this information the 
current flow for any size of generator may be determined. 
If the arrester is designed for transitory lightning only, the 
endurance is determined by sending discharges at intervals of 10 
to 20 seconds until the arrester is seriously damaged or inopera- 
tive. 

If the arrester is designed for continual lightning, the 
endurance is determined by sending a continual discharge from 
some auxiliary device, like the Tesla transformer, over the 
arrester until serious damage to the arrester or short-circuit to 
the apparatus results. 


An attempt is made below to outline the methods of test. 


“which will give answer to the questions at the beginning of the 
section marked ‘‘ 4th consideration ” 


A. Natural frequency. The effect of a variation in the natural 
frequency of the oscillation on the equivalent needle-gap may be 
demonstrated, in general, by a comparison of the values ob- 
tained from tests numbers 1, 2, 3, and 5. The first test with 
high-potential direct-current is not always available. Static 
machines furnish a very small current; the leak over most 
arresters is sufficient to absorb the charge on the static-machine 
plates as rapidly as it is generated, and consequently prevents 
the rise of potential across the terminals of the machine. A 
sphere-gap must be used instead of the needle-gap, on account 
of the line discharge from the latter. Where mercury rectifiers 
are obtainable, high-potential direct-current may be obtained in 
greater values. This test is usually not necessary as the second, 
third, and fifth tests give sufficient data, as arule, to demonstrate 
the characteristics of the arrester. Applications of potentials 
at alternator frequencies of 16 to 60 cycles (test No. 2) give the 
actual spark potential both by transformation and by equivalent 
needle-gap. The third test gives natural frequencies, easily 
regulated to values of a million per second or more. The equiva- 
lent needle-gap will usually differ from the values obtained ia 
test No. 2. 

In both tests, No. 2 and No. 3, the potential is applied during 
several cycles of the oscillations. It has been found that some 
arresters do not discharge easily during the first half-cycle of 
the oscillation. Through considerations of the dielectric spark- 
lag and frequency, this characteristic affects the protective value 
of the arrester. Test No. 5 (half-wave test) brings out this 
characteristic. By inductive reasoning, it can be shown that an 


ae 


Ee 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATIUS 1083 


arrester which has a half-wave equivalent spark-gap much 
greater than the disruptive-stroke equivalent spark-gap is not a 
good protector for low-frequency strokes. If the arrester does 
not spark over its gaps during the first half-wave, the insulation 
in parallel will be punctured unless the time of the first half-cycle 
of oscillation is less than the dielectric spark-lag of the insulation. 
In other words, such an arrester may give good protection at 
exceedingly high frequencies but decreases in protective value as 
the frequency of the lightning surge happens to be lower. 

Summarizing, we have for the study of frequency effects on 
the arrester that: 


Test No. 1 (direct-current static) is usually unavailable and un® 
necessary. ; 

Test No. 2. Alternator gives two equivalent needle-gaps. 

a. The needle-gap corresponding to the voltage by trans- 
formation (no arrester connected to the terminals). 

b. The equivalent needle-gap as actually measured in parallel 
with the arrester. 

Test No. 3 (disruptive stroke) gives two equivalent spark- 
gaps, one for each test. 

c. The equivalent needle-gap of suddenly applied potential 
(alternator as source), arrester energized previous to stroke. 

d. The equivalent needle-gap of suddenly applied potential 
' (static machine as source), arrester not energized previous to 
stroke. 

The form of the equivalent needle-gap characteristic curves will 
usually give information concerning the effect of frequency by 
inductive reasoning. 

Test No. 5 (half-wave test) gives one equivalent spark-gap. 

e. Equivalent neecle-gap which shows the sensitiveness during 
the early part of any surge. 


B. Effect of rate and acceleration of discharge on the equivalent 
needle-gap. ‘The rate of discharge is the value of the current 
carrying off the quantity of electricity which causes the strain 
on the insulation. Mathematically, it is expressed as 


It is the rate of decrease in the quantity of electricity, or it is 
the rate of decrease of potential. It is evident that the higher 
the rate of discharge, the less will bethe liability of damage to the 


1084 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


insulation. The rate of discharge (that is, the current) varies in- 
versely as the resistance in the circuit. The effect of the rate 
of discharge, as affected by resistance, is shown by the equivalent 
needle-gap characteristic-curve of the resistance of the arrester, 
especially using the disruptive-stroke test. 

Before an arrester can have a rate of discharge (current) 


there must be an increase of current from zero, or normal, to. 


the value considered. The rate of this increase is the accelera- 
tion of the discharge. Even if the final rate of discharge is 
high, it will be of little avail if it requires a relatively long time to 
reach the condition of rapid relief. The aceleration of discharge 
is the rate of increase of current. Mathematically it is expressed 


as = u when V is the potential of the lightning and L the 


inductance of the arrester in the path of the lightning. Since 
the potential of a lightning stroke on a line cannot be controlled 
or limited in any way except by overhead grounded wires or 
materials, the factor of inductance of the arrester must be 
reduced to its minimum possible value. Since the inductance 
of an arrester is normally very low, it will cause no appreciable 
voltage effect except at very high frequency, therefore the high- 
frequency disruptive test (No. 3) should be used to measure the 
inductance. In order to eliminate the other involved factors, 
viz., dielectric spark-lag and rate of discharge, a wire 
of good conductivity may be carried over the contour of 
the arrester circuit and the equivalent spark-gap of this induct- 
ance taken. This equivalent spark-gap is inversely proportional 
to theacceleration. In general, arresters have negligible induct- 
ance as compared with the inductance of the earth connection. 


C. Effect of the quantity of lightning discharge on the equiva- 
len: spark-gap. It should be noted that in this the quan- 
tity of dynamic electricity is not included. The quantity 
of dynamic electricity which follows the lightning stroke 
produces an effect on the endurance and arc-extinguishing 
power, and should be considered under a different head. If 
the dynamic discharge causes the lightning surge, the quan- 
tity of electricity involved in the excess potential comes under 
this head. 

The effect of quantity of electricity was incidently involved 
and discussed under rate and acceleration of discharge. 

There are three means of increasing the quantity of lightning 
electricity: 


EEE 


Lee 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1085 


1. By keeping the Capacity constant and increasing the 
potential, 


2. By keeping the potential constant and increasing the ca- 
pacity. 

3. By maintaining a current at high potential and allowing 
it to flow fora time. Q = /t. 

If the increased quantity of electricity is obtained by an 
increase of potential, the duration of abnormal potential will be 
extended, since the logarithmic decrement remains the same. 
If the increased quantity of electricity is due to increased 
capacity, the natural frequency of the oscillations will be lowered 
inversely, proportionally to the square root of the capacity. 

Increased quantity by increase of time requires the applica- 
tion of continuous power. 

- The quantity of lightning electricity which may be generated 

in a laboratory is usually small as compared with the induced 
stroke on a transmission circuit, but not always. The usual 
criticisms of laboratory tests are based on this fact. This con- 
dition is unfortunate, but does not prevent reasonable deduc- 
tions from laboratory tests. For example, if increasing quan- 
tities of electricity up to the laboratory limit are used, and the 
equivalent needle-gap of arrester (X) continues to rise with the 
increasing values, it seems safe to conclude that any greater 
quantity on the line will give a still higher equivalent needle- 
gap. If the equivalent needle-gap of an arrester (Y) remains 
constant for all available values of quantity in the laboratory, 
the conditions on the line discharge will be more favorable to 
Y than to X, to say the least. 

The equivalent spark-gap characteristic-curve taken with 
either the disruptive stroke test (No. 3) or the half-wave test 
(No. 5) will show effects of the increase in quantity of electricity. 
In test No. 3, the quantity may be increased by an increase in 
potential obtained by drawing out the G gap, or it may be in- 
creased by using larger condensers. In the second case, the po- 
tential may be left constant, but the natural frequency of the 
discharge is somewhat lowered, according to the formula 


1 
eae LE 


The quantity of electricity in the half-wave test depends on the 
electromagnetic circuit, dimensions, and on the value of current 
in the primary. Greater quantity, then, may be obtained by 


1086 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


choosing a larger transformer or by increasing the value of the 
direct current. 

The only known way of reducing the quantity of cloud- 
lightning charge on a line is by means of an overhead grounded 
wire or other overhanging material. 

_D. What is the nature of the dynamic current-supp-essing 


device? To make this definite, some of the known devices are. 


herewith enumerated. 

1. Arc suppressed by rectifying quality of zinc; example, 
. multigap arrester. 

2. Arc suppressed by elongation of the arc to extinction; 
example, horn gap, magnetic blow-out, and movable plunger or 
electrode. 

3. Arc suppressed by increase of resistance; example, con- 
glomerate materials, analogous to coherers. 

4. Arc suppressed by counter electromotive force; example, 
liquid electrode. 

5. Arc suppressed by fuses in series. 

6. No arc to suppress; dynamic limited by condenser effect. 
Example, aluminum cell without series-gaps. 

There are at least three features about the dynamic current- 
suppressing device which should be determined experimentally. 

a. Does the device for the dynamic current also restrict 
the flow of the lightning current in any way? 

b How long does the device require to extinguish the dynamic 
current? 

c. Does the extinguishment of the dynamic current set up 
secondary lightning surges on the system? 

To answer question (a), the equivalent spark-gap should be 
taken under the widest range of conditions possible in the 
laboratory. 

To answer question (b), a study of the oscillograms of the 
discharge is necessary. 

To answer question (c), some knowledge may be gained by 
arcing in connection with inductances and capacities of variable 
proportions. Even line tests are feasible, using protected 
needle-gaps at different points to measure the rise of potential. 
Oscillograms will sometimes give an indication of surges, or 
possible surges under more favorable conditions, in the form of 
a sudden decrease of current. 


E. Endurance of the arrester. Two conditions of endurance 
corresponding with the service conditions should be recognized, 


TRE DIS; os 
it 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1087 


1. Endurance to transitory lightning strokes at stated in- 
tervals. 

2. Endurance to recurrent surges. 

From observations of a number of thunder storms, the general 
conclusion has been reached that two strokes of cloud-lightning 
follow each other either in rapid succession, one setting off the 
other, or only after an interval which may be reckoned in several 
seconds or minutes. The time between strokes will vary 
with the storms, but an interval of three to ten minutes was 
usual in one locality. 

Starting discharges over an arrester in a laboratory test at 
intervals as great as three minutes, would make an endurance 
run of inconveniently great lemgth. An arrester recovers from 
a stroke of lightning quickly, and it is necessary to give sufficient 


-time only between strokes to dissipate the energy loss in the 


arrester. In most cases, an interval of 10 sec. is sufficient to 
dissipate the heat, but in a number of cases the writer has used 
¢ sec. with a total endurance of 10,000 strokes. 

If the arrester is intended only for intermittent lightning 
strokes, the only rule that can be adopted is to make the in- 
terval sufficient to avoid damaging the arrester by carrying the 
effect of one stroke over to the succeeding one; such an arrester 
should be capable of successful operation also when the strokes 
come in pairs, the interval between the two strokes of each pair 
being in the range of one to ten cycles of the generator frequency. 
In the test record, the interval should be noted. 

If the arrester is designed for recurrent surges, its endurance 
is expressed in the number of minutes it will carry the con- 
tinual train of discharges until the arrester no longer protects 
or is inoperative. Going out of operation may be the result. 
of total destruction, destruction of some essential part, or in- 
crease of equivalent needle-gap to a dangerously high value. 


F. The dielectric spark-lag. Although there are no commer- 
cial methods of measuring the dielectric spark-lag sufficiently 
developed to present at this writing, the subject is too important 
in lightning protection to leave without mention. Progress 
in the development of protective apparatus requires a recog- 
nition of its existence, and a further study of the cases where 
the dielectric spark-lag of an arrester involves a danger to 
the insulation. Any arrester involving the use of a gap in series 
has a dielectric spark-lag. Thus, eliminating other defects, 
dielectric spark-lag is dangerous wherever it is possible to injure 


1088 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS _ [June 25" 


normal insulation placed in parallel with the arrester by sub- 
jecting both simultaneously to any kind of a lightning dis- 
charge. The converse of this statement, that the failure is 
due to the dielectric spark-lag only, is evidently not true. 
Each case must be discussed on its own merits based on the 
previously mentioned tests. The use of one or more series gaps 
necessarily involves a value of dielectric spark-lag. In reporting 
on the lightning-arrester, it is necessary, for the present at least, 
simply to state whether the arrester has or has not series gaps; 
the use of series gaps does not condemn the arrester, although 
it is a distinguishing feature. 

As a brief summary, recommendation of tests of lightning 
arresters should include at least the following: 

1. The equivalent spark-gap characteristic-curve by the dis- 
ruptive-discharge test. 

2. The equivalent spark-gap at generator frequency. 

3. The maximum discharge current at normal voltage and 
at double normal voltage. 

4. The half-wave equivalent spark-gap. 

5. The endurance of the device. 

The principal protective apparatus to beconsidered areas follows: 

1. Lightning-arresters. 

The choice of arresters will usually lie among the four following 
types: 
. Multigap arrester. 
. Aluminum arrester (no-gap type and gap-type). 
. Liquid-electrode arrester. 
. Magnetic-blow-out arrester. 
. Lightning-arrester choke-coils or reactances. 
. Overhead grounded wires, one or more, with or without 
lightning-rods. 

4. Overload switches, either. single-phase or multiphase. 

5. Insulator protectors, horns or gaps, with or without fuses. 

6. Static dischargers. 

7. Earth connections. 

8. Horn arresters with resistance. 

The classifications of the circuits to be protected are as follows: 

1. Constant-potential alternating- 
{ grounded neutral 
| non-grounded neutral. 
2. Constant-potential alternating- 


grounded neutral 
non-grounded neutral. 


wnanr wea 


current overhead systems 


current cable system | 


1907} CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1089 


3. Constant potential direct-current systems. 
4. Constant-current systems. 


Comments on the protective apparatus. a. The multigap ar- 
rester has been used for years, and has been described and dis- 
cussed elsewhere down to the latest designs. Its excellent 
qualities for discharging transitory lightning are well known. 

6. The aluminum arresters are particularly well adapted to dis- 
charging continual lightning. They do not replace the multigap 
atrester, but complete the protection of a system by taking 
care of lightning which endangers the multigap arresters. Nearly 
all cases of destruction of the multigap arresters of the old 
design have been due to continual lightning. Every constant- 
potential system should have at least one installation of alumi- 
-num-cell arresters. This arrester is preferably installed on the 
bus-bars so as to take care of all feeders, and the multigap ar- 
rester on the feeders outside the switches for protection of the 
particular feeders. The aluminum arrester is a winter and sum- 
mer arrester, as continual lightning is not directly due to cloud- 
lightning. The two types of aluminum arresters are the no-gap 
and gap types. The gap type is the cheaper and has a less 
maintenance expense, but the no-gap type is more effective. 

c. The liquid-electrode arrester is recommended for poten- 
tials above 35 kilovolts, where the design of a multigap arrester 
is difficult. 

d. The magnetic-blow-out arrester has been used for several 
years. It is adapted to constant-potential direct-current 
systems. 

2. Lightning-arrester choke-coils or reactances have the 
function of retarding high-frequency lightning traveling toward 
the station. This retardation gives the lightning-arresters 
time to relieve the lightning potential before it strikes the 
apparatus. This high-frequency lightning seems to come in- 
variably from cloud-lightning, therefore the installation of 
choke-coils on the cable systems is unnecessary and not to be 
recommended. Inmany cases, the installation of good lightning- 
arresters both inside and outside choke-coils is to be recom- 
mended. 

3. Overhead ground wires. Ifa wire be placed underground, 
it is protected from the static charge of cloud lightning. If 
the insulated wire is simply placed in a metallic sheath and hung 
overhead, it is still protected from electrostatic charges from the 
clouds. Both these methods are often impossible of employe 


1090 CREIGHTON; PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


ment on account of the unjustifiable expense involved. The 
next best thing to do is to put the ground over the line wire. 
The farther above the line wire the grounded wire is placed, the 
better is the partial protection. Dr. Steinmetz recommends 
that an overhead grounded wire be so placed that two imaginary 
lines drawn from this wire 45° down from the horizontal will 
include all line wires between them. Each additional overhead 
ground wire, properly placed, gives some additional protection 
against induced static electricity from the clouds. The invest- 
ment is the controlling factor in the choice. 

The overhead grounded wire also has the function of pro- 
tecting wooden poles from shattering by direct stroke of cloud- 
lightning. It also has the possibility of carrying a direct stroke 
of cloud-lightning to ground past the line wires without shatter- 
ing theinsulators or causing a short-circuit. More data regarding 
this point are needed. 

Lightning-rods at each pole add a slight probability that a 
direct stroke will strike at the pole and not between poles. 

If the overhead grounded wire is earthed at every pole, direct 
strokes of lightning are likely to find a more direct path to 
earth. The wave-front of a direct stroke is usually so steep 
that the charge finds the natural inductance of the horizontal 
wire a great impedance, and consequently it is likely to side- 
flash to other lines and also over insulators to its natural terminus, 
the earth. If the earth connection is made at every third pole, 
there are of course more chances that a direct stroke will hit 
a midway point and have a greater distance to travel parallel to 
the line wire before it reaches the earth. The parallel movement 
of the charge gives electromagnetic induction on the power 
wires. Practically all reports of damages to lines by direct 
strokes confine the line damage to about seven successive poles. 
This fact is suggestive. 

4. Overload switches are a part of the protective apparatus, 
especially on grounded neutral systems. Multiphase switches are 
usually installed and are to be recommended on all systems, 
like a cable circuit, where a short-circuit between phases follows 
quickly after a short-circuit from phase to neutral. On overhead 
grounded neutral systems, phase-to-phase short-circuits are less 
likely to occur, and consequently, if three single-pole switches 
are used, the phase short-circuited may be opened automatically; 
and the load, if not excessive, may be carried on the remaining 
two wires with a ground return for a time. 


= > = =r 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1091 


5. Insulator protectors. An insulator protector is a single 
gap or horn gap placed beside the insulators and set with a gap- 
length such that a spark will just prefer to jump the gap to 
arcing around the insulator. The insulator should be in its 
wet condition. The use of this protector is based on the principle 
that if the arc must take place at the insulator, due to any high 
potential, it will guide the flames so that the insulator will not 
be cracked by the heat. The arc is then interrupted either by 
a fuse or by automatic trip-switches in the station. If no damage 
is done to the generator or transformers, the line can be im- 
mediately put back into service. Otherwise, the line is out of 
service until the linemen locate and repair the damaged insulator. 
On most alternating-current railway circuits, a momentary in- 
terruption of service is not very objectionable. 

_ There are some evident objections to the use of the insulator 
protector. 

In general, every electrical system should have some lightning 
protection. There is a certain minimum of protection below 
which it is not advisable to go. The amount of protective 
apparatus above this minimum will depend primarily on the 
value of the transmission apparatus and the value of continuity 
of service. Since there is a uniformity in these valuesin the 
various installations throughout the country, there is consequently 
a general uniformity of practice. There are, however, many 
special cases which require the careful consideration of every 
device described: above. Such examples are found in large 
factories and industries depending entirely on continuity of 
electrical power, also in large lighting plants in cities. Thor- 
oughly efficient protection is not much more expensive than 
partial protection, and is cheaper than carrying duplicate 
plants and apparatus, in addition to the repair bill and almost 
inevitable interruption of service when apparatus is destroyed. 
Arresters are of the nature of insurance. A reasonable per- 
centage of the cost of the apparatus, cables, lines, etc., with 
the factor of the cost of repair of each kept in view, should be 
added to the monetary value of continuity of service. The 
sum thus found should be the limit up to which it is justifiable 
to make expenditures for protection and inspection. 

Recommendations for protection of electrical plants in general. 
These recommendations will vary with the class. of circuit to be 


protected. 
1, Ccnstant-potential, alternating current, overhead systems. 


1092 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


The first consideration is the question of connecting up 
grounded neutral or non-grounded neutral (this includes straight 
delta connection). The answer is somewhat influenced by the 
kilowatt capacity of the generating apparatus and the multi- 
plicity of the circuits. In general, it may be stated that the 
distinguishing troubles on a non-grounded neutral system are 
primarily potential or internal-lightning troubles; these may 
finally result in a short-circuit which becomes a current trouble. 
On the other hand, in the grounded neutral system the initial 
trouble is usually a short-circuit which may become an internal- 
lightning surge when the abnormal current is suppressed. 
Until the advent of the aluminum arrester, there was no way of 
taking care of the continual lightning on a non-grounded neutral 
system, due to a phase becoming accidentally grounded, and 
consequently practice has been favoring the grounded neutral 
connection. It seems safe to predict that the non-grounded 
neutral connection will now become more favored on account of 
the possibility of operating for an indefinitely long time with a 
grounded phase. 

Insulators often fail one at a time, and such failure causes a 
short-circuit in the grounded neutral connection. The subject 
of overload-switches has already been discussed above. — 

On a non-grounded neutral system, the aluminum arrester is 
absolutely essential. On a non-grounded neutral system, it is 
advisable to use an aluminum arrester to take care of the pre- 
liminary continual oscillations which sometimes precede a short- 
circuit, and afterwards to take care of the low-frequency energy 
surge that sometimes results from the interruption of the short- 
circuit current. In the case of multiple circuits, an aluminum 
arrester in a station may be used, connected directly to the 
bus-bars. Multigap or other arresters for transitory lightning 
should be installed on each line or feeder, and lightning choke- 
coils should be used in each phase between the arrester and 


bus-bars. Line arresters should be used on the line at high 


altitudes, exposed lengths, fractional multiples of the line 
length to catch standing waves, and in the usual path of thunder 
storms.  Transitory-lightning-arresters should be installed 
on all incoming and outgoing lines in conjunction with choke- 
coils in every sub-station. An aluminum arrester is probably 
unnecessary, in general, in each sub-station, but in some cases it 
will be advisable to install another arrester at the extreme end 
of the line. 


ee 


= ~-—_ 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS 1093 


When low-potential systems are fed from high-potential 
systems, special precaution should be taken to prevent the 
destruction of the arrester, and then of the low-voltage apparatus 
over the entire system by the accidental impression of the high 
voltage on the low-voltage system. This may happen either 
through electrostatic induction or direct connection of the 
two systems. Continual and continuous lightning are pro- 
duced on the low-voltage system. The multigap arrester without 
series resistance will short-circuit by welding the cylinders 
and thus save the apparatus. An aluminum cell will take 
care of this condition without interrupting the service, 
but the arrester must be of special design, as it may have to 
operate continuously at its critical voltage until the fault 
is removed. If it is only electrostatic induction through the 


step-down transformers, the design is easy, but, if it is a direct 


connection between one phase of the high-potential system and 
the low-potential system, the aluminum cell must be capable of 
carrying the condenser current of the high-potential line until 
the fault is removed. 

One substantial overhead wire well-grounded is a justifiable 
investment on nearly all overhead systems. Two driven iron 
pipes as earth connections are recommended, or one pipe and 
the usual wire to the bottom of the wooden post. Using large 
copper plates buried in. the earth is as a rule unnecessary. 


Earths. Make an earth connection as near the arrester as 
possible, even if it must be a relatively poor earth, then extend 
the earth connection to two good earths. It is advisable to 
measure the ground resistance each year before the thunder 
storms appear and to be assured that it is low. 


Constant-potential cable systems. The choice of grounded ornon- 
grounded neutral is again up for choice, as the conditions in a 
cable system are quite different from those of an overhead system. 
From a protecting standpoint, the difference lies in the fact that the 
phases are as a rule throughly isolated from one another in the 
overhead system, and an arc fed by the capacity current of the 
line can play from one phase to ground without affecting the 
insulation between phases, but in the cable the capacity currents 
are much greater, and an arc from phase to ground quickly 
melts and burns away the insulation between phases. In the 
usual multiple-feeder system, there is not time in this short 


4nterval to locate and disconnect the faulty feeder. Since a 


1094 CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS [June 25 


short-circuit is to result anyway, and open the circuit-breaker, 
practice has favored the use of the grounded neutral connection. 
This avoids most of the continual surges due to a grounded phase 
on anon-grounded neutral. The aluminum arrester will protect 
against the continual surges, and, if there are only a few feeders, 
some evident advantage may be gained by using the non- 
grounded neutral connection. 

The circuit should be broken as quickly as possible after an 
arc starts, or the heat from the flame will cause widespread 
damage to adjacent cables and wires. This is especially true 
on large, -high-current systems where even normal current 
could quickly burn up considerable cable. The engineer should 
take note of the effect of the heat of an accidental arc, and usenon- 
inflammable separations for the cable. Asbestos covering or 
brick barriers are to be recommended in manholes or at terminal 
bells. 

Unless there is some special reason for not doing so, the cable 
sheath should be thoroughly and frequently earthed. It is unde- 
- sirable to make the sheath carry currents of fusing values, or 
to allow even a small arc to play upon the sheath to the earth 
in any spot, especially where inaccessible. 

Except the transitory lightning due to switching, all surges 
on a cable system are continual. Therefore, the multigap, 
or any other arrester involving an arc in the discharge, 
is not so well suited for this system as the no-gap aluminum 
arrester. No choke-coils need be used on a cable system. 


Mixed cable and overhead system The only addition to 
what has been said of each system is the statement of the 
advisability of installing arresters at the junction point of the 
two systems. 

4. Constant-potential direct-current systems have been sat- 
isfactorily protected by the single-gap arrester, notably the 
magnetic blow-out type. In the future, it is probable that the 
no-gap aluminum arrester will find an application where cloud 
lightning is especially severe and where the conditions warrant 
the extra expense. 

5. On constant-current systems, the peculiar conditions 
permit the use of a simple horn gap with a suitable series re- 
sistance. 

Although this paper has been carried to an unusual length, 
not all the salient features of each subject treated have been 
discussed. It is hoped, however, that enough has been said 


1907] CREIGHTON: PROTECTIVE APPARATUS _ 1095 


to assist in bringing the practice in protective appara- 
tus out from the somewhat indefinite speculative stage and to 
establish the foundation of methods and tests which will place 
the engineering on the same reasonable basis as that of other 


electrical branches. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E E 


PRACTICAL TESTING OF COMMERCIAL LIGHTNING- 
ARRESTERS 


BY PERCY H. THOMAS 

Introductory. The question as to what tests for commercial 
lightning-arresters might be properly incorporated in the stan- 
dardization rules of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers has lately been considered by the Standardization Commit- 
tee. The committee finally decided not to adopt any lightning- 
arrester tests in the new edition of the rules adopted June 21, 
1907. However, the sub-committee on lightning-arresters hopes 
to get a full consideration of the subject for the benefit of a later 
Standardization Committee. The present paper, together with 
another paper on the same subject by Mr. E. E. F. Creighton, is 
prepared at the request of the sub-committee to serve as a basis 
for discussion. As no lightning-arrester tests have ever been 
included in the standardization rules, the initial treatment should 
now receive especially careful attention. 

Some idea of what constitutes suitable subject-matter for the 
standardization rules of the Institute must be assumed at the 
outset. It is the opinion of the writer that the purpose of the 
standardization rules should be to give such directions and in- 
formation for the comparison and test of commercial lightning- 
arresters as may be likely to be of general practical use, and 
which are of such a character as to be generally agreed to and 
accepted by engineers having experience with the use or design 
of lightning-arresters. This subject-matter need not be limited 
to specific tests or specifications, but may properly include 
general considerations, suggestions of forms of making tests, of 
apparatus, etc. Individual personal opinions, as to the superi- 
ority of particular designs of arresters, specific tests about the 

1097 


1098 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


value of which there is not a general agreement, untried tests, 
and, in general, purely theoretical considerations should be 
omitted. 

Research work, covering the effects of various conditions on 
the performance of lightning-arresters, the investigation of 
really new types, for example, electrolytic arresters, and the best 
conditions for determining the detail of designs, etc., is of great 
importance and should be actively’ encouraged. But such 
matter properly finds no place in the standardization rules. 

All information and tests embodied in the standardization 
rules must be sufficiently general to be applicable under all 
conditions within their terms; for example, a test applicable 
only to high-voltage alternating-current arresters should not be 
recommended in such broad terms as to be applied to direct- 
current railway arresters. 

This matter must be capable of being readily understood by 
any electrical engineer having experience with plants, likely to 
require the lightning-arresters under consideration. No such 
person should be expected to have to make a special investigation 
of new types of apparatus or new methods of test to carry out 
the rules. All rules should be such as not to favor any particular 
manufacturer’s apparatus. 

Tests may be made to determine: 


1. The condition of individual arresters. 
2. The effectiveness of a particular design. 
3. The characteristics of different types. 


In general, there will be little occasion for testing the condition 
of individual arresters, since inspection will usually reveal any 
defects in the materials or construction. The relative ad- 
vantages of the different broad types of arresters will in most 
cases be determined by general considerations and consensus of 
opinion, rather than by definite tests. It is therefore with in- 
dividual designs that practical tests on commercial arresters will 
be found most useful, and here such tests will be of very great 
benefit. For example, from time to time new commercial 
arresters appear; advocated by comparatively irresponsible 
persons. These arresters very often have little protective value. 
Such arresters, especially on lower voltages, although they are 
by no means confined to such voltages, find a ready sale entirely 
independent of their merits, and the more frequently, since 
engineers of low-voltage plants are often not at all familiar with 


‘ — 


—_— 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1099 


the lightning-arrester problem. If a standard test generally 
accepted and capable of easy application can be determined, the 
detection of such practically worthless arresters will be a com- 
paratively easy matter. Similarly, the necessity of commercial 
trials on a large scale of special forms of high-tension arresters 
which have a very limited protective power, may be eliminated 
by suitable comparative tests. Again, if generally accepted 
tests wére at hand for the criticism of commercial arresters, 
the designs of many of these arresters would undoubtedly be 
overhauled and perfected so as to appear to advantage under 
such tests. If the tests were wisely chosen, a distinct advance 
in the art would follow. 

In testing the effectiveness of individual designs, one of the 
most important features to be determined is the insulation 
strength of the apparatus to resist the static strains existing . 
during actual discharge. 

Tests should undoubtedly be made to cover auxiliary appara- 
tus as well as arresters proper, for example, line choke-coils. 


Conditions of actual operation. A recital of the various ways 
in which lightning and other static disturbances can affect an 
exposed commercial circuit has been often made. Practically all 
result in the equivalent of the production of a sudden rush of 
electricity, or wave, or surge along a line wire. Such a surge 
usually passes both ways in the wire until it is discharged, dissi- 
pated, or reflected. There is obviously no upper limit to the 
electromotive force which may be applied to a line wire by light- 
ning, and the wave or surge may be theoretically of any frequency. 
As a matter of fact, however, since extremely high frequency— 
for example, 100,000,000 million cycles—must necessarily be 
associated with extremely small electrostatic capacities, in the 
writer’s opinion such very high frequency disturbances need not 
be here considered. (See appendix I.) 

The distinctive characteristics of the static surge or wave are 
its abnormal frequency and the fact that it is not directly sup- 
ported by the power of the generator. It should, of course, be 
remembered that these surges not only produce strains to ground 
and between line wires, but they frequently cause concentration 
of potential between turns of windingsin coils, especially near the 
terminals. 

Resonance, being usually supported directly by the power of 
the generator, will not be cared for by lightning-arresters and is 
here omitted from consideration. 


1100 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


There is another possible source of potential rise of a static 
character; namely, the sudden interruption of a current flowing 
through inductance, such as the inductance of a transmission line. 
It is evident that a short-circuit including the whole or a portion 
of the transmission system, will store a relative:y large amount 
of energy in the inductance thereof if by any means sucha short- 
circuit current be abruptly interrupted, a very high potential 
will result, being limited only by the electrostatic capacity of the 
lines and their insulation strength. It is the opinion of the 
writer, however, that this condition never occurs where large 
currents are involved, since the condition predicated for produc- 
ing the short-circuit provides also a discharge path for any 
voltage rise, and since the very energy stored in the choke-coil 
will tend to maintain the current uninterrupted until the major 
portion of this energy is dissipated. When, however, in the 
case of the opening of such a short-circuit as in an open-air arc, 
the extension of the length of the arc proper has reduced the 
current to a value where it becomes relatively unstable, there will 
be a tendency for the arc to goout suddenly, causing the remnant 
of the energy, originally remaining stored in the inductance, to pro- 
duce a rising potential. This residue will, however, never be 
more than a smali portion of the maximum energy stored. A 
great many direct tests of the opening of circuits through en- 
closed fuses and circuit-breakers, where conditions have been 
definitely known to be as assumed, have shown practicably 
negligible rises of potential. The fact that high voltages have 
appeared in electric accidents coincidentally with short-circuits 
and arcs is no proof that these high voltages have resulted from 
th. sudden interruption of heavy short-circuit currents. 

The severity and general range of the static disturbances 
actually materializing within an ‘electric system is definitely 
limited in certain ways. 

A. The maximum voltage of a surge passing along a line 
must be limited to the voltage which will cause a discharge to 
earth over the line poles. That this is an effective limitation 
is shown by the great number of transmission poles which have 
been shattered by lightning. It is natural to suppose that on 
this account, transmission lines having steel poles will not 
make as heavy demands on the terminal protective apparatus 
as lines having wooden poles, since the discharge to earth can — 
presumably occur much more readily on the former. It remains 
to be seen, however, whether the added annoyance of grounds 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1101 


and cracked insulators where the steel poles are used, does not 
more than offset the advantage of the discharge from the wire 
over insulator to ground. 

B. Disturbances of very small energy, and hence very high 
frequency discharges,can be neglected, since the electrostatic 
capacity of the terminal line wiring and apparatus will be such 
as to absorb their energy without serious rise of potential. 

In general, then, it is the opinion of the writer that we are 
safe in concluding that we have to deal only with static waves, 
or surges of potential not over a few times line potential, on extra 
high-tension circuits: namely, high enough to discharge to ground 
over the insulators, such surges having frequencies usually very 
high with regard to normal frequency, but not what is generally 
understood by extremely high frequency ; for example, practically 
never reaching fifty million cycles a second. 

Lightning-arresters should discharge without serious rise of 
potential and without otherwise disturbing the system, this 
specific type of “static,’—not static disturbances in general, 
nor all kinds or forms of that can be devised or produced under 
laboratory conditions,—but merely static discharges actually oc- 
curring under the limitations imposed by commercial plants. 

Choke-coils, static interrupters, or reinforced insulation 
must serve to protect windings from local concentration of 
potential under the same limitations as to the character of the 
static disturbances as above. 

It should be stated in this connection that to enable an ar- 
rester to exert its protective function properly, it is necessary 
that all the insulation of the system, including the apparatus 
and the lines shall be high, and especially that it be high against 
static disturbances. Bushings and surfaces are often broken 
down much more easily by static than by normal frequency 
strains. It is by the strengthening of the insulation of the 
system that immunity from lightning has been in the past most 
readily obtained and will in the future be most effectively 
increased. 

TESTS 

Discussion and specification. The discussion in this paper will 
be confined to lightning-arresters for electric lighting and power 
circuits, alternating and direct current. Such arresters may be 
of many types having radically different characteristics and 
structures. For the sake of clearness, it will be well to enumerate 
the principal of these types: 


1102 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TES1ING [June 25 


Multigap arresters, with series or shunt resistances or both. 
These arresters are used practically only on alternating-current, 
constant potential. The multigap feature is, of course, intro- 
duced on account of its non-arcing power. 

Arresters relying for the suppression of the generator arc 
upon the blowing of a fuse or upon the opening of a circuit- 
breaker. 

So-called horn arresters. 

Magnetic-blow-out arresters. 

Electrolytic arresters. 

Many special types, including such arresters as the water-jet, 
the Gola, the Wurts railway arrester, and many others relying 
on special materials or special forms for their non-arcing power or 
discharge characteristics. 

The features of arrester apparatus most susceptible of satis- 
factory tests are perhaps: 


A. The initial break-down voltage. 

B. The static equivalent during discharge. 

C. The circuit-opening power. 

D. The insulation strength. 

E. The ability to stand repeated discharges. 

F. The choking power and insulation strength of choke- 
coils and equivalent apparatus. 


Houtpinc NorMAL VOLTAGE 


General considerations. The determination of the voltage 
necessary to cause an arrester to discharge is of importance; first, 
as ascertaining the minimum voltage at which protection begins; 
secondly, the margin of safety which the arrester has in order 
to secure itself against continuous break-down. The second 
consideration is of special importance in the high-tension ar- 
resters, especially voltages of 30,000 and above. 

On very high-tension circuits, the power of multigap lightning- 
arresters to hold the normal line voltage is very greatly affected 
by attendant conditions; for example, the electrostatic capacity 
of the intermediate unconnected cylinders forming the gaps 
causes a break-down to occur at a much lower voltage on high 
frequency than on low frequency. This subject has been fully 
discussed before the Institute, for example, in connection with 
the following papers: 


“Methods of Testing Protective Apparatus” by E. E. F. Creigh- 
ton; see discussion by Chas. P. Steinmetz, TRANSACTIONS, Vol. 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1103 


XXV, 1906; ‘“ Protection against Lightning, and the Multigap 
Arrester,”” by D. B. Rushmore and D. Dubois. TRANSACTIONS, 
Vol. XXVI, 1907, and ‘Multigap Lightning Arresters with 
Ground Shields,” R. B. Ingram, Electric Journal, April, 1907. 

Since the capacity of these gap cylinders is increased by the 
nearness of grounded objects, the placing of arresters near a 
wire or transformer case or similar object, or more particularly 
in the neighborhood of other arresters or line wires on another 
leg of the circuit, tends very greatly to increase this effect. 
The effect is so marked that an arrester entirely capable of holding 
the line voltage with a good margin of safety, if installed apart 
from other objects, will be utterly unable to hold normal voltage, 
if installed in close proximity to another arrester connected to a 
different leg of the line. From this, it follows that tests to de- 
~ termine the power of an arrester to hold normal voltage must be 
made under conditions equivalent to those under which that 
individual arrester is to serve. The writer suggests that, on 
voltages of 40,000 volts or higher, an excess of air-gaps may be 
provided, and the exact number required to give a proper margin 
over line voltage be determined by trial after final installation. 

Too sensitive an adjustment of the series-gaps of an arrester 
on very high tension circuits will be the cause of the greatest 
annoyance, and probably will result in the destruction of the 
arrester. The resulting frequent discharges of the arrester will 
oftentimes be laid to abnormal static, due to some unknown 
cause, when as a matter of fact the only difficulty is the ease 
with which the arrester discharges on slight impulses of high 
frequency or even fluctuations of abnormal voitage. This 
condition has in the past, often been a source of great annoyance 
in commercial plants where it has frequently not been recognized ; 
it should always be carefully borne in mind. 


Description of test. The actual measurement of the break- 
down voltage of an arrester can best be made at normal fre- 
quency. In making this measurement, the primary object is to 
determine the margin of safety in the arrester over the normal 
line voltage as read on a voltmeter. Thus in this particular 
instance the use of the needle-point spark-gap for measuring the 
voltage as provided in the standardization rules, though always 
of value, is not as directly the criterion sought as the voltage 
determined by the voltmeter. In making such a measurement, 
all the conditions provided in the standardization rules under 
“Insulation Tests ”’ should be followed, where applicable. The 


1104 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING {June 25 


writer suggests that, where practicable, the determination of the 
breaking down voltage of arresters on 40,000 volts or over be 
made from the main generator of the system with the arresters 
and neighboring apparatus in final position. 


It is true that high-tension multigap arresters will break 


down at a much lower voltage on high-frequency electromotive 
force than on normal frequency; but, in the opinion of “the 
writer, since this phenomenon is in the direction of safety, and, 
since it has been established by actual experience on high- 
tension plants that this fact does not cause discharges on arresters 
frequently enough to be troublesome, this may be accepted 
as a favorable characteristic of such arresters. This matter is, 
however, properly a subject for investigation and research. 


Maximum IMPEDANCE OFFERED TO A DISCHARGE—NEEDLE-GAP 
EQUIVALENT 


General considerations. The maximum impedance offered to 
a discharge determines the protective power of an arrester, and 
is therefore of the greatest importance. On the other hand, 
since so little can be definitely determined as to the type of dis- 
charges actually to be met, and so much depends upon the 
characteristics of the circuit and apparatus being protected, 
it is impracticable at the present time to devise absolute 
tests of a general character which are not likely to be uncertain 
or misleading. It is of course easy to choose condensers and 
circuits, and apply static to arresters under a great variety of 
conditions with presumably considerable variation in results, 
but in the opinion of the writer such tests, except where they can 
be shown to be reasonably within the conditions existing ina 
transmission line, should not be specified for the testing of com- 
mercial arresters, but should be considered as proper subjects for 
investigation and research. However, comparative tests be- 
tween arresters may be often made to great advantage. 

If an arrester be subjected to a high-frequency discharge from 
a condenser, and its static equivalent measured by the equivalent 
needle-gap method, the numerical result will depend upon the 
character and method of operation of the testing apparatus; for 
example, it will depend on the electrostatic capacity of the con- 
denser, the inductance through which it discharges, the voltage 
to which it is charged, the auxiliary circuits providing for the 
charging of the condenser, and the disposition of the arrester 
itself. Since it is manifestly impossible to determine upon any 


en 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1105 


reasonable number of definitive conditions as representing the 
transmission line under all conditions, no general absolute test 
should be attempted as such; that is, no attempt should be made 
to treat each arrester as having so many units of protecting power 
irrespective of conditions of service and of test. 

The study of arresters through the agency of condenser 
discharges has been an absolute necessity in the progress 
of recent years. This progress has been notable. Tests with 
any reasonable form of condenser discharges, as distinguished 
from applications of normal frequency, will show practically the 
same characteristic results, although numerically different 
frequencies and different circuit arrangements, etc. will show 
variations. Consequently, to get what advantage is practicable 
out of such tests, the natural course would seem to be to use 
some condition, or conditions, of condenser capacity, etc., known 
to be reasonably well within the conditions of actual operation 
and reasonably easy of realization, and then to make comparative 
tests for what they may be worth. By this means, a large part 
of.the value of a complete range of static tests will be obtained. 
Any further data that might be found by multiplying the tests 
under different conditions, would probably produce only small 
changes in the actual conclusions; such additional tests are 
more properly subjects for investigation and research than for 
practical tests of commercial arresters. 

Taking up these tests more in detail, the various types of 
arresters will be separately considered, since their needle-gap 
equivalents are controlled by radically different features. 


1. Arresters offering no impedance to the discharge. Such arrest- 
ers rely on special features for suppressing the generator arc. 
Examples are the fuse type, the horn type, and the magnetic 
blow-out type. If a horn arrester has also a series resistance, 
it is no longer properly a horn arrester but a series resistance 
arrester. It is obvious that the maximum impedance offered to 
a discharge by this type is practically equal to the initial 
discharge voltage, and no further test is required than has been 
already indicated under the head of holding normal voltage. 
This type of arrester is especially effective in discharging the 
line. 

In connection with these arresters, the question must be 
raised, however, that it is theoretically possible for the device 
relied on for interrupting the generator current to introduce a 
rise of potential. This question can be determined finally only 


1106 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


by experience. The definite data available at the present time, 
derived from direct tests, have, as far as the writer is aware, 
failed to indicate any serious rise of potential from the operation 
of fuses, horn, or magnetic blow-out arresters. The question is, 
however, somewhat a matter of controversy. 


2. Arresters with series resistance. Series resistance must neces- 
sarily offer some impedance to a static discharge. The amount 
of this impedance will depend upon the value of the resistance, 
on its inductance and its capacity, on the abruptness of the 
application of the charge, and upon the inductance through 
which such charge must pass. Any inductance in the series 
resistance will tend to impede the discharge; any capacity, 
however, either internal or with other objects, will tend to 
facilitate the discharge. The higher the frequency, that is, 
the greater the abruptness of the discharge, the greater will be 
the relative importance of the inductance and capacity in the 
series resistance in comparison with the ohmic resistance. 

It is evident that the danger to apparatus introduced by the 
series resistance will be negligible if the discharge be small 
enough, or may theoretically be dangerous with the lowest 
resistance if the discharge be abrupt and heavy enough. Since 
both the magnitude and abruptness of the discharges which can 
be produced in a commercial system are limited by certain 
maximum conditions, it becomes an open question just how 
much danger will result in practical operation from a definite 
series resistance. 

Series resistances for lightning-arresters have been designed on 
two principles; first, sufficient to cut down the generator current 
following a discharge, to render the device easily non-arcing, and 
to prevent all burning of cylinders; secondly, usually with multi- 
gap arresters, to allow as free a discharge as possible while still 
maintaining the non-arcing quality. In the latter case the shunt 
resistance has ordinarily been used as well, and helps decidedly 
in cutting down the minimum allowable series resistance. 
Experience shows that the first mentioned high series resistance 
does seriously impede the static discharge on commercial lines 


and it has been practically abandoned as a means of princi- . 


pal protection,. though somewhat used to carry off the so-called 
slowly accumulated charge. The low series resistance is much 
used on all types of alternating-current circuits except those of 
lower voltages; it can hardly be considered at present as finally 
determined, whether or not the present “‘ minimum value ” 


yrs ee 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1107 


Series resistances offer serious opposition to actual discharges on 
commercial systems. In most cases they do not. 

The determination by test of the impedance offered by a 
series resistance arrester to a static discharge is hardly practi- 
cable, since such resistance will ordinarily constitute practically 
the major portion of the resistance in the test circuit, so that, 
whatever the discharge voltage may be, it will of necessity be 
impressed upon the series resistance. The needle-gap equivalent 
would then be merely a measurement of the voltage and quantity 
of current in this particular test, and not any inherent charac- 
teristic of the arrester: Some idea of the relative value of two 
arresters may be obtained by connecting them in series, passing 
a discharge through, and measuring the needle-gap equivalent of 
each arrester. As far as the writer knows, this particular form 
of test has rarely been made. Obviously, a comparison of the 
ohmic value of the series resistances of two arresters, generally 
similar, will give a good idea of their relative effectiveness. 
Where the types of series resistance are, however, entirely differ- 
ent, a comparative test by putting the two in series and sub- 
jecting them to the same discharge, or some equivalent test 


would be necessary for forming a trustworthy judgment. 


3. Special forms of arresters. Under this head are included, as 
above, arresters relying on special forms and special materials 
for their non-arcing power, and arresters having an unknown con- 
struction. Here will be classified many new types of arresters, 
especially low-voltage forms which appear from time to time, but 
are not founded on well-recognized principles and are presumably 
of doubtful utility. 

These types are generally found to be intermediate in their 
characteristics between groups 1 and 2, above. They are not 
like group 1, in which the maximum impedance to a discharge 
is practically independent of the character or strength of the dis- 
charge, nor are they quite like group 2, in which the needle-gap 
equivalent is more or less directly proportional to the severity 
and abruptness of the discharge; their equivalent is usually 
found to increase slowly with increasing severity of discharge. 
It is in these special groups that direct tests by discharge of 
condenser through the arrester are of the most service. Such 
tests may be made to give a measure of the impedance offered to 
the discharge, as compared with that offered by some standard 
well-known arrester, thus giving data for the judgment of 
their effectiveness where inspection and the results of com- 


1108 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


mercial service are insufficient to determine the merits of the 
arresters. 

In view of the compactness of construction of most lightning- 
arresters, there is always an opportunity for a discharge to break 
down insulation or jump an air-space, short-circuiting a portion 
of its normal path. Such action is of course likely to destroy 
the arrester and shut down the system, since the non-arcing 
features are ordinarily be thereby crippled. The test with a 
severe condenser discharge may be made to serve the function of 
testing the insulation of the arrester. This is one of the tests 
most needed and most easily made, and should be strongly 
recommended. In actual practice, a great many arresters have 
failed on both high-tension and low-tension circuits from dis- 
charges jumping between parts or to ground, and allowing the 
generator current to follow. When these tests are made without 
the power lines being connected to the arrester, care must be 
taken to detect the occurrence of internal sparks, as they may 
not otherwise be noticed. 


Description of test. The test to determine the impedance 
offered to a discharge may be best made by discharging a con- 
denser directly through the apparatus to be tested, and measuring 
the maximum voltage across this apparatus by a needle-point 
spark-gap. The measuring spark-gap may either be so set as to 
take the discharge half the time, while the apparatus takes it 
the other half, or it may be so set as just to fail to take any dis- 
charges. The former condition is presumably the better one, 
since to make a spark-gap take all the discharges when connected 
in parallel with an arrester, it is sometimes necessary to increase 
the gap a very considerabie percentage. This percentage will 


depend upon all sorts of conditions not definable or controllable, | 


so that a very considerable source of variation will be introduced 
into the measurements, if the method of entirely suppressing the 
spark in the measuring gap be adopted. The needle-point gap 


taking half of the discharges will be the comparative measure - 


of the impedance voltage offered to the discharge. 


Spark-gap. The condenser should always discharge over a 
spark-gap to reach the apparatus to be tested. This is the 
element which introduces the high frequency. This spark-gap 
should preferably be large enough to cause a voltage to be im- 
pressed upon the arrester very much higher than the normal 
voltage of the circuit upon which it is to be used; where possible 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1109 


perhaps three times normal voltage. The tests will of course be 
of value even if a considerably lower discharge potential be used. 


Condenser. The electrostatic capacity of the condenser 
should preferably be considerable, because it is intended to re- 
produce to some extent the more severe conditions of practical 
experience. A pair of high- or low-tension line wires will 
ordinarily have a capacity in the neighborhood of one hundredth 
of a microfarad per mile. It is thus seen that where several 
lines are connected to the same bus-bars near the arrester, a 
considerable capacity may discharge over the arrester. It is 
difficult to tell just what portion of a line wire near the 
discharge point should be considered to discharge directly 
through the arrester, since the inductance of the line becomes 
_very considerable and tends to delay the discharge of the more 
remote parts, allowing the arresters more. time to pass off the 
excess. (See Appendix II). It is suggested as a compromise 
value that where practicable a few hundredths of a microfarad 
be tried. This figure is admittedly open to discussion. Ca- 
pacity can be most easily measured by determining the charging 
current taken on a true sine electromotive force at a known fre- 
quency and voltage; one microfarad takes three-eighths of. 
an ampere approximately at 60 cycles and 1,000 volts. 

It may further be added, that it seems practically very un- 
likely that any considerable length of transmission line can 
be raised at one time to an excessively high potential by any 
static disturbance. The total length of line simultaneously 
affected could hardly exceed a few miles at most. Where so 
much capacity ashere recommended is not available, since all 
such tests must be relative, a considerably smaller condenser 
will give valuable results. High voltage rather than ex- 
* tremely large electrostatic capacity is recommended. 


Abruptness. The condition of extreme abruptness in a test, 
which is one of the severe conditions, is obtained by having no 
impedance, other than the arrester directly, in the discharge path 
of the condenser and by limiting the length of the connecting 
wires in such path to a few feet. The initial abruptness of the 
discharge (though not the frequency of oscillation) depends 
solely upon the inductance and resistance in the discharge 
path; it is not lessened but rather increased by enlarging the 
capacity of the condenser. It is of much more importance in 
making the discharge sudden, that the inductance in the dis- 


1110° THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


charge path of the condenser be eliminated, than that the electro- 
static capacity of the condenser be large. The character of a 
discharge is indicated by the sound. The “ crack”’ should be 
extremely sharp and loud. 


Circuits. In providing means for charging the condenser 
conveniently (except where using a static machine), it will 
usually be necessary to prevent the current supported by the 
charging apparatus from being maintained through the lightning- 


 SvaTic MACHINE 


DISCHARGE 
SWITCH 


Wich Oxmic AESISTANCE 


Fic: 1—Diagram of circuits for testing impedance offered 
by lightning-arrester to a discharge—static machine and 
leyden jars 


arrester after a discharge. This might oftentimes burn out a 
resistance. 

A variety of connections may be utilized for these tests, two of 
which are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Others may be devised. 

Where laboratory apparatus and laboratory skill are available 
and the voltage is not too high, the arrangementin Fig. 1, utilizing 
a frictional or static generator, will be found convenient and 
compact. Under other conditions, however, static machines 


ca andl 


~ 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING tale 


are often not available; they are very troublesome except in the 
hands of persons especially expert, and in general will be found 
less satisfactory than the connections in Fig. 2. The arrange- 
ment shown in Fig. 1 is substantially that described by Mr. 
Creighton in a paper before the annual convention of this Insti- 
tute in 1906, Vol. X XV of the TRANSacTIONs. 

It is, of course, possible to utilize the circuits of Fig. 1, substitut- 


Low ZEnsioN MAINS 


FES/ISTANCE 


‘DISCHARGE 
SWITCH 


RAISING 
TRANSFORMER 


CHOKE CO/LS 
70 PROTECT 
TRANSFORMER 


CONDENSER 


LIGHTNING ARRE STEP | 


DISCHARGE 
CAP 


Fic. 2—Diagram of circuits for testing the impedance offered 
by a lghtning-arrester to a discharge—alternating-current 
mains and step-up transformer 


ing for the static machine a step-up transformer connected to an 
alternatiny-current main. A switch will then be used across the 
high-tension leads of the transformer to start the discharge. 
There must usually be some current-limiting device in connection 
with the transformer, to prevent too much current flow on the 
closing of the switch. This arrangement should give a satis- 
factory source of static discharge. 


1112 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


In Fig. 2, alternating-current is used to charge the condenser 
through a step-up transformer and the discharge is produced by 
the closing of a switch, as shown. This switch must ordinarily 
be opened rapidly, to prevent the generator current from following 
a discharge over the series-gap through the arrester. The re- 
sistance or inductance in series with the primary of the trans- 
former also serves to limit the generator current. Such a switch 
may easily be made by mounting a contact on the end of a pole 
some feet in length, arranged to swing past a codperating contact 
point; this will close and open the circuit rapidly enough to 
get a single discharge over the series-gap with each closing. 

By using a very high ratio in the step-up transformer and 
suitable values of the inductance or resistance in the primary, 
it is often possible, by leaving the switch closed, to produce a 
rapid succession of practically pure static discharges over the 
series-gap through the arrester. Apparently under these con- 
ditions the condenser charges and discharges each alternation, 
and all generator current is suppressed by the inductance or 
resistance. This continuous spark method should be used with 
great care, and only when the actual suppression of the generator 
current in the arrester has been demonstrated. This condition 
is favorable for making a very large number of discharges in a 
short time, but is very hard on the arrester; as, for example, in 
case of a puncture of insulation. It can be more readily ob- 
tained when, instead of a generator of considerable power and 
choke-coils or resistance in the low-tension side of the transformer, 
a small generator is used having its field weakened very much 
below normal value, and a transformer ratio chosen much 
greater than necessary to break down the discharge gap. In 
this case, the field reaction kills the generator voltage as soon as 
the condenser discharges over the series-gap. This is a very 
effective arrangement but is not always available, as it requires a 
special generator. 


Construction of condensers. Condensers may be conveniently 
made up in a number of ways. 

Leyden jars in sufficient quantity are satisfactory, though the 
writer has not found them nearly as convenient as other forms. 
The capacity of a leyden jar having 50 square inches of foil coat- 
ing inside, and having a glass wall approximately three thirty- 
seconds of an inch thick is somewhere near 0.0005 microfarads. 

Glass plates with tin-foil cemented on them, and placed in a 
rack, are effective but easily broken. 


a EE Eee 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1113 


Sheets of metal between sheets of solid insulating material 
such as oiled cambric or oiled paper, either in or out of oil are 
quite satisfactory.* This type of condenser, though inferior 
in point of dielectric loss, is extremely compact, is easily con- 
structed of materials readily obtained, and is quite robust. 
The leads are preferably brought out from each condenser plate 
separately, so that the capacity and insulation strength may 
be varied by connecting the plates in different combinations. 


Tests of choke-cotls. Although lightning-arrester choke- 
coils, and other forms of auxiliary apparatus accomplishing the 
same purpose, do not serve the same function as lightning- 
arresters, yet the impedance offered to the discharges from the 
line is of importance, since it is the function of the choke-coil 
to offer as large an impedance as practicable to such surges 
as May pass an arrester. Comparative tests of the impedance 
values of choke-coils are especially desirable at the present 
time, since there is very little data on the relative choking power 
of the more usual designs of such coils, and their relative merits 
are not easily determined otherwise. These tests do not in- 
volve very much difficulty in the making, and when made as 
comparative tests serve an important function. 

The same apparatus and method of tests as described for 
testing the impedance of arresters to discharge, may be utilized 
in connection with two or more such coils in a series, one being 
a standard for purposes of comparison. The needle-gap should 
be taken on each of the two coils under the same or similar 
conditions, and a comparison of results will show the relative 
power of these coils. By this same means the insulation strength 
of the coil and the spacing of its leads can be tested. 


PowER TO SUPPRESS THE GENERATOR ARC 


General considerations. This all-essential feature of an ar- 
rester is unfortunately extremely hard to test and determine 
in the general case, since the difficulty of suppressing a generator 
arc increases with larger and larger currents and is multi- 
plied many times when the generator circuit includes much in- 
ductance. With many arresters, tests made on anything less 


*The capacity of a plate condenser may be calculated fairly closely 
from the formula: Capacity in microfarads = the area of one plate in 
square inches divided by the thickness of dielectric in inches X 2.25 X 
the specific inductive capacity X 10°7. The specific inductive capacity 
of air is 1 and of solid dielectrics from 3.5 to 6. 


"1114 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


than a full-size plant cannot give a safe guide for judging the 
non-arcing power of an arrester, since only on such plants can 
the maximum generator current be obtained. Designs be- 
having perfectly satisfactorily in many laboratory tests on 
medium-size machines, or on large machines with limiting re- 
sistances, may very likely fail utterly to suppress the arc when 
placed upon regular commercial circuits. In a paper, presented 
concurrently herewith and supplementary to a paper by the 
writer read at the annual convention of the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers in 1902 on the “‘ Function of Shunt and 
Series Resistance in Lightning-Arresters,’’ are shown some 
curves of the non-arcing power of multigap arresters on alter- 
nating-current circuits, which are the result of actual tests and 
show this fact in a very marked manner. 

This condition is not of an imaginative nature, since this 
very difficulty has occurred a great many times. It is very 
seldom that conditions are favorable for making such tests, 
as they require, except with an arrester inherently limiting the 
generator current, practically the exclusive use of a large generat- 
ing plant ; and, because short-circuits may be produced frearently, 
there is great danger of damage to the generating apparatus. It 
is of course true that lightning-arresters, themselves limiting 
the flow of current from the generator, need be tested on cir- 
cuits, only just large enough to supply, without material drop 
of potential, the current naturally taken by the arrester. In 
all cases it should be definitely determined that no more current 
would be supplied during the discharge were the generating 
capacity infinitely large, otherwise the test would not be trust- 
worthy. Also, it is important that, where necessary, special in- 
ductance should be introduced into the circuit to represent any 
inductance which might be found in an actual power system; 
as, for example, the inductance of a transmission line. The 
presence of such inductance markedly increases the difficulty 
of suppressing the generator arc. 

Speaking broadly, it may often be determined from general 
considerations whether an arrester will be non-arcing or not, 
in which case tests will be unnecessary. In practically all 
free-discharge, non-arcing arresters, the tests of non-arcing 
quality will cause destruction of the arrester and usually of several 
arresters. Considering more particularly the bearing of the 
various arrester types on tests of non-arcing power, the following 
should be noted: 


es 


eee 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1115 


a. A number of arresters utilize a free discharge path to 
earth, with means brought into action after the passage of the 
discharge for suppressing the arc. Such are the fuse-type ar- 
rester, the horn arrester, the magnetic-blow-out arrester, etc. 
The horn type is sometimes used in connection with series re- 
sistance or with a fuse, in which case it should not be classed 
as a horn arrester but as a resistance or fuse arrester. 

The ability of these arresters to suppress the generator cur- 
rent then becomes a question of the ability of the fuse, the horn 
form, or the magnetic field to open the circuit. There seems 
to be no doubt of the ability of a properly constructed fuse, ” 
usually of an enclosed or explostve type, to open any circuit. 
Numerous tests have been made on this subject. There is a 
good deal of question as to the ability of horn arresters to 
open promptly very heavy currents. Magnetic-blow-out ar- 
resters are used only on low voltages where they have a very 
decided arc-opening power. 

b. Arresters of the series resistance type. When the series 
resistance is very large, the maximum generator current will 
be low, and there will be no question as to the non-arcing char- 
acter of the arrester. 

When the series resistance is made as small as possible, as 
is usually the case in connection with the multigap shunt resist- 
ance arresters which are much used for high alternating 
pressures, the design of the arrester is usually somewhere near 
the lower limit of non-arcing power and tests will be of value. 
The factors determining the non-arcing power of multigap 
atresters, with or without shunt resistance, have been pretty 
thoroughly investigated. As a matter of fact, with a given 
inductance in the circuit, the number of gaps required to sup- 
press the generator arc with a high-tension alternating-current 
circuit increases at a rate between the first and second power 
of the current. With increase in inductance in the circuit, it 
also rapidly increases with a given current. 

c. The types of special material or special form arresters 
already referred to, including arresters of unknown method of 
operation, will be found generally to have characteristics inter- 
mediate between those of the two classes above mentioned, and 
very little can be inferred as to their non-arcing power aside from 
tests, unless the results of actual experience have been sufficient. 
Unfortunately, with special forms on high voltages, for reasons 
already explained, it is often very dificult to make adequate 


1116 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


tests. For low voltages, alternating and direct-current, how- 
ever. it is relatively easy to make tests, and they are often to 
be recommended, especially where claims are made for some 
unknown arrester which has not been widely and publicly used. 


Description of test. The tests of non-arcing power are made 
by reproducing operating conditions; that is, connecting an 
arrester across a powerful supply circuit and passing a static 
discharge across the whole or a part of the arrester to initiate 
‘the generator arc. The generator capacity should in all cases 
be sufficient to supply, without material drop in voltage, all the 
current which the characteristics of the arrester will allow it to 


take. On this account, tests on horn and fuse-type arresters | 


and other types not limiting the flow of generator current on 
discharge are rarely practicable. When made on smaller ma- 
chines, or by limiting the current flow by resistance or other- 
wise, they are of little value. 

The inductance corresponding to the maximum inductance to 
be expected in service, should be included in the generator circuit. 


Source of static discharge. It is a very troublesome matter to 
obtain a satisfactory source of the static discharge. Where 
a Holtz or frictional machine is available, and the voltage is 
not too high for this machine to cause a discharge, it may be 
satisfactorily used. In most cases, however, it will be found 
more satisfactory to get the high-tension discharge from 
a transformer. An arrangement similar to that already de- 
scribed for testing the impedance offered to discharges by ar- 
resters, may be here utilized. In this case, a much smaller con- 
denser may be used than for the above test, and the voltage 
need be only just high enough to cause the discharge. It is 
essential in such a test to avoid synchronism, that the source 
of discharge be not taken from the same supply as the generator, 
since, if the static waves have always the same relation to 
the waves of the generator, all conditions of practice would 
not be obtaiiued. If special pains should be taken to adjust 
phase relations to give the discharge at the most severe point 
of the wave, the same source might be used, but this method 
is difficult and uncertain. 

Evidently, in order to get the most unfavorable condition 
for suppressing the generator arc, the discharge should be passed 
over the arresters in the early part of the cycle of the generator 
wave, since this allows maximum of heating or other activity 
in the arrester before the first zero point. 


- 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING Na 


The actual severity of the exciting static discharge seems 
to be unimportant in this work; a comparatively slight spark is 
entirely sufficient. 


Protection of apparatus. It is necessary in practically all cases 
to protect the generator, by powerful choke-coils or static inter- 
rupters, from the strains produced by the static discharge utilized 
to jump the arrester. It is desirable as well, unless otherwise 
provided for, to protect the high-tension side of the charging 
transformer, by means of choke-coils or other apparatus, from 
a short-circuit due to the condenser discharge across its leads. 


Timing the discharge. The production of the exciting spark 
at the proper time of the cycle may be accomplished by a small 
synchronous motor driven from the supply and arranged to 
— close the circuit at the proper time, as described in papers by 
E. E. F. Creighton on “ New Principles in the Design of Light- 
ning-Arresters,”’ read at the March meeting, 1907, and ‘‘ Methods 
of Testing Protective Apparatus,’ read at the annual conven- 
tion, 1906, or it may be accomplished by the swing-switch 
method already described, in which case a number of trials 
must be made with each setting of the apparatus to ensure the 
reaching of the worst condition, since the point within the 
cycle at which. the discharge occurs is largely a matter of acci- 
dent. From 20 to 50 trials should be made under each 
condition. This method is preferable to the synchronous- 
switch method, as so much dependence need not necessarily be 
placed on the accuracy of the operating mechanism. Oscillo- 
graph curves are here, of course, a great safeguard. 


Auxiliary Apparatus. It is very desirable in tests of this 
sort to have an adjustable resistance controlling the flow of 
current from the generator, which can be cut out gradually 
until the maximum condition is reached. Such a resistance 
must be of a very robust and well-insulated character. It is 
also necessary to have in circuit an entirely reliable circuit- 
opener of some sort, such as an oil-switch or a fine-wire enclosed 
fuse. Either arrangement may be made satisfactory. 

It is, of course, of interest and value to have oscillograph 
records of the currents and voltages of the tests, but as this 
involves a great deal of work in setting up the apparatus and 
is not wholly necessary, the oscillograms will often be omitted. 

It should be noted in testing alternating-current multigap 
arresters utilizing shunt resistance, that, if when the static dis- 


1118 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING {June 25 


charge is. produced at the early part of the cycle, no current 
follows into shunted gaps; the discharge should be produved at 
a somewhat later point of the alternation, as this will be more 
favorable for the initial starting of current in the shunted gaps. 


INDEPENDENT GENERATOR MAINS 


FOR CAUSING DISCHARGE 


MESISTANGE 


FAISING TRANSFORNER 


CHOKE CO/L TO 
DIRECT TRANSFORMER 


CONDENSER'§ 


LIGHTNING ARRESTER 


< 
DISCHARGE 
AP 


STATIC INTERRUPTER 
70 PROTECT 
GENERATOR 


SERIES INOUCTANCE 
ADJUSTABLE 7 
SERIES 


RESISTANCE ENCLOSED 


FUSE 


POWER GENERATOR 


Fic. 3—Diagram of circuits for testing non-arcing power 
of lightning-arrester 


Thus, in the case of shunted gaps the most critical point of 
the cycle for the discharge is different from what it 1s in the 
case of plain series gaps. 

One diagram of connections for testing the non-arcing power 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1119 


of arresters is shown in Fig. 3. This is capable of various mod- 
ifications. Reference is suggested to the various papers above 
referred to by Mr. Creighton and the writer. The arrangement 
shown by Mr. Creighton is presumably satisfactory where appli- 
cable. 

Attention is again called to the fact that except where ar- 
resters have an inherent faculty of limiting the flow of ‘current, 
tests to be of value must be made upon high-capacity generators 
and circuits; they are then very troublesome to make and in- 
volve considerable danger to the generator and other apparatus 
connected to the test circuit, both from the heavy short-circuits 
and from static strains. Line choke-coils playing practically 
no part in the arc-suppressing power are not involved in this 
test. ; 


Disturbance of operation. When the discharge of an arrester 
offers a free path for the flow of generator current, the result is 
the lowering of the line voltage to such an extent as to cause 
synchronous apparatus to drop out of step, and, in view of the 
heavy current taken by the arrester, the opening of the circuit- 
breakers or the blowing of fuses. This is a most serious matter . 
in practical operation and has caused a great many shut-downs. 
These shut-downs are serious, as the whole system must be 
started again, including the synchronizing of generators, syn- 
chronous motors, and synchronous converters. The critical 
conditions evidently are the generator current taken during the 
discharge, and the length of time before its suppression; for 
example, a current strength which in one alternation would be 
insufficient to open a circuit-breaker might, if continued for a 
dozen alternations, cause this result. Arresters which sufficiently 
limit the generator current following the discharge will cause 
no disturbance; and arresters suppressing the generator current 
within an alternation or so will undoubtedly cause no trouble, 
however great this current. Arresters utilizing series resistance 
and drawing only a few times full-load current would not be 
expected to open breakers or throw out synchronous converters ; 
fuse arresters utilizing a small wire-enclosed fuse which open the 
circuit very quickly are probably safe, but horn arresters and 
their equivalent will usually disturb the system. 

Tests to determine whether or not a definite arrester will in 
general cause this trouble are impracticable, for the different 
settings of breakers, the different designs and loads of syn- 
chronous apparatus, together with the different location of dis- 


1120 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


charges, will render a general determination out of the question, 
However, it may often be concluded from general considerations 
that an arrester cannot even take current enough to disturb 
the system, or that it is sure to take current enough to cause 
trouble. 

Under specific sets of conditions, as at some particular plant, 
by selecting the most sensitive condition, it may be determined 
by trial whether an arrester discharge is likely to cause dis- 
turbance of the operation, by repeating the test just described for 
determining the non-arcing power of arresters. This will, how- 
ever, usually be considerable of an undertaking and not worth 
while. 


Capacity for frequent discharges. It goes without saying that 
every arrester should be able to withstand as many successive 
discharges as it may meet in actual service. Unfortunately, this 
condition is exceedingly variable and impossible of general <e- 
termination. High-voltage arresters will presumably discharge 
much less frequently than. will low-voltage arresters, as in the 
former minor disturbances will not be able to pass to the ground. 
Furthermore, on alternating-current circuits at least, discharges 
occurring at one part of a cycle are more severe than discharges 
occurring at another, which tends to relieve the arrester. Under 
the conditions in which tests for non-arcing power are feasible, 
tests to determine the capacity for frequent discharges may be 
made. The parts particularly subject to deterioration under 
these conditions are series and shunt resistence, magnet-coils, 
and the cylinders in multigap arresters. 

On low-voltage circuits, direct and alternating, where working 
conditions are more easily reproduced, such tests are often 
feasible. On high-tension alternating-current circuits, however, 
they are not often worth while. 


Tests for determining capacity for frequent discharges should | 


be made as already described for determining the non-arcing 
power of arresters. A number of discharges should be produced 
in succession at intervals of some seconds, the exact number of 
repetitions and the intervals being determined according to the 
circumstances of the case. 


Deterioration, etc. There are a number of other characteristics 
of great importance in the choice of arresters which, however, 
cannot readily be made a subject of test. Arresters should be 
robust; the resistances should be of a character not to corrode 
or otherwise deteriorate with time; they should be as simple 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1121 


as possible and the parts likely to deteriorate should be replace- 
able. 

To require a renewal by hand after a discharge, before an 
arrester is ready for a second discharge is a serious handicap. 


Conclusion. It is evident from the analysis of the advantages, 
disadvantages, and limitations of the various possible tests of 
lightning-protective apparatus, that certain tests are of great 
value in connection with certain types of arresters, but not 
with all types, and that some of the tests are difficult and awk- 
ward to make. It would thus seem that tests should be intro- 
duced into the standardization rules cautiously and gradually. 

On the other hand, there will be a great advantage in many 
cases in testing lightning-arrester apparatus; for example, a 
ready means of correctly sizing up the numerous low-voltage 
arresters, especially railway arresters, which appear from time to 
time is desirable. Furthermore, the fact that certain tests have 
the stamp of approval of the Institute will do much to cause 
designers to put their apparatus in condition to meet the tests, 
even if the tests be so inconvenient as rarely or never to be 
imposed. Again, a careful consideration of a properly chosen 
set of rules will help materially to give to electrical engineers who 
have not paid much attention to static phenomena a clear idea 
of the fundamental conditions to be kept in mind. 

The following tests are suggested for general consideration as 
suitable for the approva! of the Institute: 


1. Inalllightning-arrester design, the insulation strength should 
be required to stand the abrupt application of the discharge of 
a condenser of at least 0.01 microfarad capacity, charged to a 
potential three times normal arrester potential, and not less than 
50,000 volts, without sparking between parts or to ground. 
Where it is inconvenient to get a discharge of this severity, ar- 
resters, alternating-current and direct-current, for not over 3,000 
volt lines can be roughly tested with a smaller capacity or 
lower potential, but no tests with capacity less than 0.0025 
microfarads or voltage less than 30,000 should be relied upon. 

2. Breakdown voltages at normal frequency should be de- 
termined in all cases, following; where applicable, all the re- 
quirements laid down in the standardization rules for the testing 


of insulation strength. 


1122 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


On voltages of 40,000 and higher, the test should if possible be 
made with the arrester installed in position, and in any case with 
the same relation to surrounding grounded or charged objects 
as it is to have in final installation. 

3. Where general considerations are not sufficient to de- 
termine the amcunt of impedance offered to a discharge, com- 
parative tests between arresters may be made by noting the 
needle-gap equivalents of two or more arresters, by passing 
across the arresters separately or in series the discharge of a 
condenser of a few hundredths microfarad capacity charged to a 
potential not less than 50,000 volts, or less than three times the 
normal voltage of the arrester. This test will be of relatively 
little value with an arrester including series resistance of equiva- 
lent characteristic, since the test will show simply the voltage 
of the discharge in each case. Such comparative tests may be 
made with smaller capacities and lower voltages, though they 
will not be as trustworthy. 

The impedance offered the discharge should be measured by 
a needle-point spark-gap in shunt to the terminals of the arrester, 
and set to take half the discharges. The needle-point gap 
should be shielded by metal, if near the main discharge-gap. 

4. Where general considerations are not sufficient to de- 
termine the non-arcing power of an arrester, a test may be made 
by passing sparks over the arrester when connected to a source 
of electromotive force of sufficient power to supply, without 
dropping its potential, all the current which the arrester will take. 
In no case need a generator power, greater than the maximum to 
which the arrester is to be subjected, be used. In all cases the 
maximum series inductance to be found in service must be 
included in the generator circuit. 

With arresters which offer no impedance to the discharge, such 
as the horn type, the fuse arrester, and the multigap arrester 
without series resistance, etc., reliable tests can be made only 
on the maximum generator power to which the arresters are to be 
exposed. 


Non-arcing tests are difficult and dangerous for apparatus in 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1123 


all cases except where the generator current is strictly limited. 
The testing apparatus should be protected both from the 
static discharge and from the effects of the short-circuits. 

5. Endurance tests may be made in the same manner as tests 
of non-arcing power. The discharges should be repeated at inter- 
vals of some seconds. The exact interval and continuance of 
test must be a matter of judgment in each individual case. 

This test is especially useful and feasible in connection with 
low-voltage arresters, such as direct-current railway types. 

6. In addition to the behavior of arresters under the above 
tests, other features should receive consideration; for example, 
the disturbance of normal operation caused by a discharge, robust- 

~ness and permanency, simplicity, whether or not replacement 
is required after a discharge, etc. 


As the only final test of a lightning arrester is actual experience 
extending over considerable time and repeated in many places 
under different conditions, no general conclusions should be 
drawn from short-time trials. Such a determination usually 
requiring years, the considerations and tests enumerated above 
are of great practical value in determining the relative merits of 
different types of apparatus. 


APPENDIX I 


The reasons for concluding that very high frequencies do not 
have to be considered in the protection of commercial lines may 
well be somewhat elaborated. Since the quality which renders 
the discharge of a static surge of a given magnitude exceptionally 
difficult is very great abruptness, that is, very sudden arrival 
of charge, we should here consider not strictly the frequency of 
discharges, but rather the form of the initial wave-front. Strictly 
speaking, the term frequency is applicable only where there is 
an oscillating current or potential. The term abruptness of 
discharge is more generally applicable. This abruptness of 
charging depends upon the time required for a given point to 
pass from normal to a given abnormal potential. This time is 
especially short with very high charging potential and low 
inductance in the charging path. 

Every lightning-arrester has some capacity; so have the line 
wire outlets, insulator tie-wires, and every conductor or patrol 


1124 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


conductor connected with the line. Consequently, to raise the 
potential at the lightning-arrester discharge-gap to a dangerous 
point, a certain amount of charge is required. Since this charge 
is transmitted to the arrester by the line wires, there will be a 
minimum length of wire which wil! be sufficient to store charge 
enough to cause this rise of potential. Such a value as ten feet 
of line wire would seem to be very conservative as the minimum 
limit of capacity which could store sufficient energy to produce 
material strain. The capacity of two transmission wires, 10 
feet long, is approximately 1.5x 10° microfarads. It is hard 
to imagine a possible case in which such a length of wire can be 
abruptly charged through a path having less inductance than 
that of 5 feet of such a transmission wire, which will be about 
4x10 henrys. Consequently, since the time of the complete 
discharge period of a condenser through an inductance is = 
2zx\’/G L, in which expression capacity may be farads and 
inductance henrys, the frequency of discharge of this con- 
denser through this inductance will be approximately 20,000,000, 
per second. This is presumably the maximum frequency which 
need ever be considered in a transmission line, and even this is 
probably too high. 

The only conclusion to be drawn from the above is that in 
a general way we may neglect the effects of any disturbances 
having a higher frequency than a few million periods per second. 
It is of course true, however, that, since the inductance and 
capacity of the transmission line is distributed, the above for- 
mula cannot be applied directly thereto. The true results 
will not differ radically from those derived by the assumptions 
made. As further reducing the probability of harmful effects 
being produced by very high frequencies, it should be noted 
that every irregularity of form, every insulated tie-wire, every 
branch connection of any kind, or leakage into air over insula- 
tors, and any current set up in other conductors, tend, especially 
with very high frequency, further to break up an advancing 
wave and also to dissipate its energy. 

A few outer turns of a transformer winding have a large 
enough electrostatic capacity to be of very material moment 
in keeping down potential rises from very high-frequency dis- 
charges; for example, consider the outside layer of a trans- 
former coil, which may be taken as three-fourths of an inch wide. 
Such a transformer as would be connected to a high-tension 
transmission line would have perhaps a mean length of turn of 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1125 


six feet, giving an exposed area on the top and edges of the 
first layer of about 75 square inches. The mean distance of 
such a layer from grounded objects, or objects acting as though 
grounded for the necessary brief instant of time, would be not 
far from two inches in a high-tension transformer. The specific 
inductive capacity of the insulating material is at least three, 
giving a capacity of 2.5x 10° microfarads. This is equal to 
about 10 or 15 feet of transmission line. This estimate is prob- 
ably very much too low, since, if the frequency is high enough 
~so that only the first layer is affected, the next layer or two 
will act as though grounded and will increase the capacity of 
the first layer ten or twenty times. In other words, as far 
as the protection of transformers from ground is concerned, there 
must be a very considerable volume of charge at high potential 
passed into the winding before a jump to ground will result. 
The immediate leads of the transformer are presumably pro- 
tected by this capacity, and indeed they add some capacity of 
their own. On the other hand, station wiring gets no benefit 
therefrom, when the transformers are disconnected. 

In general, then, in view of the fact that there must be in all 
commercial lines at or near the arrester a certain minimum 
capacity, which in a general way for the purpose of discussion 
may be assumed as at least equal to 10 or 15 feet of trans- 
mission line, no disturbances involving a materially less capa- 
city can cause serious damage. Consequently, no higher fre- 
quencies than can occur in connection with the minimum 
capacity need be considered in lightning-arrester work. This 
frequency will probably not exceed a few million per second. 
The same general line of reasoning applies to low-tension line 
wires. With these, the values of electrostatic capacity and all 
leakage factors are greater than for high-tension lines. 


APPENDIX II 


There are certain limitations in the severity and possible 
forms of discharges from commercial transmission lines which 
are important in considering the impedance offered to dis- 
charges by various designs of arresters. 

The exact maximum electrostatic capacity that can ever, in 
a commercial circuit, be so located as to be abruptly discharged 
through a lightning-arrester is very difficult to estimate accu- 
rately. The conditions of the test recommended for measuring 
the impedance to discharge of an arrester are very severe, 


1126 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


more severe probably than are likely to be met with in practice, 
for the following reason: In the test recommended, the total 
charge of the condenser is passed directly against the arrester 
through only the impedance of a few feet of wiring. In an 
actual transmission plant, there can be connected so closely 
to the discharge path of the arrester only 100 or 200 feet 
of line and at most a few high-tension transformers. This 
capacity will be increased somewhat by tie-wires, insulator 
surfaces, bushings, outlets, etc. Taking these things together, 
however, the capacity within a few feet’s discharge of the ar- 
rester will fall far short of a hundredth of a microfarad. On 
the other hand, there may be in the immediate neighborhood 
a capacity considerably larger than this amount. Such excess 
of capacity, however, must discharge through some tens or 
hundreds of feet of transmission line, which will very much 
reduce its severity on the arrester discharge. 

Neglecting the concentrated capacity closely adjacent to the 
arrester, which has already been described as limited to a quan- 
tity presumably much. less than a hundredth of a microfarad, 
the current passing from the transmission line proper may be 
likened to the discharge of water from a long uniform trough. 
If such a trough filled with water be allowed to discharge by 
the opening of one end, there will be a sudden rush as the water 
accumulated at this end passes out, but this rush will be im- 
mediately followed by a steady stream of water of practically 
uniform section while the trough empties itself. The rate of 
flow at the outlet once established on this steady basis will not 
change materially until after the “ falling ’. wave which passes 
backward reaches the end of the trough and is réflected again 
toward the outlet. Similarly, with ‘the transmission line; as- 
suming it to be charged to a very high potential and the dis- 
charge to start at one end over an arrester, there will be an 
initial rush of the charge stored in the immediate neighborhood 
of the arrester (this would include that stored in bushings, 
transformers, branch wires, etc.), but when once this charge, 
which is limited in amount by the conditions already stated, 
has once passed, further charge will flow out of the line through 
the arrester at a more or less uniform rate which is determined 
by the relative inductance and capacity of the transmission 
line, but which thus produces no steadily increasing demand 
on the discharge capacity of the arrester. If, instead of the 
whole transmission line being charged to this high potential, 


ee 


a ek i, lamin 


1907] _ THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1127 


the disturbance be one of high frequency, this is equivalent 
simply to shortening the trough of water or the transmission line 
and will relieve the arrester so much the more easily. 

Evidently, an arrester which discharges somewhat slowly 
will have a harder task to perform, since the distance of the far- 
thest charge which can discharge directly through the arrester 
on the initial breakdown without material opposition from line 
inductance will extend to a greater distance; for example, an 
arrester with series resistance will be more likely to receive an 
absolute direct discharge from as great a capacity as a hundredth 
of a microfarad, than will a fuse-type arrester. 

Even in the severe condition in which a direct stroke of light- 
ning reaches the transmission wire at 1000 feet from the ar- 
rester, a similar limitation exists, since all charge, above that 
necessary to bring the potential of the line wire to the point of 
breaking to earth from the line over insulators, is discharged 
directly to ground, and, as before, we have only the charge on 
the transmission wire to be discharged over the arrester. There 
is, however, one exception; namely, when the lightning stroke 
is continuous for some relatively considerable period of time, 
in which there will be a transter of current over the line wire 
through the arrester to ground, not in the form of a wave or 
surge (relying on the distributed inductance capacity for its 
transmission), but as an ordinary current in a conductor gov- 
erned by the impedance of the line. In this case, the effect 
of the inductance of the line and the arrester discharge path 
will soon disappear leaving the resistance of the line and of the 
arrester to withstand the voltage of the discharge. How 
common such a condition is at the present time is a mere matter 
of speculation. 

Mr. R. P. Jackson, in his paper of last December on “ Recent 
Investigation of Lightning Protective Apparatus,” called at- 
tention to the fact that there is a limit to the amount of dis- 
charge current which can be obtained from the electrostatic 
capacity of a transmission wire at a definite voltage regardless 
of the length of the line. 

It may be thus concluded that there is a surprisingly low 
limit to the severity of the discharge which an arrester can be 
called upon to discharge from a transmission line, and it is the 
opirion of the writer that the “several hundredths of a micro- 
farad ’’ recommended by this paper in the test for measuring 
the impedance offered to discharges is justifiable principally to 


1128 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


give a margin of safety and to provide in the most practical 
available manner for the fact that the actual arrester will have 
to discharge lines charged to a considerably higher potential 
than that of the test, which, of course, renders the condition more 
severe. 

The writer wishes to take this opportunity to make the plea 
that it would be far better.in discussing lightning-arrester 
problems to avoid expatiating upon what we do not know and 
cannot know about lightning, and statements to the effect 
that the conditions are infinitely various and incomprehensible; 
and to make a serious effort to determine and explain such 
limitations and facts as we may know and can determine from 
known laws and from experience. If this be done, the subject 
would lose most of its mystery; operating engineers would be 
able coherently and intelligently to observe and judge by what 
they see, and the advancement of lightning-protection would 
be very much facilitated. 


APPENDIX III 


Various papers bearing upon the reaction of lightning on trans- 
mission lines, and of the various characteristics and performances 
of lightning-arresters for light and power circuits have appeared 
from time to time in the TRANSACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. For convenience 
they are here enumerated. 


“Lightning Arresters and the Photographic Study of Self- 
_ induction.” E.G. Acheson. Vol. VI, 1889. 


“Some Possible Modifications in the Methods of Protecting 
Buildings from Lightning.”” N.D.C. Hodges. Vol. VIII, 1891. 

“Lightning Arresters and the Discovery of Non-arcing Metals.” 
Alex. J. Wurts. Vol. IX, 1892. 


“ Discriminating Lightning Arresters and Recent Progress in 
. Means for Protection against Lightning.” Alex. J. Wurts. 
Vol. XI, 1894. 


“ Theoretical Investigation of Some Oscillations of Extremely 
High Potential in Alternating-High-Potential Transmissions.” 
Chas. P. Steinmetz. Vol. XVIII, 1901. 

“ Static Strains in High-Tension Circuits and the Protection 
of Apparatus.”” Percy H. Thomas. Vol. XIX, 1902. 

“The Function of Shunt and Series Resistance in Lightning 
Arresters.”’ Percy’ H. Thomas. Vol. XIX, 1902, 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1129 


“The Grounded Wire as a Protection against Lightning.” 
Ralph D. Mershon. Vol. XXII, 1903. 

“ Safeguards and Regulations in Operation of Overhead Dis- 
tributing Systems.” W.C. L. Eglin. Vol. XXII, 1903. 

“Protection of Cables from Arcs Due to the Failure of Ad- 
jacent Cables.” W. G. Carlton. Vol. XXIII, 1904. 

“The Protection of High Pressure Transmission Lines from 
Static Discharges.” H.C. Wirt. Vol.: XXIII, 1904. 

“High-Power Surges in Electric Distribution Systems of 
Great Magnitude.” Chas. P. Steinmetz. Vol. XXIV, 1905. 

“An Experimental Study of the Rise of Potential in Com- 
mercial Transmission Lines Due to Static Disturbances Caused 
by Switching, Grounding, etc.” Percy H. Thomas. Vol. XXIV, 
1905. 

~ “Some Experiences with Lightning Protective Apparatus.” 
Julian C. Smith. Vol. XXIV, 1905. 

“ Notes on Lightning Arresters on Italian High-tension Trans- 
mission Lines.’”’ Philip Torchio. Vol. XXIV, 1905. 

‘“‘ Performance of Lightning Arresters on Transmission Lines.” 
N. J. Neall. Vol. XXIV, 1905. 

‘“Some Experiences with Lightning and Static Strains on a 
33,000-Volt Transmission System.”’ Farley Osgood. Vol. XXV, 
1906. 

“Methods of Testing Protective Apparatus.” E. E. F. 
Creighton. Vol. XXV, 1906. 

“Protective Apparatus for Lightning and Static Strains.” 
fiecr Witt, Vole XV, 1906, 

“ Recent Investigation of Lightning Protective Apparatus.” 
Ruse jackson. Vol. X XV, 1906. 

“Lightning Phenomena in Electric Circuits.” Chas. P. 
Steinmetz. Vol. XXVI, 1907. 

“Protection against Lightning, and the Multigap Lightning 
Arrester.’”? D.B. Rushmore and D. Dubois. Vol. X XVI, 1907. 

“‘New Principles in the Design of Lightning Arresters.” 
E. E. F. Creighton. Vol. XXVI, 1907. ; 

‘“‘ Notes on Hydroelectric Plant Organization and Operation.” 
Farley Osgood. Vol. XXVI, 1907. 

“ Potential Stresses as Affected by Overhead Conductors.” 
R. P. Jackson. Vol. XXVI, 1907. 


1130 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


Curves oF THE NON-ARCING Power oF MutticaPp LIGHTNING- 
ARRESTERS AND THE SHUNTING POWER OF OuMIC RESIST- 
ANCE. 


These curves and descriptive data are supplementary to a 
paper by the writer read before the annual convention of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers in June, 1902, and 
entitled, ‘‘ The Function of Shunt and Series Resistance in 
Lightning Arresters.’’ -In the original paper, the principal con- 
ditions governing the non-arcing power of multigap arresters on 
constant potential alternating-current circuits were discussed. 
The results from which these conditions were determined had 
been plotted in the form of a series of curves which were not at 
that time published. These curves, which are the result of a 
very large number of tests at several voltages and on various 
circuits, are here reproduced. 

These curves although not to be interpreted with minute 
accuracy, which would be out of the question in work of this 
character, are believed to be thoroughly reliable under general 
commercial conditions. They are, of course, not of absolutely 
general applicability, since, for example, practically all the tests 
were made with gaps at or near one-thirty-second of an inch, and 
would presumably not hold closely for widely different lengths 
of gap; also, the curve showing the shunting power of ohmic 
resistance is plotted on the assumption that the number of series 
and shunt-gaps is approximately the same. There are, however, 
so far as the writer is aware, no limitations such as have just been 
mentioned, which are not clearly stated either in connection with 
the curves themselves or in the original paper referred to. 

It is expected that these curves will be of interest in connection 
with the papers, to be presented concurrently herewith, on the 
subject of the testing of lightning-arresters. 

The general method of making these tests is fully described in 
the original paper, and consisted in passing static sparks re- 
peatedly, at instants of time determined by chance, across a 
series of gaps which were connected to a generating system 
including resistance and inductance where necessary, so that a 
known current would flow through a known inductance upon 
short-circuit. The number of gaps was varied in repeated trials 
until it was determined how many would always suppress the are 
following a static discharge, and also what was the greatest 
number of gaps which could be made to fail. Similarly with the 
shunting power of resistance. With known conditions of short- 


tee sgls 


a 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1131 


circuit current from the generator, static discharges were passed 
repeatedly until both the condition of failure and the condition 
of minimum successful operation were obtained. 

The tests on 12,500- and 25,000-volt circuits were made on one 
or two generators of 5,000 h.p. capacity and having an exception- 
ally large flywheel capacity. It will be noted in the curves that 
free short-circuit currents were not taken from the generators. 
The currents actually used were, however, increased up to the 
point where burning of the cylinders became a limiting factor for 
commercial work. It is obvious from the form of the curves that 
larger currents flowing from the generator would greatly reduce 
the non-arcing power of the gaps and ultimately eliminate it. 

It may be stated that a line of lightning-arresters adapted to 
all voltages from 2,500 to 50,000 has been designed from these 
curves. In some five or six years of operation, so far as the writer 
knows, they have never shown any failure to suppress the genera- 
tor arc. In a very few instances, where by some accidental 
means a portion of the gaps has been cut out or a part of the 
resistance short-circuited, trouble has occurred, but this cannot 
be considered a failure of the arrester to be non-arcing. 

Fig. 1 shows a number of one-thirty-second-of-an-inch gaps 
necessary to suppress the generator arc under the worst condition 
of static discharge with different initial short-circuit amperes, 
with different amounts of inductance in the generator circuit, 
and applies to circuits of 2,500 volts, 3,000 alternations. Each 
curve is for a definite inductance. 

On 2,500-volt circuits, the non-arcing power is nearly inversely 
proportional to the initial current up to 500 or 600 amperes, 
with a low inductance. 

Fig. 2 shows similar curves fo’ a 4,800-volt circuit, both at 
3,000 and 7,200 alternations with various inductances. 

On 4,800-volt circuits, the non-arcing power is still nearly in- 
versely proportional to the initial current, especially with low 
values of inductance. The increase of the inductance makes an 
enormous decrease of non-arcing power. 

Fig. 3 shows similar curves for 12,500-volt circuits, at 3,000 
alternations. It should be noted in this figure that the very 
high values of inductance cause an enormous decrease in the arc- 
‘suppressing power of the cylinders. This shows how little can 
be determined as to the non-arcing power of a given arrester 
arrangement. without a knowledge of the inductance in the 


1132 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING | [June 25 


circuit. It will also be noted in this figure that in general the 
curves bend up more sharply than before, showing that the 


iH lea Fe i 
ee 
a a a 

a oo oe 


oe 
Be HET 


currents for different values of inductance in circuit, 2,500 volts, 3,000 alternations 


i ai a a : th 
ae Er HEH ES EEE cee Hi 
EEE i: LC a 


Fic. 1—Number of gaps necessary to suppress the generator arc with various initial short-circuit 


Yove pa B9-O — SAafSPd4dD JLU/) 


high tension brings in a condition which is very exacting on 
the arc-suppressing power of the arresters. 
On 12,500-volt circuits, the effect of the usual amounts of 


1907] THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1133 


inductance found in commercial circuits becomes more important, 
and the non-arcing power drops and begins to decrease more 
rapidly than the initial current increases. 


9 
7 
ecechsss +t 
He g 
ae g 
eer He 3 
HHH il i HS 
ares at etter rn iE HEE ay 
sgasgeeaa: EH ise HH H H HH HE 
pegases Bat H HE THE 
aa eae Ht 1 H ‘ 
at rT 
He iit: SaBS) 
ANSE S 
EEN + Ba H 
Ht 
Ht HH Sena: aa sees 
+++ it 
d ttt STH S 
3 % 
Hf EEE Ht AW 
i deed eaeaeect ane uaaure taael tuaeeetgtne CTE 
oe rH pti se 3 
t : q HH HEH EA z H 
aeaneeat H H Ht ‘ a aH 
a ; ete i Zan 
aH tH Fe 
seceae rH LH HEA H 
iseaseasa! Be i H at ETHEL rH EHH © 
He a8 
rH 4 Bae EH seas 
44 FEET] 
oe me oe sede 
Hate H 
a ig 
: { Hf 7 
zs: on é + es at H 
soe Hd . 
ane : cn 
ipreesatese HH x 
Et t 
an Hitler tartar i 
iF HH = mae 
try 
easaeees HH S 
; % 
: ie 
a 
ry 
: a 
Seeaeese tt 
sreeaie # 15 = He ia 
HES sceriuitiaserittuatet if 
Hf 8 
ie Z q, 


woos sto b 2-9 — SLOf{SAHD fIUf) 


Fig. 4 is similar to Fig. 3, except that the curves are for 25,000 
volts and 3,000 alternations. In this figure, the tendency of the 
curves to bend upward is much more marked than in Fig. 3. 
In other words, the limitation of the initial short-circuit current 


y to suppress the generator are with various initial short-circuit 


currents for different values of inductance in circuit, 4,800 volts, 3,000 and 7,200 alternations 


Fic. 2—Number of gaps necessar 


1134 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING  |yune 24 


is much more necessary in high-tension circuits than in low- 
tension circuits. 
On 25,000-volt circuits the non-arcing power drops still lower 


10 AGG 10114 00, 00 om 200 


tial short-circuit 


ae n 
sift H * 


rious ini 


fr arc with va 


120 


tT 
rH 
tt 
60 
Fic, 3—Number of gaps necessary to suppress the generato 


He fi ssaites 
ee 
pared mde 
Eeinhahs Steen et 


currents for different values of inductance in circuit, 12.500 volts, 3,000 alternations 


iy Sug iisereridpess 
“7 2 OOO ES. BT hee tw ae ee 
— yove sdob 9 ~ ssajso1io pup — 


on account of the predominance of the inductance of the cir- 
cuit, and becomes nearly inversely proportional to the square 
of the initial current. The necessity of some resistance in such 
a circuit is very evident. 


1907) THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING 1135 


Vig. 5 shows for different initial short-circuit currents in the 
series gaps of a combination of series and shunted gaps with 
shunt resistance, the number of ohms per shunted gap which will 


mae ee/CO 


1 short 


f 
fet 
sSSeeReueaon 
prose aeesss 

ae 

apeasatiea Bet pessecesarces FH EHH a EEE seit 

EH HH EE uuieas bractee 

enema nalts ieee i Br 

ees Hee cai TESTES egeenaeis Sree 
DFT PAY Ae) aad = IE” 2 ee 7 2) 


- yoDea sovb. ae iG — SLOfSOLLD fH“) = 


just cause a dropping out of the arc in the shunted gaps. _ It will 
be noted that this value varies enormously with the initial 
short-circuit current, and that, for currents over perhaps 200 
amperes, there is little or no shunting power for any useful value 


t 


-circui 


ts, 3,000 alternations 


ious initia 


. 


4 
Be 


Fic. 4—Number of gaps necessary to suppress the g2nerator are with var 
currents for different values of inductance in circuit, 25,000 vo 


1136 THOMAS: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING [June 25 


of shunt resistance. The gaps are as before one thirty-second 
of an inch, between Wurts’s non-arcing metal knurled cylinders. 
The number of shunted gaps is always equal to the number of 
series gaps. 


smear sanyo, wow v0 £50 


gap able to withdraw the generator arc 


Maximum ohms per 


-circuit currents. 


asy 73 a : a Sr 2 O7/ 


. bdvb 5) "lob vad suyo 


For instance, with 25 amperes initial current a resistance of 
120 ohms will just withdraw the current for the shunted gaps 


while with 175 amperes only from 2 to 5 ohms may be used, 
according to conditions. 


5—Shunting power of shunt resistance. 


from the shunted gaps with various initial short 


Fic. 


Number of series gaps equals number of shunted gaps 


1907) THOMAS; LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TESTING ley 


The value of a given number of ohms per gap with a given 
short-circuit current is not entirely independent of the total 
voltage on the circuit of the inductance, etc., but is affected by 
these characteristics only to a minor degree. With high currents 
on low voltages, such as 2,500 volts, the shunting power is 
somewhat higher than with the higher voltages. 

In estimates of the non-arcing power of arrester arrange- 
ments on various circuits, the initial short-circuit current is the 
dominating factor and the method of calculation becomes of 
importance. In these curves this current is calculated from 
the generated voltage of the supply, taking into account the 
total ohmic resistance in circuit, including rheostats, lines, and 
armature windings, the inductance of all coils introduced, the 
inductance of the line and of the armature, together with the 
estimated field reaction of the current in each case. It is as- 
_ sumed that the resistance of the arresters during discharge was 
practically zero. This method is not absolutely accurate, partly 
because the gaps have some resistance, partly because an 
accurate determination of the armature impedance and field 
reaction of the generator is difficult to make, and for other reasons. 
But this method does give values of current dependent upon the 
essential determining factors and is undoubtedly sufficiertly 
accurate for all practical purposes. Of course, in using the data 
of the curves for other circuits, calculations should be made 
according to the same methods. 

Reference to the writer’s original paper on this subject is 
suggested for a description of the method of design of a non- 
arcing arrester for a given system from the basis of these curves. 

A discussion of multiple shunt resistance will be found in papers 
by E. E. F. Creighton and by D. B. Rushmore and D, Dubois in 
Vol. XXVI of the Transactions of the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers, 1907. 


———« 


a 
a - Py 


. . (ietcrt 434 oe i) 4. eer a a =a. rng a, we ee “4. 2°?” 2 pi te ‘ 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907, By A, I. E, E. 


A PROPOSED LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST 


BY N. J. NEALL 

It is generally recognized that the worst disturbances 
to an electrical transmission system from lightning are due to 
the unbalancing of the circuit-elements after the passage 
of the initial lightning charge to ground. 

In the development of lightning-arresters, provision must 
be made not only to discharge freely any atmospheric dis- 
turbances which take place near by, but to prevent as far 
as possible any short-circuit on the system which might thereby 
arise, should two legs of the line be simultaneously discharged. 
From this it follows that lightning-arresters, in the very act of 
relieving the line, introduce other conditions of potentially 
great destructiveness, such as short-circuits, sudden grounds, 
and oscillations. 

Since it is impossible to predict where any given lightning 
disturbance will arise on a transmission line, the assumption is 
made here that this is ordinarily of no consequence, if it is not at 
the lightning protective apparatus. Any source of disturbance 
other than lightning which causes the lightning-arresters to 
operate may, however, properly be included here. 

Fig. 1 shows the elements of the test. A spark from an in- 
duction-coil is made to pass over all the gaps of the lightning- 
arresters under test. This forms a bridge for either a short- 
circuit by line current (provided two legs of the line are simul- 
taneously discharged) or for the passage of charging current 
from the stored capacity of the system, as the case may be. 

The apparatus required consists of an induction-coil operated 
from several cells of a storage-battery by means of a mechanical 
vibrator. A small switch in series therewith enables the dis- 

1139 


1140 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST [June 25 


charge to be controlled at will. A condenser is placed in series 
with each terminal of the induction-coil, the one being grounded 
and the other being led through spark-gaps to such a point of 
the series of the lightning-arrester gaps that the spark from 
the coil will divide and pass over them simultaneously in the 
direction of line and ground respectively. 

Special gaps should be inserted in the induction-coil spark- 


circuit before connecting to the arrester under test to prevent ~ 


TRANSMISSION LINE WIRE, 


LUHTNING ARRESTER. 


Sanrx 
OWES. GaoS: 
~<—- SRROWS SHOW DIRECTION 
OF SPARK» 
Ca, : 
SOUND. WOENSER. 
faw 

CONDENSER 


Sraeace HARATOR. 
sa SATTERK, 
GROUND. 
aA 
Swows PRINCIPLE OF TEST 


a decrease in insulation strength to ground of the arrester itself.* 

Figs. 2, 3, 4 and 5 are self-explanatory. 

It will be seen from the diagrams that the required insula- 
tion strength of the condensers, thus used in testing any poly- 
phase system, is only half the nominal voltage between legs, 
for two condensers are always in series. Thus, for a test ofa 
50,000-volt line only 25,000-volt condensers are required. 

With the exception of several laboratory tests, made first in 


*See Ingram, Elec. Journal- -Vol. IV, No. 4. 


EE EEE 


1907] NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST 1141 


Minneapolis in September, 1906, on a 2300-volt circuit to prove the 
elements of the method, no trials have been made of this method 
on transmission lines. There isno apparent reason why it should 
not be used, save that, when the possibilities of the method are 
realized, most transmission operators will undoubtedly be afraid 
to try it lest it may demonstrate itself too successfully. 

There are undoubtedly plants in this country, and perhaps 
abroad, whose operators would be glad to avail themselves of any 


TRANSMISSION WIRE. 


Low EQUIVALENT 
LIGHTNING ARRESTER. 


8 
: 
5 


SERIES AE- 


GROUND. 


CONDENSER. * G 
(fees WoucrioNn Colke 
ae 


FIG. 2 


Suows SPECIAL APPLICATION OF FRINCIPLE 70 
lon EQuivaLENnT LIGHTNING ARRESTFR FOR 
dwiriat, OISCHARGE OVER Atk GAPS: 


such method of generating their own “‘lightning’’—to employ 
a late application of this term—and the ideas contained herein 
are therefore presented with the hope that they may pave the 
way to increased knowledge of lightning disturbances and pro- 
tection against them. 

The following ideas have been suggested in this connection: 

1. The apparatus must be adjusted in size and connection 
to individual requirements. 

2. The effect of a disturbance can be measured positively by 


1142 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST [June 25 


the simultaneous use of tell-tale papers at all known points where 
auischarges take place to ground. 

3. The tests may be varied to suit any requirements; namely, 
short-circuits, grounding, phase to phase, etc.; and may be 
made simultaneously at extreme points of a line with duplicate 
test sets, if desired. 

The following characteristics have been noted, and should be 
allowed for: 


THREE PHASE TRANSMISSION LIMES. 


<— ARRESTERS—> 


a 


le age 
° 


° 
8 
9 
29 9a 
3 


CONDENSERS: 


ro Ml” youerran Con, ut 


+ 
GROUND, 


ht--o— 
fic. 3. 


Sows MEeTI00 oF CONNECTION FOR TESTING 
LUATNING ARRESTER GROUPS ON 
THREE PHASE SVSTEIMS: 


1. The coil must give a fat spark of considerable length. 
Such a coil as is used in wireless telegraphy is well suited to this. 

2. The condensers need not be of great capacity. They may 
be of heavy glass coated with tin-foil and immersed in oil in 
stone jars. 

3. There is apparently a definite limit to the number of gaps 
over which line voltage will break simultaneously with a given 


1907] NEALL:; LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST 1143 


static discharge. This has been noted in several cases and is 
quite marked. Any increase in the number of gaps, while 
apparently not affecting the spark, will prevent the arc. 

4. Cells of storage battery permit the set to become portable, 
and thus enable field tests easily to be made. 

5. The apparatus may be made quite rugged. In case of 
high voltage, the exciting-circuit knife-switch may be opened 


THREE PHASE TRANSMISSION LINE 


CONDENSER, 


| /NOUCTION Co/L.. ik 
Groowe, 
Ih |}-—o-—- 
F16. 4, 


Snows A SvesesTéo METHO0 oF 
Tes 7IN&S PHASE T0 FUASE, 


and closed by an insulating handle to protect the operator 
against possible break-down of insulation between line and 
ground. 

6. The advantage in this method lies in its readiness for 
operation when required, its simplicity, and the fact that the 
induction-coil spark does not coat the cylinders or gaps with 
any metallic fumes. 


1144 NEALL: LIGHTNING-ARRESTER TEST [June 25 


7. It may be used for any lightning protective apparatus 
consisting of air-gaps between line and ground. 

8. It is a method of as great value to the operator of the line 
as it is to the manufacturer of lightning-arresters, because it 
gives him the best possible method of determining how success- 
ful the lightning apparatus is in meeting the demands which 
he deliberately produces. 


TRANSMISSION LINE WARES, 


CONDENSER, 


MN ik 


f INDUCTION CO/L. 


| > 
Gis 


Swous ASvCCESTED METHOO OF TESTING 
THE MIULTIPLEX PRINCIPLE ON A THREE PHASE SYSTEM. 


9. Its intrinsic value rests on the importance of knowing as 
far as possible how great these disturbances may be, how 
efficient any given system of protective apparatus is to handle 
them, and of discovering to what degree any given transmission 
system contains in itself elements of length, arrangement, and 


character of apparatus tending to prolong or increase the dis- 
turbances once initiated. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1145 


ae . 
Discussion on ‘“‘ LicutTNING-ARRESTERS ’, AT Ntacara Fatts, 
N. Y., June 25, 1907 


E. E. F. Creighton: J agree with Mc. Thomas on: the main 
features of his paper, but disagree in tegard to a few minor 
clauses, relating particularly to the equivalent spark gap. I 
wish to express my appreciation of the work he has done in the 
latter part of his paper in determining the number of gaps to 
obtain non-arcing conditions. I think that Mr. Thomas’ test 
is more favorable to the arrester than it should be, for we can 
not make the test in the laboratory too severe. This statement 
is based on the arguments already given in my paper, on the 
variations in frequency that can occur on the line and the 
variations in potential of lightning itselt. These factors can 
not be regulated further than slightly to diminish them by 
putting an overhead ground-wire above the line; therefore any 

- arrester, no matter whether for low-potential or high potential, 
should be built to withstand any potential or frequency of 
lighting, and any duration if it is designed for continuous 
lightning. . 

Has Mr. Neall ever attempted to get a discharge from an 
induction coil over a large number of gaps? This discharge 
from the induction coil cver the multigap corresponds to the 
half-wave test published in the March PxocrEpincs 1906. The 
half-wave test on the multigap arresters shows that it gives an 
exceedingly high equivalent needle-gap. That has been the 
basis of our design for this year, for multigap arresters, to reduce 
this effect. This half-wave test corresponds presumably to 
the portion of the low-frequency surge on the line, and we have 
been enabled so far to spark from ground every few minutes 
by the induction coil. I have a great many tests of that kind, 
and shall be glad to publish them later. I ask Mr. Neall if he 
assumed a sparking over, and by what means he has been 
able to get over a great many gaps. 

N. J. Neall: Without knowing what Mr. Thomas would set 
forth in his paper, I find that I could take paragraph 4 of his 
recommendations as a basis for the contribution to the Institute 
which I make this evening. 

It is safe to say that the commercial testing of lightning- 
arresters to-day by the manufacturers is not carried much beyond 
2500 volts in the factories, or above 25,000 volts in practice. 
The long term of years during which 25,000. volt lightning-arrest- 
ers have now been in service has enabled arresters up to this 
voltage to become fairly satisfactory. But for voltages above 
this it is perfectly safe to assert that no manufacturing company 
to-day could make any such tests on lightning-arresters as have 
been stipulated by Professor Creighton and Mr. Thomas. One 
of the reasons for this is the large apparatus required, its costli- 
ness, and the difficulty of placing it in the factory, where it 
would hold up considerable work going through for customers. 


1146: LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 25 


It was for this reason that last year the method which I have 
proposed was devised in order that a collection of various well- 
known forms of lightning protective apparatus for station and 
for line service might be given a service test to determine their 
true merits. The principle of the test consists in passing a static 
discharge over the gaps of the lightning-arrester in such a way 
as to form a path for either a passage to ground of the stored 
capacity of the system or for such short-circuits as may be de- 
sired. 

Those of us who are familiar with the practices of wireless 
telegraphy will recognize in the method a form which has been 
employed in that connection, but until I discussed the proposed 
test with Professor Reginald Fessenden in another connection, 
I was not aware that such was the case. I believe, however, that 
the application in this instance is original with me. 

I would lay particular emphasis upon the opportunity which 
this test will now give the operator as well as the manufacturer 
to test out the arresters in practice, and for this reason I cannot 
too heartily urge the cooperation of the manufacturer and the 
operator to the end that more positive information be obtained 
as to lightning protective apparatus operation. 

Chas. P Steinmetz: Professor Creighton’s paper is essentially 
positive. He discusses all those tests which it is desirable to 
make on lightning protective apparatus so as to assure their 
satisfactory operation, their operativeness as far as our present 
knowledge of lightning phenomena goes. Mr. Thomas’ paper 
shows us what tests we should make, tests that are very difficult 
to make, and in many cases almost impossible except with special 
facilities. 

I believe the conclusion to be drawn from these two papers 
is that the testing of a lightning-arrester is not the same as the 
testing of other electrical apparatus Other apparatus can be 
tested before the customer and approved, but with the lightning- 
arrester it is essentially a test of a type to be made on one or a 
few samples of the arrester, to show whether it—or rather a 
duplicate of it—will probably be able to cope with the lightning 
phenomena. After carrying out all of these tests, for instance 
to determine the limits of the discharge capacity, there will 
probably be not much left of that particular lightning-arrester. 
Hence the testing of the lightning-arresters is somewhat similar 
tothat of incandescentlamps. Incandescent lamps cannot be com- 
pletely tested for life without destruction, and only a certain small 
percentage of the product is tested, and the rest judged by the 
performance of the tested (and destroyed) percentage. 

The first attempt to test lightning-arresters similar to standard 
apparatus is givén in Mr. Neall’s paper. Naturally, such a test 
is to some extent rather dangerous to the arrester as well as to 
the system. It is the starting of a discharge of an induction 
coil. If, instead of a vibrator operating the induction coil, ve 
operate it by a Wehnelt interrupter, or substitute in its place a 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1147 


Tesla transformer to set off the discharge, it gives a very good 
way of testing the endurance of the arrester for the recurrent 
surge as described by Professor Creighton. That means that in 
all probability in the case of all the commercial arresters at 
present in use it would be from a few minutes to a few seconds 
before they would go up in conflagration, because most arresters 
are built to cope with transitory surge oscillations, transient 
discharges, and not with recurrent surges. This method of 
testing by sending a single impulse through. by closing the switch 
of the Ruhmkoff coil, and immediately opening it, will give 
a single discharge or a few successive discharges, but by closing 
the switch and keeping it closed, with the rapidly operating in- 
duction coil or Tesla transformer, it will give a recurrent surge. 
such as is met with in practice with a spark discharge between 
the cable conductor and the cable armor, or with the spark dis- 
charge from an isolated transmission line to ground through 
~ a broken insulator. 

Such a recurrent surge as we know now is not taken care of 
by most types of lightning-arrester, but requires additional pro- 
tective devices, as explained by Professor Creighton. It re- 
quires an aluminum cell permanently connected from line to . 
ground. That brings up the second point to which I desire to 
call your attention, and that is that all these statements of tests 
with different forms of lightning-arresvers may possibly have to 
be modified slightly here and there. For instance, to test the 
discharge voltage, as laid out by Mr Thomas, we cannot always 
apply the Institute test of gradually raising the voltage until 
the discharge takes place, and then keep it on fora minute. In 
some types of arrester, as exemplified by the water jet—which 
we are told gives such good results abroad, especially in countries 
where lightning is not particularly severe—or the aluminum ar- 
rester, there is no definite discharge voltage. Their discharge 
voltage is the normal operating voltage, because they continu- 
ously carry a small current and in such case the test would have 
to be modified. I especially refer to the aluminum arrester, 
because in this country where lightning is rather severe I do nct 
think that the water jet would be considered as particularly 
useful. Jn this case the test may be made by inserting in series 
with tie lightning-arrester the short-circuited secondary of a 
transformer, and then suddenly opening the secondary circuit, 
while energizing the primary with impressed electromotive force, 
that is, suddenly raising the voltage on the lightning-arrester 
by a certain definite value, say 5%, or 10%, or 50%, and then 
measuring the instantaneous rush of the discharge current. The 
discharge current, even if the rise of voltage is moderate, say 
10%, may be very large in the first moment. but rapidly dies 
out, the lightning-arrester adjusting itself to the higher voltage. 
Some other modifications of tests would also have to be made, 
which would be obvious to the one who studies the particular 
lightning-arrester. In general, the conclusion is that the testing 


1148 LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 25 


of the lightning-arrester, to get absolute results on its probable 
performance in actual operation, is not so simple as testing other 
apparatus, generators, etc., but requires the cooperation of the 
customer with the manufacturer and also requires special facili- 
ties, quite elaborate facilities, really to get a complete and rea- 
sonable and effective test. 

P. H. Thomas: Iam surprised that none of the manufacturers 
of commercial lightning-arresters has made a protest against 
the rather uncertain and indefinite tests here proposed for In- 
stitute sanction, as I am inclined to be sceptical about the wisdom 
of the Institute’s attempting to standardize lightning-arrester 
tests at the present time. The Institute should be very careful 
about approving methods of testing lightning-arresters that 
cannot be conducted by engineers of ordinary experience, 
methods by which such engineers would not usuaily be able to 
produce identical results. There are not more than one or two 
of the tests proposed that can be so conducted by the average 
engineer. Mr. Creighton’s recommendations seem to be intended 
for individual research by experts and designers of lightning- 
arresters, rather than tests to be undertaken by commercial 
engineers. 

I feel also doubtful about the wisdom of making any more 
definitions at present. It is hard to keep track of definitions 
made by the international societies and conventions; and if we 
make any more I think it will lead to complete confusion. 

It is too soon to attempt to make standard rules for testing 
electrolytic arresters. There is a good deal ot laboratory in- 
formation, perhaps, and a good deal of inference as to what 
their characteristics will turn out to be; but, until a considerable 
number of engineers become pretty familiar with them, and the 
plants in which they are installed have seen more experience, 
I think we should refrain from adopting any standard tests. I 
do not wish to make any insinuations about the value of the 
electrolytic arrester, but I think we should go slow on general 
principles before standardizing tests. 

Mr. Neall’s paper shows an ingenious arrangement and one 
which might work conveniently in some cases, provided the in- 
duction coil will cause sparking over the gap, which I think is 
doubtful in most cases. As Dr. Steinmetz has pointed out, it is 
necessary to have a single spark at a time, not a series of sparks 
more extended, except in the case of an endurance test. With 
one or two exceptions, relative tests are the only valuable tests. 
It is not possible to say that the arrester has so many absolute 
units of protective power. 

W. S. Lee: If some system could be devised for testing the 
lightning-ariesters where installed it would be an excellent 
thing, and I think it should be given some consideration as it 
would help out the man who thinks he has an arrester but 
really has not. We should have some test, it possible, which 
could be made periodically, to find out whether the arresters on 


ee 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1149 


lines are good or useless. Having to contend with a great deal 
of trouble every year with lightning-arresters, I think the time 
has come when some reliable tests should be devised which could 
be applied to the arresters while they are in service. 

N. J. Neall: In answer to Professor Creighton’s question—the 
requisite spark strong enough for a given discharge has not been 
fully determined. For low-voltage preliminary experiments it 
was easy to obtain more spark than was actually necessary in 
order to have the arc take the spark as a bridge. 

Another important consideration, discovered almost at the 
outset, is the impossibility of obtaining a spark from gaps to 
ground if the condenser heads are connected directly to the high- 
tension feeders, because the power in the high-tension system is 
sufficient to hold the condenser charged. It is for this reason 
that connection is made to the middle point of the series of gaps 
between the line and ground in order that the discharge may 
have full play in both directions. 

_ I should like to make the following suggestions in connection 
with the papers by Messrs. Creighton and Thomas. 

1. Nomenclature. The names, definitions, and recent classi- 
fication of lightning-arrester characteristics while entirely proper 
from the standpoint of theory, strike me as being unduly elab- 
orate and unnecessary for the purpose for which standardization 
rules were originated. It seems to me that nomenclature can 
be overdone, not to speak of misleading the general manufacturer 
and operator who is not necessarily a technician. ; 

Practical lightning development and testing should be kept 
as simple as possible in order to free it from any mystery which 
can be so easily attached to this branch of the art. 

2. Apparatus. It will be observed that the methods pro- 
posed for the development of lightning protective apparatus, 
even under the most favorable laboratory conditions, do not 
permit. a thorough investigation of the devices under operation 
much above 5000 volts. 

Practical application of lightning protective apparatus is now 
fairly well established up to 30,000 volts. What is needed is 
information as to its behavior at a higher voltage, 50,000 volts 
and so on, so that in selecting any standard test in its develop- 
ment this difference in the character of the service should be 
borne fully in mind. 

As a matter of fact the only test of final value is a practical 
one. A method to this end has been described previously in 
the ProcrEpines. It consists in a careful observation by 
means of tell-tale papers as to the operation of all protective 
apparatus on a given system so that any recommendations by 
the Institute under the head of Standardization Rules should 
give some mention of this. 

2. Tests proposed.. I heartily approve of the tests proposed 
by Mr. Thomas as being practical. While they do not cover the 
case absolutely, they furnish all the information that would 


usually be required, » 


1150 LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 25 


If to his proposed tests, a further one should be added to cover 
investigation by means of tell-tale papers over a long period, 
there should be sufficieat data to eliminate considerable uncer- 
tainty. 

4. Needle-point spark-gap. It seems to me that the most 
serious danger to the general engineering field lies in the pro- 
posed ‘‘ standardization ”’ of the needle-point spark-gap. 

Those members of the Institute who have studied spark-gap 
performance know that it is very difficult to check the curve 
which has so far been accepted as standard. Now merely to 
extend the range of readings on this curve at higher voltages 
without a thorough study of the phenomena entailed strikes me 
not only as injudicious, but likely to destroy the prestige which 
should attend the publication of any data of this character. 

It is not my intention to go into the characteristics of spark- 
gaps of various forms for voltage measurements, since this would 
well be the subject of a number of papers. It-is of as much im- 
portance as contributions on lightning-arrester tests. I 
would therefore respectfully protest against the unqualified use 
of this form of gap, particularly for very high voltages as at 
present proposed; in its place 1 would substitute the gap 
made with spherical noses backed by metallic discs in order to 
reduce the opening for a given voltage as well as to straighten 
and fix the curve therefore. 

Charles E. Waddell (by letter): The mountain and Piedmont 
districts of North Carolina are subject to severe electrical 
storms of frequent occurrence. On the breaking of winter in 
the latter part of February or the early part of March, the first 
destructive storms usually occur; then follows a lapse until the 
latter part of May or early June, at which time they are at 
their worst, and from which climax there is a gradual diminu- 
tion in violence until, early in September, the electrical storms 
practically cease. 

As it is the expressed purpose of the Institute to gather all 
information pertaining to the subject of lightning, thereby 
hoping to correlate sufficient data to solve the problem of pro- 
tection, it is purposed in this paper to recite two instances a 
little out of the ordinary. 

The plant that has suffered more than any other in the moun- 
tains is that of the Haywood Power Company on the Pigeon 
river, twelve miles from Waynesville. The equipment consists 
of a 400-kw. three-phase, 60-cycle, 13,000-volt hydroelectric 
unit. The 12-mile transmission line is composed of three No. 2 
B. & S. aluminum cables, supported on Thomas 5-T insulators, 
and on wood poles spaced 200 feet apart. The line runs over 
mountain ranges and across valleys, touching altitudes of 4000 
or 5000 feet. — 

The lightning protection originally installed was of the 
highest grade of one of the well-known arresters. Some little 
difficulty was experienced in obtaining a good ‘ ground ”’, but 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1151 


after this was overcome the management felt perfectly safe. 
The opening of the following season was, however, heralded by 
the destruction of coil after coil in the generator, until at the 


ae aaa 


15000 Volts 


Onit composed 
of © gaps 


time the author was called in, out of 54 coils in the armature 
40 had been burned out and repaired, and the machine was 
then running with 13 coils out. Matters had reached a point 


1152 LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 25 


where on the slightest manifestation of an electrical disturb- 
ance the plant was shut down. 

An examination revealed the singular fact that not a single 
coil had grounded on the frame, but had in every instance 
ruptured on the ends. While in the station a powerful arrester 


| a 
C7ap " 1 
= Unit: 1 " 


————— —_ ——» 
— ——— ~ = 
— — — 
on a _— 


Fig 2 


discharge took place, and it was observed that the polyphase 
electrostatic ground detector which had previously been in a 
quiescent state became most unstable, erratically fluctuating 
first one way and then the other, and this was followed in a 


few moments by the giving way of a coil, and the inevitable 
shutdown. 


¢ 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1153 


The writer concluded that the rupture was due to a static 
stress that slowly built up, and that the inductive discharge 
from the electrical storm merely intensified the effect; this 
opinion was sustained by the attendant’s statement, that rup- 
tures occurred when no storm conditions prevailed, and that 
the line was frequently observed to deliver a brush-discharge 
at the wire entrance. 

Inspection of the generator disclosed the fact that the arma- 
ture was Y-connected. It was decided to ground the neutral 
point, consequently reducing the petential between each line 
wire and the earth to 7500 volts. 

The arresters were of a design suited to a maximum potential 
of 18,000 volts and were connected as shown in Fig. 1. 

Experience in a number of cases leads the writer to the con- 
viction that it is as necessary to provide a path for a free dis- 
charge between the lines themselves as it is to provide a path 


~to the earth, it was therefore determined to modify the ar- 


rester connection, making the changes shown in Fig. 2, and the 
result was that immunity was obtained. 

The coils breaking down on the ends between turns, appar- 
ently indicating no disposition to ground, and avoiding punc- 
ture in the slots, would seem to indicate that the concentrated 
magnetic field, with the presence of iron, afforded a_ repelling 
effect, driving the static charge as far away as possible. 

The second case is not solely a lightning discharge but is 
more complicated and may in part be attributed to high-po- 
tential oscillations or waves. 

Included in the Weaver Power Company’s distribution system 
is the Elk Mountain line, a circuit that is in all less than a mile 
long, which supplies mills in the vicinity of the power house, 
and the Biltmore line, a circuit nine miles long supplying at 
that time the Biltmore sub-station only. Both circuits had 
been in service for about a year and had given no trouble, the 
line potential being but 6600 volts and the insulators Locke’s 
No. 298. 

The transformers at Biltmore were connected in delta with 
a spark-gap on one leg of the secondary winding. In making 
some changes at the Elk Mountain mills it was decided to con- 
nect the transformers in Y. The neutral was not grounded. 

Shortly thereafter a storm occurred, and during its progress 
an insulator and cross-arm were destroyed on the Elk Mountain 
line. Nothing was thought of the incident, a defective insulator 
being assigned as the cause; but the second, third, and fourth 
repetition of the trouble led to the conclusion that the in- 
sulators were not at fault, and that a more subtle cause was 
responsible. 

Not long after the lightning season was over, an underground 
cable broke down on the Biltmore distribution system, followed, 
as it always is, by a continuous discharge on the secondary 
spark-gap. While this was occurring, the main plant tele- 


1154 LIGHTNING-ARRESTERS [June 25 


phoned that an arm and insulator were burning on the Elk 


Mountain line. The discharge at Biltmore was then saddled — 


with the responsibility, and it was decided to provide the neutral 
of the transformers at the Elk Mountain mills with a spark-gap. 
This done, it was observed that when one line discharged the 
other inevitably followed. Since that time no more insulators 
have given way. 

In each of the foregoing instances stress was purposely laid 
on the type of insulator. In the case of the Haywood Power 
company the insulator was of a pattern that afforded very 
little leakage. The insulator of the Weaver Power Company 
affords a considerable leakage. The lines of the North Carolina 
Power Company parallel those of the Weaver Power Company, 
and are also equipped with an insulator on which the leakage 
is negligible. 

With the exception of a few potential transformers destroyed 
when the plant first started, and the above trouble, the Weaver 
company has been practically safe from lightning troubles, 
while the other two concerns have experienced not a little in- 
convenience and loss. In view of these circumstances it would 
seem not an unreasonable conclusion that a slight leakage 
distributed over an entire distribution system affords consider- 
able protection against static discharges, and that occasionally 
by the merest accident a condition of this kind is obtained. 

Where violent discharges have passed over the arresters in 
the Weaver Power Company’s station in every case that was 
investigated it was found that such discharges had occurred 
immediately before rain started to fall, and that once the in- 
sulators, arms, and poles were wet the discharges became less 
frequent and less severe, a fact that in the author’s opinion 
tends to confirm the above theory. 

In justice to the manufacturers of the insulators, it should 
be stated that the existence of leakage on the particular type 
is no reflection on the quality, for they are in every respect emi- 
nently satisfactory, but is due to the use of a type scarcely large 
enough for the service. 


A paper presented at the Annual Con vention 
Meeting of the Amercian Institute of LElectri- 
cal Engineers, Niagara falls, June 25, 1907. 


Copyright 1907 By A.I.B.B. 


INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES IN TELEPHONE LINES. 


BY LOUIS COHEN. 


The inductive action of one telephone line on another, pro- 
ducing what is commonly known as cross-talk, presents an 
important problem to the telephone engineer. The induction 
is both electromagnetic and electrostatic. A variable current 
passing through any circuit is accompanied by a variable 
magnetic field, which will produce electric currents in neigh- 
boring circuits. In addition to this there exists also an electro- 
static effect, a charge on one conductor will induce charges on all 
neighboring conductors, and any variation in the charge will 
produce an electric current. We thus have two distinct phenom- 
ena acting simultaneously, both causing trouble on telephone 
lines. It is to be noticed, however, that the two effects act in 
opposite directions. The establishment of a current in one 
circuit is accompanied by an induced current in any neighboring 
circuit in the opposite direction, while when the current in the 
inducing circuit is decreasing, the induced current will be in 
the same direction. In the case of electrostatic induction the 
conditions are reversed. When both forms of induction act 
together we obtain a resultant effect which depends on the 
various electrical constants of the lines and their relative im- 
portance. It would appear therefore quite evident that to 
obtain a knowledge of the effect due to induction, we must first 
be able to ascertain the relative importance of one form of 
induction as compared, with the other, and to determine the 
factors which enter in fixing the magnitude of each. A thorough 
knowledge of these factors may be of considerable assistance 
in improving the conditions of telephone lines, or at least it 

1155 


1156 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES [June 25 


may suggest some methods for overcoming induction effects 
which are a source of considerable annoyance to users of tele- 
phones. 

In a paper presented before the American Institute of Elec- 
trical Engineers in 1891,* Mr. J. J. Carty discussed a series of 
experiments which he had conducted to determine the relative 
_ importance of the electrostatic as compared with the electro- 
magnetic induction. His conclusions were that the electro- 
magnetic effect is entirely negligible as compared with the 
electrostatic effect; in fact in his experiments he has not been 
able to detect any electromagnetic effect at all. In the dis- 
cussion of his paper Mr. Carty made the following statement: 

“I go so far as to set forth that the effect of electromagnetic induc- 
tion between parallel telephone wires may be neglected. That is, that 


when a man is talking on one wire and his speech is heard by induction 
on a parallel wire, that that speech finds its way between the two wires 


Th 


Fig. 1 


by virtue of electrostatic induction, and that electromagnetic induction 
is entirely negligible.” , 

This view expressed by Mr. Carty has generally been ac- 
cepted by telephone engineers, and is usually given a very 
prominent place in all text books on telephony. 

In what follows I shall discuss this question from a mathe- 
matical standpoint, and shall show that not only is: the electro- 
magnetic induction not a negligible quantity, but that in some 
cases the electromagnetic effect may be much larger than the 
electrostatic effect; and I shall further show that the results 
Mr. Carty obtained were correct, that under the conditions of 
Mr. Carty’s experiments he could have obtained only an electro- 
static effect. To infer, however, from his results, as Mr. Carty 
has done, that what is true for the case he experimented with— 


Oe 
* J.J. Carty, TRansactions. of the A. I. E. E. 1891, Vol. 8, page 114, 


1907) COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1157 


a line three hundred feet long—is equally true for a line so 
many miles long is, as I will show, quite erroneous. 

Suppose we have two lines JT, and T, running parallel to 
each other and both are grounded at the two ends; T, may be 
a power circuit or telephone circuit, G is a source of an alternat- 
ing electromotive force, and T, a telephone line. We wish ta 
consider what is the nature of the induced currents in line T,. 

Let L,, R,, C,, denote the self-inductance, resistance, and 
capacity per unit length of line T,, and similar letters with 
suffix 2 denote the same constants of line T,; M will denote 
the mutual electromagnetic inductance and C,, the mutual 
electrostatic inductance. Let also x and y denote the currents, 
V, and V, the potentials at any point on the lines T, and T,. 

The algebraic sum of the forces acting at any point on the 
two lines will be given by the following equations: 


(1) 


We also have the electrostatic relation, 
C.Vit Cw V2 = 
C,VetCy Vi = % 


(2) 


By the aid of the equations of contint 


dq __ ax 
cig aaa & 
OG ay 
Li oes tbs 


we may write equations (2) after differentiating with respect 
to t in the following form: 


dV aVv d % 
egestas. ds 
(3) 
dV d d 
age ae 


1158 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES {June 25 


Differentiating equations (1) with respect to s we get: 


ox d x a dame Fah 


Lt Rt tt ds? =0 
(4) 
ad’y dy Ot ik Vos 
VRE VAS ete ren ak 


If we differentiate equations (3) with respect to #, and intro- 


a xhinn dy 


duce the values of ge eB Ne Br 


thus obtained into equations 


(4) and also the values of = and Eat from equations (3) we 


shall obtain the following equations: 


PV, PV, adv, dv 
LC, St t Li Cn St Ry Cy GO +R Cu SH 

PV, PV, _ @&Y, 

PAO eT ett Cin diag egg 
(5) 
Dav oem eV dV, dv 
LC, Fp tha Cn ge +R Oe ey +R, Cy 

PV, PV, @V, 

ort CSE Dir pean Meg 


Assuming that the impressed electromotive force be simple 
harmonic, that is the real part of E e*?' say, then the potentials 
at any point along the lines will be simple harmonic, and there- 
fore we may put: 


PV avy ae 
gan ae rae ees 
PV, dv 


dt =-—?' V,, Tp ae Me 


1907] COHEN: {NDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1159 


Introducing these values in equation (5) and rearranging we get: 


eV 
Fara = a, V+, Wes 
(6) 
dale 
bap ico = a, V,+6, V, 
Where, 
a,=-PL,C,4+71pR,C, —MC,,f 
b, a P lL, Cy tiprk, Ci—-M C, Pp 
Oa P L, C,+tpR, C, Se, Cy. P 
b, age P L, Cy. tt PR, C1, =e Cy P (7) 


Each of the equations (6) contains two dependent variables 
which make it rather difficult to solve. We can, however, 
transform equations (6) into equations containing only one 
dependent variable ty the following device :* 

Put 

V,=W,+W, 
V,=/,WithW. 


where f, and 7, are arbitrary constants. 
Equations (6) will transform into the following: 


ar We a W 
d at is = (a,+5, f,) W,+ (4,40; 7.) W, 
a? W, 
fe tj, FO = (a fb) Wit a fathy) Ws 


Eliminating first W, and then W, we get the following equations: 


(a, J. +b,— a, 7,— 5, hi fe) See nek — GO, fz -.0; f.”) * pea 
me os 04 b, pe aie W, 
(a,a Gas Ty) a 


a’vw, 


s 


(asf + boa fib A) EH hit bia fabs ff) Ge 


= (a,a,-5, d,) (i; —f.) W, 
*See O. Heaviside coll. papers, vel. 1, p. 126. 


1160 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 
now determine f, and-7, from the equations 

a, f,+b,—4,f,—5,7,? = 9 

a, f,+0,— 4,7,--0,f = 0 


that is, 
fj, = a, — a,— V (a,— 4,)? + 40, b, 
one 20, 
fie a,— a,— V (a,— a,)? + 46, b 
26 


1 


Equations (8) will reduce to the following: 


ds? ai, "WwW, 
2 WwW. 
rm 3 =FP?W, 
where, 
gare aay bby) r= £9" 
Gy fyt+5, — af, — Ofifs 
JR _ (a, a,— b, 6.) (f, — fe) 


a,f7,+ 6,—a,f,— fi fs 


The complete solutions of (10) will be the following: 


W, =Acosyz(l—s)+Bsin p (l—s) 


W, = Doos p, (I—s)+F sin p, (J— s) 


[June 25 


(9) 


(10) 


(11) 


(12) 


The constants are to be determined from the following bound- 


ary conditions: 


When 
: V, = Eetet V,=0 
L, Ve == 0, Vs = 0 
Now, 
V,-V 7,V,-V 
W hi 1 2 Ww s 2 1 2 
: Arete " i= hh 


a 


Se NY armin 


1907] COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1161 


Hence, when s = 0 


W, = Atos pl+B sin pl 2 BAS 
hie he 
MD omar ee ain, Tate 
hhh 
When s = /, 
W, =A =0 
Wee Dias 0 
and therefore, 
fi Be! 
B= pak chee 
Gea) sin ft l 
E ett 
Pies he 
G2— 7.) sin p, ? 


Introducing the values of the constants thus obtained into 
equation (12) we shall obtain the following values for V, and V,: 


jason (G15). ~ 


i = ipt 
V.= W.+W, = ( sin p, (J Dy Ee 


fe 


sin el sin gt) fh 

(13) 

= rs Ji sin p ¢— s) psig =) E ett 
at Wry les ( sin pl =i sin p, L hi-te 


The values of ~ and », may be obtained by inspection of 
equation (10) which gives 


ls ig ee (aj G@,— 0,05) (fo— fi) 
ery Gah, Opa frm bel ets 


| (14) 
rep rte pela 
pata Ay fp, +b,— A fy—Oy fs fe 


The value of the currents in the two lines can be easily ob- 
tained from equation (13) by the aid of equation (3). Thus: 


1162 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES [June 25 


threes [cite (13 jn008 ts (—2) 


psin pl fy sin py, L 
: Frcosu(l—s) PP, cos ty r)) E et? 
a ce ( psin wl fy sin wy, L liz i-fs 
(15) 
i ., (fr cos (l—s) _ f,°COs py (l— -) 
- y= [6.4( sin pl i, sin py Z 
f apt 
‘ jicosp(i—s)  f,cospy acosm—s)\ | 2 et? 
+iCuP ( sin pl fy Sin py l hi-fs 
Rearranging we obtain: 
4 cos pt (L— s) 
me kas (CA t Cah? if sin pl 
yy 7.008 ze (— >) 1 p E ett 
(Cy fo +Cr2 fe”) fy sin p, 1 hi-fhe 
(16) 


cos 4 (I— s) 


ey (C.fe+ Cut) usin pl 


i p E et? 


- cos pt, (J— s) 
oe (C, he +C,, fo) oF Ca Ee Pe i ) nite aS ee 


fi; SID. fly 


The second equation of (16) gives us the final expression for 
the currents in any wire due to electromagnetic and electro- 
static induction of a parallel wire. The inducing line may be 
part of a power circuit, lighting circuit, or a similar telephone 
line. In deducing equations (16) we have taken account of 
the difference in dimensions, or electrical constants, of the two 
lines which react upon each other, which will of course be the 
case if we wish to calculate the currents induced in a telephone 
line by a power circuit running parallel to it. 

According to some recent reports, the introduction of the 
single-phase electric railway plays havoc with service on tele- 
phone and telegraph lines which parallel the railways. This 
will in all probability be a very serious problem, and a careful 
consideration of equation (16) will give us a better insight 
into the nature of the problem and the magnitude of the disturb- 
ance. It may also possibly suggest some means for eliminating 


1907] COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1163 


these disturbances or at least reducing them to a minimum. 
I hope to consider this phase of the problem in another paper, 
but for the present I shall limit my discussion to the case of two 
parallel telephone lines. 

If it is the influence of two telephone lines on each other that 
we wish to investigate, then equations (16) will be somewhat 
simplified; for in that case we find by examining equations (6) 
that 


a= mio b, ob, 
equations (9) will therefore reduce to 


1=—-hh= 


Hence equations (16) will become, 


S oe - cos pt, (l— =) _ 23 
Se B((C+C) S Cy») i" ai ap ape 
(17) 

oe cos p (J— s) f cos pw, (J— 2) a 
-y=4((C+Cy) “qaaat — © Cx) aT eee 


The values of w and m, are given by equations (14) which in 
the case of two parallel wires reduce to the following: 


— P= a+b=— p(L+M) (C+C,,)+tpR (C+ C,5) 


(17) 
=a py =o waa (LM) (OC) +e p R (C= C12) 
je and p, are of course complex quantities, putting 
p= a +4.8 fy = ayt2 8, 
and solving for a, 2, a, and §, we get 
a@=V/tp(C+C,) [/p(L+MyP+R+P (L+M)] 
P= V4p(C+C,) [Vp (L4+ M+R? CtM)] 
(18) 


=V/4~(C-C,,) [\V/p? (L—- M+ R+P (L-M)] 


B=V/tp(C-C,,) [Vp (L— M+R - pL) ] 


1164 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES [June 25 


It remains now to separate the values of x and y into the 
real and imaginary parts, for the actual currents in the lines 
will be the real parts of the values of x and y as given by 
equation (17). Now 


psin pl es (a+2 f) sin (a+z f) 1 
2 (a—2f) (sin al (e8!+ e*!)-1cos al (e8-e8!)) E21 p (cos pt+tsin pt) 
(a? + B) [sin? al (68+ 2+ 6%!) + cost al (e°8/— 2+ 67! 


ipEe?! tpE (cospt+isinpt) _ 


the real part of which is 
2E pl B cos al (e8'— e-8!)— asin al (e8!+ 8!) sin pt 


+ 18 sin al (e8!+ e!) +a cos a 1 (e8!— e8!) f cos pt | 
(a? +B?) (e4!4 Pua 3 cos 2a dl orto 
: 2Epsin (pt), 
V/ (a? + B?) (2 cos h 2 B1— 2 cos 2 al) 
Where tan ¢ = 


B sin a I (e8! + e8l)4 a cos al (e8!— e) 
B cos a 1 (e8! — e’) — asinal (e+ el) 


(19) 


(20) 


When #/ is a very small quantity, then approximately 


ass 

tan d = = (21) 

When 1 is very large, then the above equation will be approx- 
imately 

Bsinal+acosal 


t = 
pap Bcosal—asinal 


(22) 


At the end of the line, say when s =/, the values of the cur- 
rents will therefore be given by the following equations: 


( (C,+C,,) sin (p t+) 
— x 1B, — 
i PV (a +B) (2 cosh 2 B1— 2 cos 2a@/) 
ri (C,— C,,) sin (p t+) 
V (a,?+ 8,2) (2 cos h 2 B, 1— 2 cos 2 a, J) 
(23) 
skype (C,+C,,) sin (p t+ ¢) 


AOE. +B’) (2cosh 2 Bl— 2 cos 2a) 


7 (C, — Cy») sin (pt+4,) 
V (a+ 8B,") (2 cosh 2 B, l— 2 cos 2 a, 2) 


ete 


1907] COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1165 


The second equation of (23) represents the current at one end 
of the line 7, due to the electromagnetic and electrostatic in- 
duction. We may put equation (23) in a more convenient form, 
thus: 


yi = E p/A?+ B’— 2A Boos (P— 4A) Sin (Pt+g) — (24) 
Where 
A ie C— Cis a, 
V(a,?+B,’) (2 cosh 2 B, 1— 2 cos 2 a, 1) 
mie C+Ci. 
V/ (a? + 8") (2cos h 2 B1— 2 cos 2a 1) 
A cos ¢,—Bcos ¢ 
f A sin ¢,—B sin } 
The maximum value of the current will evidently be, 
E p/A?+B?—2A Boos (¢— 4,)- 


Now to find the ratio of the electrostatic to the electromagnetic 
induction, we calculate the value of y; as given by equation (24) 
first on the supposition that M = 0; that is, that the whole 
effect is purely electrostatic, anc then calculate the value of 
y, on putting C,,=0; that ‘s, assuming that the effect is purely 
electromagnetic. We can thus obtain an estimate of the rela- 
tive importance of the two forms of induction in causing dis- 
turbances in parallel lines. The values of the various electrical 
coefficients which enter into the calculations were determined 
from formulas given by Mr. Heaviside* in his collected papers, 


which are as follows: ‘ 


(25) 


tan d = 


D+ (ty +1)” 
d+ (hy — hy)? 


2 log >" 


2 a? 4 hi 2 
(: log “* — ( log ae ) 


+4)? 
log a a 


= C= 7 oi /, o +ah\ 
(2108 — (tog tian cae 


i tw oe eee 
*O. Heaviside collected papers, Vol. 1, pp. 44 and 101. 


Mo = log 


C= 


(26) 


1166 COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES [June 25 


These formulas apply to the case of parallel suspended wires 
where / is the height above the ground, d is the distance be- 
tween the wires, and 7 is the radius of the wire. 

Let us now consider an example; suppose the two wires are 
1.25 cm. apart, and at about 1000 cm. above the ground let the 
radius of each wire be 0.1 cm., then we find 


L = 0.00203 henry per kilometre. 
M = 0.00147 “ oe os 
G = 0.0118 mf. Ny " 

— C,,= 0.0088 mf. 3 


R = 3 ohms per kilometre approximately. 


Using these values for the constants of the lines, I have cal- 
culated the maximum of the current 9), as given by equation(24), 


first assuming that we have only electrostatic induction; 


that is, M= 0, and second assuming that we have only electro- 


magnetic induction; that is, C,, = 0. The ratios of the two 
forms of induction for various lengths of lines given below: 


é.-5: 

erences e. m. 

0.1 km. 0.02 

100 km. 0.44 
1000 km, 1.6 


From this short table it will be seen that for the particular 
case under consideration, the electromagnetic induction is far 
larger than the electrostatic; but as the length increases the 


1907} COHEN: INDUCTIVE DISTURBANCES 1167 


electrostatic is gaining more rapidly than the electromagnetic, 
and thus at 1000 km., the electrostatic has overpowered the 
electromagnetic. In obtaining the above results we have as- 
sumed that our line does not have any telephone receiver in 
it, which is of course not the important case. In the case of 
a long line, however, say 100 km. or more, where the inductance 
of the line is large, compared with the inductance of the re- 
ceiver, the introduction of a receiver will not modify the result 
to any great extent, but in the case of a short line, the intro- 
duction of one or more receivers may affect the results to a 
very great extent. Let us consider for example one of Mr. 
Carty’s experiments. 

There are two lines of about 0.1 km. long stretched side by 
side at a distance of about 1 cm. and there are three telephone 
~ receivers in the second line, the complete solution of this prob- 
lem is not of course so simple, yet as an approximation we may 
consider the introduction of the telephone receivers in such a 
short line as a distributed inductance and resistance. If the 
inductance of each receiver is 0.05 henry and its resistance is 
50 ohms, then for such a short line, the inductance per unit 
length will be L = 1.5 henry and K = 1500 ohms. Assuming 
these to be the constants of our line we find, on calculating as 
in the previous cases, that the current due to electromagnetic 
induction is practically zero, and it is only the current due to 
electrostatic induction that has any appreciable value, and this 
is what Mr. Carty obtained experimentally. To infer from this 
that electromagnetic induction is negligible in all cases is how- 
ever, certainly incorrect. In the case of a long line, say 500 km., 
the induction and resistance of the telephone receivers will not 
modify to any great extent the constants of the line, and in 
that case the electromagnetic induction is just as important 
as the electrostatic induction. Which is the more important 
depends a great deal on the length of the lines, their height 
above the ground, and their distance apart. By varying any 
one of the above factors we shall vary the ratio of the electro- 
magnetic to the electrostatic induction. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26,1907. 


Copyright 1907By A.1.E.E. 


CHOKE-COILS VERSUS EXTRA INSULATION ON THE 
END-WINDINGS OF TRANSFORMERS 


BY S. M. KINTNER 


Surges along a transmission line are stopped and thrown 
back by choke-coils in a manner analogous to the reflection of 
water waves by a breakwater at the entrance to a harbor. The 
quiet of a harbor is obtained by setting up a strong wall capable 
of withstanding the shock of the waves that strike against it; 
so is the analogous quiet of a transformer obtained by placing 
a choke-coil in the path of a disturbance. 

A choke-coil will be effective in reflecting and shielding all 
back of it according to its strength. The strength of a choke- 
coil is ‘measured by its inductance and its insulation. If the 
former is small, but little reflection will take place, the surge 
passing through the coil and continuing beyond it. If the 
insulation of the coil is weak and the inductance is of sufficient 
value to retard the on-coming wave and throw it back on to the 
line, the rise of voltage will cause a discharge over the coil-face 
and the wave will continue past the coil. These two conditions 
can be likened to a breakwater consisting of piling spaced so as to 
have little effect in retarding an incoming wave in the first in- 
stance; and in the second instance to a breakwater of insuffi- 
cient height, so that the waves pass over it. 

With a given choke-coil on a given line, a certain fixed amount 
of protection will be afforded any apparatus placed back of the 
coil. There is no relation between the coil and the apparatus 
being protected that will make the coil more or less effective 
in its operation of throwing back surges that come in from the 
line. The choke-coil will produce the same percentage of 

1169 


1170 KINTNER: CHOKE-COILS [June 26 


reflection regardless of what it is protecting, and consequently 
can be said to be affording the same protection. 

Tests indicate that the same percentage of protection will be 
afforded by the same coil for all parts of the same transformer, 
that is, measurements made over 200 turns of the winding of a 
transformer which was being subjected to static surges from a 
discharging condenser: first, when the transformer was unpro- 
tected; secondly, when it was protected by a choke-coil, 
showed practically the same percentage of protection afforded 
by the choke-coil when the measurements were repeated over 
only 20 turns of the transformer. A long series of tests, 
the results of a part of which have been recently made known to 
the Institute by Mr. R. P. Jackson,* have convinced the writer 
of the truth of the above statements. 

In choosing a choke-coil for a particular installation, the 
matter resolves itself into a consideration of: 1, the possible 
surge the apparatus can withstand safely; 2, the probable 
surge that can be transmitted over the proposed line, the 
line insulation indicating the maximum voltage that the surge 
can have during transmission; 3, the maximum allowable induc- 
tance that will not seriously affect the line regulation if an 
external choke-coil is used; 4, a consideration of the amount of 
money to be expended for choke-coils as insurance against 
interruption; 5, the selection of a choke-coil which will most 
nearly meet the above conditions, the selection being guided 
by the above, combined with the results of tests and curves 
similar to those shown in Mr. Jackson’s paper. 

The question of whether part of the transformer winding 
should be made strong enough to withstand the surges—and thus 
have within its own windings a choke-coil that protects the rest 
of the apparatus—or whether an extra coil should be used, will be 
discussed below. 

The following is a list of the advantages and disadvantages of 
separate choke-coils. 


Advantages: 


1. On a choke-coil there is normally no voltage between 
turns, and consequently no tendency to hold a short-circuit in 
the event of a momentary surface-discharge. 

2. The choke-coil permits the construction of a transformer 
with uniform insulation throughout. This permits the safe 


SS 


* ProcggpinGs A. I. E. E. December, 1906, p. 843. 


NSU oN Tr 


1907] KINTNER: CHOKE-COILS a7 


working of such a transformer with several methods of connec- 
tion to the line. 

3. The choke-coil allows the safe use of a cheaper transformer. 

4. The choke-coil can be insulated much more strongly than a 
transformer. 

Disadvantages : 

5. Increase in the number of pieces of apparatus. 

6. Increase in complication of station wiring when external 
choke-coils are used. 

1. One of the greatest advantages of choke-coils over extra 
insulation on the transformer windings lies in the fact that 
the choke-coil does not normally have a voltage between turns. 
In the event of a choke-coil insulation failing between turns, 
nothing in the nature of a short-circuit results, as there is no 
voltage-difference to maintain an arc. On the other hand, a 
failure between turns in the insulation of a transformer is vital, 
and it is almost certain to result in a transformer burn-oat. A 
part of the choke-coil will be cut out and will be inoperative, 
and consequently the coil less effective as a whole is the worst 
that can result from such a failure in the coil insulation. 

2. The second point of superiority of the choke-coil—allowing 
the use of a transformer which is uniformly insulated—is of great 
advantage to the builder, as well as to the operator. 

In the majority of specifications for power transmission 
transformers, it is required that the transformer be capable of 
operating at one-half voltage at full rated capacity. In general, 
it is expected also that occasion may arise when the transformer 
may be operated either in star or delta connection. 

It is evident that to meet all the above conditions with 
certain parts of the transformer specially insulated, involves 
some very complicated insulation arrangements, and requires 
extra insulation on a large part of the whole transformer. 

3. In consideration of the third point, that of cost of trans- 
former, it should be remembered that the better grade of power 
transmission transformers of 1000 kw. and unward are wound with 
copper ribbon, one turnperlayer. These coils are insulated uni- 
formly throughout, so as to stand momentary voltages of from 
5000 to 9000, between turns. In order to get this result, only 
about 8 to 10% of the available winding space can be used for 
copper, the rest being given up to solid insulation and oil-ven- 
tilating ducts. An increase in insulation over the above is not 
desirable with the insulating materials in use at this time; 


1172 KINTNER: CHOKE-COILS [June 26 


for two reasons: first, the coils cannot be made strong enough 
mechanically to stay in place under the shocks to which they 
are subjected; secondly, the extra insulation retains the heat 
from the copper, and thus either burns out or necessitates a 
much lower rating of the transformer. 

It is very difficult for workmen to handle large coils with 
extra heavy insulation without injury to the insulation. 

It is therefore evident that a cheaper transformer can be 
employed when a protecting choke-coil is used. 

4. The fourth advantage of the choke-coil is that much better 
insulation can be obtained in it than in a transformer. This is 
due to the fact that more material can be used between turns, 
and it can be disposed to better advantage by allowing more 
extension beyond the copper than can be employed economically 
in a transformer coil; also, the shape of the coil is much 
simpler than that of the average transformer coil and thus more 
readily lends itself to better insulation. 

5-6. The disadvantages of the choke-coil over the extra 
insulation are two in number; first, an increase in the number 
of pieces of apparatus; secondly, an increased complication 
in the station wiring when an external choke-coil is used. Both of 
these disadvantages are very materially reduced when it is 
permissible to mount the choke-coils inside of the transformer 
tank. It is thus possible to make the choke-coil a part of the 
transformer terminal, the coil being connected on the inner end 
of the terminal. 

For some installations it is possible to use choke-coils mounted 
out in the air and thus made a part of the station wiring, but in 
general the oil-insulated coil is to be preferred. Past practice 
has been to have each oil-insulated choke-coil mounted in its 
own tank, but there seems to be no good reason why they cannot 
be placed inside the transformer tank and thus save considerable 
floor space as well as outside wiring. 

After a thorough consideration of what is involved in the above 
points, it is the writer’s opinion that, for a given expenditure 
to provide protection against surges, more can be obtained by 
the use of choke-coils than by extra insulation on the transformer, 


A paper presented at the Ath Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Niagara Falls, June %, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. BE. E. 


PROTECTION OF THE INTERNAL INSULATION OF A 
STATIC TRANSFORMER AGAINST HIGH-FREQUENCY 
STRAINS 


BY WALTER S. MOODY 


Most forms of lightning-arresters, especially those of the multi- 
gap type, protect transformers against high-frequency even better 
than against low-frequency strains so far as these strains exist 
between either the high- and the low-potential windings, or 
between either of these windings and any other part of the 
transformer; because the high frequency causes a greater con- 
denser charging current to flow across the gaps at the line end 
of the arresters, thereby reducing the resistance of these gaps. 
They do not, however, always prevent strains far in excess of 
normal being thrown upon the adjacent turns and layers of the 
windings; because, although the high frequency strain may be 
less than the working voltage, the frequency, and consequently 
the wave-length may be, and generally is, such as to concentrate 
this strain on a relatively small portion of the turns at the end 
of the windings connected to the line. 

There is a wide range in the frequency of the oscillations 
that may be set up in a given circuit under varying conditions 
due to atmospheric disturbances, partial grounds, switching, etc., 
this range easily extending from normal to several hundred 
thousand cycles. In the effort to impede all or a greater part 
of the high-frequency disturbances that try to penetrate the 
transformer windings, it has been quite common practice to 
place reactance-coils between the lightning-arresters and the trans- 
formers. While such coils are undoubtedly advisable and are 
quite effective, their use is attended with some objections. 

1173 


1174 MOODY: TRANSFORMER INSULATION [June 26 


A wide range is found in the size of such coils employed by 
different authorities, varying from, say, 10 ft. of conductor 


Usual lastlating Collar 
—— Lx6TO MASUIACG COM OT 


Filler 
I <—Varrsled laplig 


Double SDacig 
Between Turris AIA Extra 
Wropping on each turn 


Double Spacvig 
Between Turns 


Copper Conductor 


SINGIE SPACIIID 
Between Turns 


Cross Section of Transformer Coil 
Sowing Felntorced lsu lae/ol7 
Fic. 1 


wound in a small diameter open spiral to several hundred feet 
wound in forms more difficult to insulate. Evidence of more or 
less effectiveness of any of the different forms is usually forth- 


1907] MOODY: TRANSFORMER INSULATION 1175 


coming, inasmuch as sooner or later there are sure to be conditions 
that will generate very high voltages and frequencies. 

If, however, the reactance is such as to be effective against. 
moderately high-frequency oscillations, it must, since it is 
connected between lightning-arrester and transformer, offer a 
very high impedance to the high frequency of the oscillatory 
currents which will usually be set up within the transformer 
itself when a bound charge within it is released by a stroke of 
lightning relieving some overhanging cloud. Under such 


Fic, 2. 


conditions, it is almost as bad to hold back the charge in the 
transformer as to keep a wave from entering under other con- 
ditions. 

It is not my intention to add anything to what has been so 
ably said by Mr. Percy Thomas, Dr. Steinmetz, and others 
regarding the theoretical considerations involved in this problem. 
I simply wish to explain how a theory, that very little preventive 
reactance is necessary to protect the winding of a transformer 
whose outer turns are heavily insulated, has been carried out 
and tested on a large scale during the last four years. 


1176 MOODY: TRANSFORMER INSULATION [June 26 


The idea was naturally first put into practice in connection 
with large high-voltage transformers. but it has been gradually 
extended, although not so thoroughly, to smaller units 
operating on pressures as low as 10,000 volts. Thin coils, 
wound with one turn per layer of flat conductor, such as are 
commonly used in all the better sort of large transformers, are 
best adapted to such reenforcement of the insulation between 
turns. 

It is practicable to reenforce a considerable portion of the 
turns of a large transformer coil so that it will withstand from 
2,000 to 20,000 volts per turn without greatly decreasing the 
space-factor of the winding or causing any considerable increase 
in cost. It is not practical to use as heavy insulation as this in 
small units, but, as the size decreases, the length of a turn also 


DIAGRAM OF TRANSFORMER WINDING SHOWING 
TAPS FOR DIFFERENT VOLTAGES BROUGHT ouUT 


NEAR THE ENDS OF THE WINDING 
Fic..3 


decreases, so that the difference of potential between two turns 
due to a given high-frequency wave is correspondingly less. 
One should aim, therefore, to have, not a given insulation strength 
per turn in this reenforced portion of a winding, but a given 
strength per foot. In like manner it is desirable to reenforce, 
not the same percentage of the total length of conductor in all 
cases, but more nearly the same total length, since a given wave 
will penetrate about the same linear distance into a transformer 
winding whatever the total length of conductor may be. 

In large transformers wound for 75,000 volts or less, it is 
practicable to resist a high-frequency wave whose magnitude is 
equal to the working voltage in some hundred feet or less of 
conductor. This means that a wave-length of 200 ft. or more, 
corresponding to a frequency of, say, 5,000,000 cycles, could be 
taken care of by such a transformer. If, in addition to this re- 


VO 


1907] MOODY: TRANSFORMER INSULATION NAA 


enforcement, the transformer has an external reactance of some 50 
ft. in length, a very considerable reduction of potential between’ 
the first few turns will result. 

Figs. 1 and 2 show a coil of a 2000-kw. 60 000-volt transformer 
in cross-sectional and side view respectively, which has such 
tapered reenforcements of the insulation between the outer turns. 
The cross-section clearly shows the three different thicknesses 
of spacing insulation between turns, and the side view of the 
coil on the form on which it was wound shows the extra in- 
sulating on the very first turns where the voltage is likely to be 
more than could be economically insulated against by spacing 
insulation only. 

The evident desirability of limiting the reenforced insulation 
to as short a length of the end portions of the winding as will 


CownuUc ToR 


INSULATION 


DIAGRAM OF TRANSFORMER WINDING SHOWING 
TAPS FOF” DIFFERENT VOLTAGES BROUGHT OUT 
NEAR THE CENTRE OF W/INOING ANS FrEINFORCED 


INSULATION AT ENOS 
Fic. 4 


accomplish the desired results indicates the need of a different 
location of tap connection than usual. Few transformers for 
transmission work are made without taps to admit of operation 
with different ratios of transformation. Frequently, such taps 
cover a range anywhere from 10 to 30% of the winding, and, if 
they are located so as to cut out the end portion of the turns, the 
insulation must be reenforced well within the inside tap or perhaps 
some 40% of the total winding. 

It has been our practice for some years, therefore, so to 
locate tap connections that they will cut out centrally located 
turns instead of end-turns, thereby not only placing them in an 
essentially safer position, but also avoiding the necessity of any 
more reenforcement than is required when all the winding is in 


service. 


1178 MOODY: TRANSFORMER INSULATION [June 26 


Some 750,000-kw. capacity of transformers embodying these 
ideas, ranging in size from 300 to 7500 kw., and wound for 5000 
to 80,000 volts have been built in both air-blast and oil-immersed 
types. Most of these have been installed with a small pro- 
tective reactance, but many without such protection; and not 
one of these transformers has yet failed from any weakness of 
the internal insulation, although a considerable proportion of 
the transformers has been installed for three years. 


a 


OO EE EE 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tio of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E E. 


NOTES ON TRANSFORMER TESTING 


BY H. W. TOBEY 


Transformer testing has already received a great deal of at- 
tention, and, considering the number and variety of articles upon 
the subject which have appeared, the ground would seem 
to be quite thoroughly covered, so thoroughly in fact that there 
would at first sight appear little more tc add. But in view of 
the changes which have been constantly taking place and the 
rapid advance in transformer design, a general discussion of 
the subject at this time may be of value. Experience also has 
led to the adoption of certain methods in commercial transformer 
testing which for various reasons have proved satisfactory, so 
that a description of these with their advantages and_ short- 
comings will perhaps prove of some interest. 

Present methods of testing, like many other methods, are 
the result of gradual but constant development, in which the 
good has been as far as possible retained and the poor elim- 
inated and replaced with something better. What was suit- 
able for small transformers, for example, was found to be en- 
tirely unsuitable for large sizes, and methods which applied 
very well tc transformers of low voltage had to be modified 
or enarely abandoned for high-voltage apparatus. 

Generally speaking, it may be said that tests are required 
for the purpose of determining the chief characteristics of the 
finished apparatus, thus enabling it to be compared with the 
original calculations and designs, and with the guarantee. 
They may be classified as follows: 


Conversion. 


Polarity. 
1179 


1180 TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 26 


Resistance. 

Copper loss. 

Core-loss and exciting current. 
Regulation. 

High potential.* 

High voltage.* 

Temperature rise. 


Conversion. This test, while a comparatively simple one to 
make, is nevertheless extremely important, particularly where 
the transformers under consideration are intended for parallel 
operation or for delta connection to three-phase lines. 

The most satisfactory method is without doubt one em- 
ploying a standard multi-ratio transformer and a single volt- 
meter, provided the potential of the source of current supply 
does not fluctuate. Then, by applying a suitable common 
voltage to the high-tension side of the transformer under test 
and the standard, the two low-tension voltages may readily 
be compared and the true ratio obtained. 

Where the supply is at all unsteady or where the ratio of the 
standard varies considerably from that of the transformer under 
test, the two-voltmeter method is preferable. Accurate results 
may then be obtained by taking two sets of simultaneous read- 
ings, between which the instruments are interchanged to elim- 
inate any dissimilarity between them. 

The opposition method is also sometimes used to good ad- 
vantage. With this, however, care should be used to see 
that the low-tension voltage of the standard and of the trans- 
former under test are exactly in phase. 

As an additional precaution, single-phase transformers which 
are required to operate in parallel on single-phase circuits, or 
delta on three-phase circuits, also delta-connected phases in 
three-phase transformers, should be connected as they are 
eventually intended to operate, and a test made for circulating 
current. This serves as a check on conversion measurements 
and is important from the fact that a slight difference in voltage 
between windings is apt to lead to serious results. 


Ss 5 eee eee ee eS eee 

*Both of these are essentially insulation tests. The terms “high 
potential ’’ and “ high voltage’ are used arbitrarily to distinguish be- 
tween a test applied between primary and secondary windings and iron, 
and one applied across terminals of the same winding. The first 
tests the strength ot the insulating barriers and casing, while the second 
tests the insulation between turns and betwcen layers. 


1907] TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING 1181 


Polarity. The relative positions of primary and secondary 
leads is ordinarily determined either by direct comparison with 
a standard transformer; or by applying direct current to the 
high-tension winding, noting the position of positive and nega- 
tive connections by means of a direct-current voltmeter, then 
shifting the voltmeter leads to the low-tension winding and 
noting the voltmeter deflection upon breaking the direct-current 
circuit. When testing large numbers of small transformers 
having approximately the same voltage and ratio, the first 
method is quicker and more satisfactory. For power trans- 
formers having as a rule widely differing voltages, the second 
method is usually preferable. 

Resistance and Copper Loss. In the measurement of resist- 
ance for the determination of copper loss and total resistance 
drop, the fall of potential method gives in general the most 
satisfactory results of any of the standard methods. The in- 
struments required are less delicate than the galvanometer 
used in bridge measurements, may be readily calibrated, and 
give accurate results over a wide range. 

When measuring resistances of small transformer windings, 
the instruments come to rest very quickly and little time is 
required for taking the readings. With large transformers, 
however, unless special precautions are taken, this is seldom 
true; for even with the terminals of the opposite winding short- 
circuited on themselves, some seconds, or even several minutes, 
often elapse before the instruments settle, so to speak, to a 
final value, and, until this settling has stopped, readings do not 
indicate the true resistance. 

Fortunately, this condition of affairs may be overcome by 
forcing through the winding under test a direct current of ten 
or twelve times that finally required for the measurement, and 
after a moment or two dropping it to normal before taking 
the reading. (Of course during the passage of this increased 
current the voltmeter should be disconnected and the ammeter 
short-circuiting switch closed.) 

While a delay of a few seconds or several minutes may do 
no particular harm at the time when cold-resistance measurements 
are made, it is extremely annoying during heat runs where 
measurements are taken at frequent intervals. Long interrup- 
tions of the load under these conditions are apt seriously to 
affect the final temperature. 

Core-Loss and Exciting Current. The influence of wave-form 


1182 TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 2¢ 


upon core-loss and exciting current has already been carefully 
investigated, and the importance of using a sine-wave source 
of current supply is well known. It is doubtful, though, if all 
fully realize how far from a sine wave the electromotive force 
of some generators really is under actual conditions of, test; 
that is, when supplying core loss to transformers. This may 
occur, even though the wave-form of the generator is entirely 
satisfactory under normal conditions, from the fact that the 
wave becomes badly distorted at low power-factors which 
occur when transformers, particularly those designed for low 
frequencies, are operated on open circuit. The extent to which 
this distortion may reach, and its effect on core-loss and exciting 
current are clearly indicated in the accompanying curves and 
data which follow. 


Fic. 1 


The curve, Fig. 1, was taken on one of the generators in 
question while on open circuit. The curve, Fig. 2, was taken 
on the same machine while furnishing core-loss and exciting 
current to a transformer. It will be noted that both approx- 
imate very closely a sine wave. The oscillograph curve shown 
in Fig. 3 was taken while a generator, having a very peaked 
wave, was exciting the same transformer at the same voltage. 
The resulting core-loss and exciting-current measurements are 
given as follows: 

First case; sine wave, core-loss 1177 watts, current 33.5 
amperes. 

Second case; peaked wave, core loss 924 watts, current 15.4 
amperes. 

By comparing these sets of readings it will be seen that in 
changing the source of supply from one, giving very nearly a 


1907] TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING 1183 


sine electromotive-force wave, to one giving a peaked wave, 
the core-loss decreased to 79% and the exciting current to 44% 
of the original values. 

Another transformer, measured under conditions shown in 
Fig. 3, and again under conditions indicated by Fig. 4, required 
respectively 5500 and 7325 watts core-loss and 25.3 and 47 
amperes exciting current, an increase of 33% and 87% respect- 
ively. These readings show the variations which may occur 
with peaked waves of the same general character. 

These figures clearly indicate the importance of referring 
all measurements to a standard form of wave. At first sight 
the peaked wave would seem to have some advantages over 
the sine wave, owing to the lower core-loss and exciting current 
values which result. After all sides of the question are con- 


Pics 


sidered, however, including among other things the effect of 
wave-shape on insulation strains, etc., a sine-wave electromotive 
force is undoubtedly the best. And what is equally important, 
the generator from which the supply is obtained should not only 
maintain the standard wave-form on open circuit and on non- 
inductive loads, but also on low power-factor inductive loads; 
i.e., under the conditions of test. F 

In the measurement of core-loss on three-phase transformers, 
the windings across which the readings are taken should be 
Y connected and the opposite windings left open in case they 
are intended for delta connection. Otherwise, the circulating 
current due to unequal distribution of flux in the core and to 
the short-circuiting of the odd harmonics would show up as an 
increase in core-loss, thus giving incorrect results. In case 
the transformer windings on one side are delta connected, and 


1184 TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 26 


for any reason cannot be changed, it is preferable to connect 
both sides in delta before taking the core-loss measurement. 
The resulting circulating current will then occur in two windings 
instead of one, and, being proportionally less, will produce smaller 
disturbing losses in the copper than if but one winding alone is 
delta connected. 

Regulation. In general, it is now customary to determine 
the regulation of a transformer by one of the several methods 
which require impedance measurements with one of the windings 
short-circuited on itself, this having entirely superseded the old 
way of measuring the voltage with transformer free and loaded. 

Here, too, it is important to employ a generator which will 


Fic3 


give a sine wave at low power-factor loads, for while it is true 
that the wave-shape does not affect the measurements so seri- 
ously as those mentioned under the preceding heading, never- 
theless the variation is fairly well marked. 

High-Potential Test. On low-voltage transformers this test 
is not a difficult one to apply correctly, but where the voltage 
is high the question is entirely different, and the chance for 
error is large. This is chiefly because of the absence'of a suit- 
able means of measuring high potential. To be sure, either the 
conversion method or the spark-gap method may be used, 
though both are open to criticism. Individual conditions alone 
can determine which is most suitable. 

If the testing transformer has extremely close inherent regu- 


1907] TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING 1185 


lation, and the charging current under conditions of test is 
but a small proportion of its normal current capacity, it is 
reasonably safe to rely upon the low-tension voltmeter reading, 
and to consider that this times the ratio of conversion is an 
approximate indication of the high-tension voltage. If these 
conditions do not exist, the spark-gap method must be relied 
upon. It should be used, however, with great care. 

As the conditions under which the testing outfit operate 
are changed entirely by the introduction of the transformer 
under test, it is obviously not right to measure the high-tension 
voltage by spark-gap before this transformer is connected. On 
the other hand, if the transformer is connected in, together 
with the properly adjusted spark-gap, and the voltage is raised 
until the latter arcs over, high-frequency oscillations almost 


Fic. 4 


invariaply occur and result in a rise in voltage. The fina! value 
of this voltage may be considerably higher than that required, 
resulting possibly in an uncalled-for break-down of insulation. 

Such a disturbance may be overcome in one of two ways, 
both of which have been tried with satisfactory results. The 
first consists of inserting in series with the gap a high resist- 
ance,* the presence of which prevents the occurrence of a high- 
frequency disturbance when the spark-gap breaks down. The 
only precaution necessary in the use of this auxiliary resistance 


*For potentials ranging from 100,000 to 200,000 volts, a resistor 
consisting of a dozen U-shaped glass tubes one-half inch inside dia- 
meter and two feet in length will be found satisfactory. These should 
be mounted in a suitable rack, filled with water and connected in 


series, 


1186 TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING fJune 26 


is the calibration of the spark-gap with the resistance in series, 
as its presence will in general increase the effective value of 
the gap. In other words, the distance between needle-points, 
as given in the Standardization Rules, may need to be de- 
creased by from 5% to 10% to obtain correct results. 

The other method, referred to above, consists in making all 
connections for the high-potential test and placing the spark-gap 
across the circuit, the gap previously having been set, however, 
for a somewhat lower voltage than that required, two-thirds 
for example. The voltage is then increased, and the low-ten- 
sion voltmeter reading is noted at the moment the spark-gap 
breaks. The gap is now disconnected and the electromotive 
force again raised until the voltmeter reading, in the case cited, 
is 50% greater than before. The desired potential is thus 
obtained with fair accuracy without any disturbance in the 
circuit. 

The importance of using a sine-wave generator for supplying 
current to the testing transformer is hardly to be questioned. 
Otherwise, it will be extremely difficult to obtain the desired 
testing strain. 

As to varying the voltage of the high-potential transformer, 
several methods are possible, including the use of a variable 
resistance, a variable reactance, or changing the excitation of 
the generator field. The first, except perhaps in the case of 
low-voltage tests on small apparatus, should not be resorted 
to, as it has a very disturbing effect on the wave-form. The 
second gives more satisfactory results in this respect, and serves 
very well when the required range is not too great. In general, 
the last method, which is that of varying the generator-field 
excitation, is perhaps most often used, chiefly because it enables 
the voltage to be varied gradually over a wide range. Low field- 
densities, however, are apt to lead to armature reaction if the 
machine is furnishing anything like full-load current, so that 
even with this method some distortion of wave-form may result. 

A discussion of this branch of the subject would hardly be 
complete without some reference to the effect which the time 
of application of the high potential has on the resisting strength 
of insulation. In other words, if an insulating material will 
safely withstand 50,000 volts for one minute, what potential 
will it withstand if the test is continued for five minutes and 
what will it resist indefinitely? 

This relation between time and voltage is fairly well repre- 


1907] TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING 1187 


sented by the curve shown in Fig. 5. This was obtained from 
a series of tests on sheet insulation, potential from a 60-cycle 
sine-wave generator being applied to two brass discs arranged on 
Opposite sides of the test piece. 

It will be noted that for periods of one minute the sample 
safely withstood a pressure of 65,000 volts. For five-minute 
tests it was necessary to lower the pressure to about 70% of 
this value, or 46,000 volts; while, in order to resist the test in- 
definitely, the applied voltage had again to be lowered to 27,500 
or about 40% of its original value. 

These figures can hardly be taken as general, for they change 
considerably with different kinds of insulation and the resulting 
curves assume widely varying forms. In most cases the reduc- 


9 
Dielectric Strength 
80 of 
Sheet Insulation 
et My Time - Voltage Curve 
£60 
} 
= 50 
fas 


° 24 6 810 20 30 40 50 60 Min, Hrs.2 3 fas 


tion in strength as the length of the test increases, is much less 
than indicated above, so that in comparing the instantaneous 
test and continuous test, for example, the reduction is nearer 
50% or 60% instead of 70% as in the sample noted. These 
figures serve to emphasize, nevertheless, the undesirability of 
long-continued strains, and tend to confirm the advisability of 
retaining the present one-minute standard. 

High-Voltage Tests. The test which determines the strength 
of insulation between turns, between layers, and between leads, 
is equally as important as the ‘‘ high-potential’”’ test just re- 
ferred to. If the transformer windings withstand double volt- 
age, or, in the case of lighting transformers, triple voltage, 
their internal condition is reasonably well assured, 


1188 TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING [June 26 


In applying this test, it is usually advisable, and in most cases 
necessary, to use a frequency considerably higher than that 
for which the transformer was designed; otherwise, the exciting 
current becomes so excessive as to make it difficult or even 
impossible to obtain the desired increase in voltage. 

In general, satisfactory results are obtained by employing 
a frequency as much above that for which the apparatus is 
designed as the test voltage is above normal terminal voltage. 
With a 60-cycle transformer under consideration, for example, 
120-cycle current gives good results for double voltage tests, 
while 180 cycles is usually satisfactory for triple voltage. A 
180- to 200-cycle generator answers very well therefore in the 
majority of instances. 

Temperature Tests. Except perhaps in the case of special 
tests on small transformers, or where a single transformer is 
to be tested, the differential method of applying load for the 
temperature test or heat run is the most satisfactory and prob- 
ably the one most universally used. This ensures very nearly 
the conditions of actual operation, enables the work to be 
carried on with a minimum waste of power, and requires a com- 
paratively small amount of auxiliary apparatus. The total 
losses occurring are in general somewhat in excess of those 
which would take place if the transformer were normally excited 
and loaded on a dead resistance, or if it were operating under 
actual conditions of service, therefore the results are always 
on the safe side. 

While it is perhaps preferable to make this run at normal 
frequency, both on the exciting and loading side, still this is 
not absolutely essential to satisfactory results. In fact, two 
entirely different frequencies may be employed if desired, it 
merely being necessary to adjust the exciting voltage so as to 
obtain what has already been found to be the true core-loss 
at normal frequency and then to feed the required current 
into the other side. (By normal frequency is meant the fre- 
quency at which the apparatus is intended to operate). 

The resistance readings, taken at intervals during the run for 
the purpose of temperature determinations, should obviously 
be made with the shortest possible delay in view of the neces- 
sary removal of load at such times. It is here, therefore, that 
the precaution mentioned under the subject of ‘‘ Resistance 
and Copper Loss’ is most useful. By observing this, and by 
employing a suitable arrangement of double-throw switches 


OE eee 


1907] TOBEY: TRANSFORMER TESTING 1189 


to which the measuring instruments and source of direct-current 
supply may be permanently connected, the time required to 
take a resistance reading is reduced to a minimum. 

General. The order in which tests should be made depends 
more or less upon local conditions, so that no fixed rule can be 
given, nor, in fact, is one necessary. The general order in which 
the tests have here been described is perhaps as good as any. 
It has the advantage of placing the heat run at the end, so 
that, in case any part of the insulation has been injured by pre- 
vious tests, the fault becomes evident while the transformer 
is under load and operating under service conditions. It is 
sometimes considered advisable, however, after the heat run 
has been finished, to repeat the measurements of core-loss 
and exciting current. Any defect in the winding then becomes 

-apparent at once. 

The question of instruments with which to carry on the various 
tests has not been touched upon, for this forms a com- 
plete subject in itself. It is needless to say that the selection 
of instruments should be made with the utmost care, as on 
their construction and accuracy depends the value of the tests. 

Not only should they be selected carefully, but the same 
care should be exercised in their handling and use, and frequent 
calibrations, at least as often as once a week, should be the rule. 

Testing as a whole requires painstaking and constant study, 
and changing conditions of design and construction must be 
carefully followed if it is to fulfil its purpose. 


1190 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION {June 26 


Discussion ON ‘‘ CHOKE-COILS VERSUS ExTRA INSULATION ON 
THE END-WINDINGS OF TRANSFORMERS,” ‘‘ PROTECTION OF THE 
INTERNAL INSULATION OF A STATIC TRANSFORMER AGAINST 
HIGH-FREQUENCY STRAINS ”’, AND ‘‘ NOTES ON TRANSFORMER 
TESTING ”’, AT N1AGARA Fa tts, N. Y., JUNE 26, 1907 


S. M. Kintner: I have tried to make clear in this paper 
that, fora given expenditure to safeguard against transformer 
interruptions caused by line surges, more can be accomplished 
by the use of choke-coils and transformers with reasonable in- 
sulation than by adding extra insulation on the end-turns of 
the same transformer and omitting the choke-coil. It is not 
my contention that an inferior insulation can be used when 
choke-coils are employed and satisfactory service got with such 
an arrangement. Reasonable insulation on transformers of 
1000 kw. and upward should be able to withstand from 5000 
to 8000 volts between turns. 

A. H. Pikler: At the meeting on December 28, 1906, while 
discussing the paper of R. P. Jackson on lightning protection, 
the chairman of the transmission committee said: 


If we must have choke coils, let us put them in the same case as the 
transformers, and so save the complication in station wiring. Better 
still, let us do away with them altogether, and put such amount of insu- 
lation as may be recessary on the end-turns of the transformers; such 
amount of insulation as will take care of considerable strain between 
the end-turns. Thenif we use a low-resistance arrester orits equivalent, 
we shall, I think, have ample protection. 


This was the first time I had heard advocated such principles. 


They must have been considered of particular importance and. 


interest because this very subject is treated in two papers of 
the present convention. Mr. Kintner recommends the use of 
a choke-coil within the transformer tank, with no extra insula- 
tion on the transformer winding; Mr. Moody recommends the 
extra heavy insulation of the end-turns, and considers the choke- 
coil superfluous. 

From the points of view of both the designer and the operator 
or station man, I consider the application of either scheme a 
retrograde step. In designing we should strive for simplicity 
in construction. The transformer is a simple and classical piece 
of standard electromechanical apparatus; to use part of the 
transformer to perform a duty entirely different from that of 
transforming and transmitting of electrical energy, viz., the 
duty of the protective apparaus, endangers the simplicity of 
transformer construction, and both the transformer and the 
choke-coil would eventually suffer. This is true whether the 
choke-coil be within the transformer tank and no extra insula- 
tion is used on the transformer coil, or the choke-coil be made 
an integral part of the transformer by putting extra heavy 
insulation on its end-turns. From the point of view of the 
station man, I should expect the protective apparatus to protect 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1191 


the main equipment even at the cost of destruction of the pro- 
tective apparatus itself. 

Therefore I recommend the use of the choke-coil outside of 
the transformer tank, and also extra insulation on the end- 
turns of the transformer; but the extra insulated end-turns 
not at all intended to take the entire duty of the choke-coil. 
Then if something must break down, it will be the choke-coil 
outside of the transformer tank. Its cost is only a few per cent. 
of the cost of the transformer, and the interruption of operation 
of the power plant will last not more than a few minutes, whereas 
if the choke-coil is inside the tank, either as a separate piece 
of apparatus or as an integral part of the transformer, this 
interruption may last for hours or even days. 

We all know that in the case of resonance; that is, when the 
periodicity of the disturbance, the induction, and capacity co- 
efficient have the following relation: 


il 
5 Sma ba 
then the phase displacement will have the value 
o = 0 


and the rush of current will be impeded only by the ohmic re- 
sistance 


E 
Le == R 
and a breakdown follows. 

This is what Dr. Steinmetz had in mind when he perpetrated 
the conundrum: ‘‘ When is a choke-coil not a choke-coil?’’ 

P. M. Lincoln: I am of the opinion that the choke-coil in 
connection with high-voltage transmission and high-voltage 
transformers is a perfectly logical piece of apparatus to use, 
and the reasons for its use, I believe, are completely, although 
briefly, set forth in Mr. Kintner’s paper and the other papers 
which deal with the subject. I do not believe we can emphasize 
too much the value of the choke-coil, owing to the fact of the 
adjacent turns of the choke-coil having no voltage continually 
applied between them, as is the case in the transformer. When 
we come to analyze the matter of putting extra insulation on 
end-turns of the transformer, we find that it means usually con- 
siderably more than is indicated by the paper which was pre- 
sented by Mr. Moody. Transformers are specified often not 
only to run upon full voltage, but also to run upon half voltage; 
also they are frequently specified to be able to run with a delta 
connection for one high-tension voltage, and a star connection 
for another; and further, they are often specified to have a range 
in ratio of 10 or 20 per cent. Therefore, virtually all the taps 
have to be end taps, with the result that we have to extend 
that heavy insulation practically from one end to the other. 
If, therefore, we can take a separate piece of apparatus, such as 


1192 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


a choke-coil, and design and install that so that all of these heavy 
surges which come in can be developed across the turns of the 
choke-coil, we can thereby save considerable in the transformer 
and also protect the apparatus to a greater extent. 

J. W. Fraser: Looking at this subject from a commercial 
point of view, I believe that the size of transformers should have 
something to do with this question. We have on our system, 
for instance, forty small sub-stations, varying in capacity from 
600 kw. to 3000 kw., and will ultimately have a great many 
more. We practically install four sizes of transformers: 200 kw., 
300 kw., 500 kw. and 1000 kw. If we should design each sub- 
station for large oil-insulated choke-coils, the building would 
cost considerably more, and the coils would cost nearly as much 
as a spare transformer. So we have decided to use the coil 
with large impedance in generating stations where the cost of 
the transformer warrants it, and comparatively small air- 
insulated choke-coils, say 20 or 30 turns, in our sub-stations. 
We make the small choke-coils ourselves at a very small cost. 
By keeping one or two spare sub-station transformers of each 
size in stock at some central point of our system we eliminate 
any chance of a long shutdown. 

W. N. Smith: I am disposed to agree with Mr. Kintner in 
the matter of having separate choke-coils outside the trans- 
former. The tendency toward standardization would naturally 
incline us toward simplified transformer construction. I look 
forward to the time when companies operating large trans- 
formers will treat them as they do generators, and make thei 
own repairs when they burn out. It frequently happens that 
when a large transformer burns out, it has either to be sent 
back to the factory, or an expensive corps of winders has to be 
sent to the point where it happens to be located. The simple 
the transformer coils can be made, the less will be the necessity 
for such an expensive repair operation. When it is possible for 
a large power or lighting company with several sizes of trans- 
formers to carry in stock a minimum number of standard 
transformer coils for repairs, economy will result. Viewed from 
this standpoint, the employment of separate choke-coils will 
tend toward the standardization of transformers. I also be- 
lieve it is desirable to have the extra protection of choke-coils 
for other things than the transformer itself, particularly in a 
sub-station. Lead-covered cables are extremely sensitive, and 
as liable to break down as the winding of a transformer, and I 
believe that the choke-coil is of considerable use as a general 
protective device in preventing destruction of cables where 
used in the outside portions of the transmission line, as well 
as in power houses and sub-stations. 

It may be impossible to devise standard choke-coils ap- 
plicable to all conditions; but as another speaker has said, 
the power companies are perfectly able to devise them to svit 
particular conditions. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1193 


_ Another point to consider is the location of the choke-coil 
in the circuit. That depends to some extent upon the con- 
struction of the choke-coil. whether it is mounted on a wooden 
support or porcelain insulators or immersed in oil in an iron 
case. As surges frequently jump acioss from a transformer or 
choke-coil to the iron of the containing case, and can thus 
make destructive short-circuits, the position of the choke-coil 
in the circuit should be such that there is some protection 
outside of it in the shape of fuses or circuit-breakers, partic- 
ularly if it is to be confined in an iron case. While a believer 
in the choke-coil, I desire to call attention to this problem of so 
placing it that a possible short-circuit from some part of it will 
not cause more damage than it is intended to prevent. 

Charles W. Stone: One thing not yet considered is that in 
one instance a long overhead line was carried into a distributing 
station, and from this station underground for a considerable 
distance. In this distributing station lightning-arresters with 
~ multiplex connections and choke-coils were installed; the idea 
being to keep any disturbances which took place on the over- 
head line away from the cable system, It was found that dis- 
turbances occurred in the cable system, and on account of the 
installation of choke-coils were prevented from discharging 
across the multiplex connections of the lightning-arresters. 
Therefore in this case it would be better to have eliminated 
the choke-coils. The other alternative would have been to 
put in two sets of static dischargers; one on the overhead 
line, and one on the cable system, which would have added 
considerably to the expense and complication. Of course if a 
choke-coil is placed in circuit and is air-insulated and has a com- 
paratively few number of turns, it might be possible that high- 
voltage disturbances on the cable system would jump across 
the turns of the choke-coil, and discharge themselves across 
the multiplex connections of the lightning-arresters, as just ex- 
plained by Mr. Berg. 

E. E. f. Creighton: I have attempted to make laboratory 
measurements on choke-coils to determine some method by 
which we could choose their dimensions, and I think we shall 
have to go back to the fundamentals to find out just what the 
choke-coil is for. With Mr. Berg and Mr. Stone, I think that 
the choke-coil is sometimes disadvantageous. The function of 
the choke-coil is to prevent or to hold back high-pressure high- 
frequency surges long enough to permit the lightning-arrester 
to get into operation. Every lightning-arrester in operation 
to-day has a certain dielectric spark lag; that is to say, after 
the potential is applied to the lightning-arrester there is a brief 
interval, a few millionths of a second, before the lightning- 
arrester begins to discharge and lower the voltage on the system. 
If there is no choke-coil between the lightning-arrester and the 
transformer, the end-turns of the transformer receive this high 
potential strain during the interval that the lightning-arrester is 


1194 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


getting into operation. These high-frequency disturbances 
nearly always come from an external source; consequently the 
practice has been to place the lightning-arrester on the outside 
of the choke-coil. If the lightning is internal, the choke-coil 
is then more or less disadvantageous according to its value in 
inductance. One solution of that problem is to use a large 
inductance in a choke-coil and to place lightning-arresters both 
inside and outside the choke-coil. A laboratory experiment 
demonstrates these statements. 

The disrupted discharge method is used with the following 
apparatus: two choke-coils representing the two choke-coils in 
the line, a spark-gap on the outside of the choke-coils, on the 
side the disturbance is coming from, and another spark-gap 
on the inside of the choke-coils. 

The circuit.can be better illustrated by Fig. 1. The outside 
gap is in the location of the lightning-arrester. Now produce a 
discharge on the outside; set the outside gap so that it will spark, 
and the spark at the inside gap is comparatively small and 


LINE 


CHOKE-COLL 
LOCATION 
; OF TRANSFORMER 
| OUTSIDE INSIDE 


GAP GAP 
DISRUPTIVE DISCHARGE 
APPARATUS 


Fic. 1 


weak. On the other hand, open the otrtside gap until the 
potential can no longer bridge the gap, and the potential on the 
inside gap will rise to such a value as to give a spark more than 
twice as long as the outside gap. On one test, the outside gap 
was not sparking with a setting of one inch, and the inside one 
was sparking with a setting of two and one-half inches. 

It seems to me that is sufficient proof, either that this choke- 
coil should be protected on the inside, or the choke-coil made 
small enough so as not to magnify the potential on the inside. 
It is usually a difficult matter to explain just why higher poten- 
tials occur on the inside. In this case, of course, the potential 
came from the outside. 

An experience I had last Friday would perhaps be of interest, 
showing that even with very high values of inductance the 
transformer cannot be protected from the high potentials. In 
making some tests on insulators to determine the gap necessary 
to place on horns in parallel with the insulator to protect it, a 
condenser was placed across the transformer operating at about 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1195 


75,000 volts. After three or four strokes, the transformer in- 
sulation broke down inside, and on making an examination of 
it we found it was not the end-turns which were affected, but 
the third coil down from the end. This transformer is designed 
to operate at 100,000 volts, and has been used for hundreds of 
thousands of discharges. We have, however, always used a 
protective device in connection with it.. In the test I refer to 
it was used without protecting device. In that case you can 
see there must have been some combination of inductance and 
capacity giving a resonant condition, which produced high 
potential very far internally in the transformer. The subject 
is not simple. 

William McClellan: I have advocated external choke-coils 
and shall continue to do so until there is produced a good low- 
resistance lightning-arrester with the attributes of an ordinary 
safety valve; in other words, until the potential at the trans- 
former terminals can be kept practically constant. Extremely 
low-resistance fuse-arresters work quite well, but they are not 
self-renewing. Certain types of the horn arrester have given 
some satisfaction, but they are uncertain. The real question 
is not so much shall an external choke-coil be used, but shall 
it be a simple air-insulated coil of a few turns, or an elaborate 
oil-insulated coil in separate case. 

W.S.Lee: Asanoperating man I am in favor of both choke- 
coils and extra insulated end-turns. I amcontinually trying to 
improve the lightning protective apparatus by putting on first 
one kind of choke-coil, and then another. Our company is 
in favor of heavy insulated end-turns and want them on all 
transformers, for in practical operation, when lightning from the 
line strikes into the end-turns, we usually find that it goes to the 
case at entrance to transformer, or burns the terminals off. 
As Mr. Fraser has told you, we have in the neighborhood of. 
forty stations on our line, grouped about at different places. 
Some of these stations operate a group of cotton millsthat owns 
the station. We have attempted to put protective apparatus 
at all of these places but it is not easy to get the mill owners to 
invest in expensive choke coils. However, in our large plants 
we are installing the choke-coil and getting satisfactory results. 

R. P. Jackson: Mr. Moody’s statement, that the disturbance 
is likely to proceed into the tansformer some distance in feet, is, 
in a way, aproximately true. I think, however, that a better 
way of measuring the penetration disturbance would be in 
henrys. Tests I have made indicate that disturbances of the com- 
moner kind will penetrate into the transformer windings, roughly, 
about 0.04 to 0.06 henrys. A choke-coil of that value put out- 
side the transformer will cause the disturbance to be absorbed 
or reflected, and very little will go through into the trans- 
former. That value for a choke-coil, 0.04 henrys, is pretty high 
for a small transformer of low voltage, but insignificant for a 


high-voltage transformer. 


1196 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


in a paper read by me before the Institute last December, a 
curve was given indicating that a zero choke-coil would reflect 
a zero surge, and that the larger the choke-coil the more surge 
was reflected, with a descending curve something like a loga- 
rithmic curve. About 30 percent. of the disturbance would pene- 
trate through a coil of 0.04 to 0.06 henrys, while very little 
additional gain was to be obtained by increasing the size of 
choke-coil. At that point, about 70 per cent. of the surge was 
reflected, or failed to appear any farther in the windings, so it 
would seem that if extra insulation were to be put on the 
proper number ,of end turns to get safety, we should cover ap- 
proximately the number of henrys previously given; or 0.04, not 
considering the iron, which would be a reasonable amount for 
this extra insulation to be placed upon. 

I doubt if any harmful effect from choke-coils occurs very 
often. The damage to a transformer as the result of switching is 
usually the result of a sudden change of potential at the terminal 
of the transformer. Mr. Tobey’s paper indicates that the break- 
down of the spark-gap at the terminal of the transformer causing 
a breakdown of the insulation between the turns, is simply a 
case where the terminal suddenly dropped in potential while the 
rest of the transformer winding had a comparatively high po- 
tential; the result was that the charge on the interior windings 
attempted to get out at the point of low or zero potential, result- 
ing in a breakdown between turns. A choke-coil at the terminal 
of a transformer will simply make this change of potential at 
the terminal more slow in occurring; that is to say, this sudden 
change occurs at the terminal of the choke-coil instead of at 
the terminal of the transformer, so that unless the cases are 
very special—something I have not encountered—the disturb- 
ances, whether from the inside or the outside, will be dampened 
-out; their effect on the transformer will be much less if there 
is a choke-coil of some appreciable inductance than if there be 
no choke-coils. In other words, the disturbance reaches some 
distance into the windings from the end or terminal, whether 
this be the terminal of the transformer, or of the choke-coil. 

If the electrolytic lightning-arrester makes good its promise, 
I think there will be a fair chance of either omitting the choke- 
coil entirely or making it much lighter, because the electrolytic 
arrester will be able to keep the potential to a fixed point at the 
terminals of the transformer. 

‘‘When is a choke-coil not a choke-coil?’’ was, I believe, pro- 
pounded by Dr. Steinmetz sometime ago. This conundrum 
has very little bearing on practical matters. If the frequency 
is so high that, due to condenser effect, it will go through a choke- 
coil, it will also go on through the transformer for the same 
reason, and do no damage in either case, so that then one can 
truthfully say that when a choke-coil is not a choke-coil, there is 
no need of a choke-coil. 

C. P. Steinmetz: The purpose of the choke-coil is to protect 


re te i 


aa 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS LON 


the station apparatus against the entrance of high voltage. 
Therefore, the choke-coil must be between the apparatus to be 
protected and the source of high voltage, that is, the transmission 
line as the main source. The choke-coil must therefore be 
immediately at the transmission line, next to the lightning- 
arrester. As a good and convenient location for the choke-coil, I 
recommend the transformer tank. That means, however, that 
the transformer must be the first piece of apparatus on the trans- 
mission line. This is seldom the case. Frequently a number 
of transformers feed together into high-potential bus-bars and 
a number of transmission lines are operated from the same 
bus-bars. In that case, then, we have the transformer 
switches between the transformer and the high-potential 
bus-bar, and the feeder switches between the bus-bar and 
the transmission line. Now, these high-potential bus-bars, 
the transformer switches, the feeder switches, the current 
transformers, ‘the connection of the potential transformer 
—all must connect in between the choke-coil and the transformer ; 
otherwise these different pieces of apparatus are not protected by 
thechoke-coil. Thisappearstome rather tomake the arrangement 
complicated and impracticable where the choke-coil is desired in 
the same case with thetransformer. Furthermore, we must con- 
sider that the choke-coil receives lightning potential; that is, 
it requires a much more careful installation than the transformer, 
and the liability to puncture by discharges jumping across 
surfaces, etc. at the entrance to the choke-coil is much greater 
than that with any other apparatus and it appears to me the 
immediate neighborhood of the choke-coil to other apparatus 
is just as undesirable as that of the lightning-arrester. To avoid 
this dificulty one very simple way is to have no insulation but 
air, and it may then be feasible to put a choke-coil out-doors, 
up on the poles between the transformer station and the lightning- 
arrester house, where such exists. In those cases where there is 
other apparatus between the transformer and line, then in 
addition to the choke-coil which is on the line we require either 
a second choke-coil at the transformer, or special protection of 
the transformer, because the transformer also is a source of high 
potential, as Mr. Thomas showed us some years ago, and we 
have to guard against that also. The simplest way is the extra 
insulation on the transformer, which in this instance appears 
not as alternative to the choke-coil on the line, but as a protec- 
tion against self-destruction of the transformer, in addition to 


the protection afforded by the choke-coils against the entrance 


of high potential from the outside. ; 
The second point I desire to draw attention to is the curious 
experiment of Professor Creighton, where at the point beyond 
the choke-coil the voltage of the disturbance was greatly in- 
creased, Let us, for instance, consider the transmission of 
10,000 kw., at 33,000 volts, 60 cycles, three-phase 33,000; volts 
between lines means 19,100 volts from line to ground, and 175 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


amperes per line. Assuming the choke-coil to consume one 
per cent. of the voltage, that is, a very large choke-coil, as pro- 
posed, this gives a reactance: 


191 
er aa 1.09 ohms, 
hence an inductance: 
x 
aa — a= 2 h, 
is InN 2.88 m 


This choke-coil is interposed between the line and the station 
wiring, which station wiring also has a certain electrostatic 
capacity, though small it may be. That means you have an 
induct. ice in series to a capacity. 

Estimating the capacity of the station wiring, that means of 
the connection from the choke-coil to the transformers over 
the different switches, circuit-breakers, bus-bars, etc., as equiva- 
lent perhaps or of a magnitude of something like 50 feet of 
wire, that would give you a capacity of about 


C = 0.0002 mf. 


The frequency or resonance of this combination of capacity 
and inductance in series would then be: 


1 
N = ane t 200,000 cycles, 


approximately. Any disturbance, wave, impulse or oscillation, 
coming from the transmission line and approaching this com- 
bination of choke-coil and station wiring, if of this frequency, 
or containing a component of this frequency, meets resonance, 
and the choke-coil generates voltage, raising the voltage in 
the station to—theoretically—infinity. -Well within the range 
of lightning frequencies is 200,000 cycles; that is, impulses 
of static induction from the clouds, etc. A large choke-coil 
even with moderate voltage may build up, due to the in- 
ductance of the choke-coil in series to the station capacity, 
and produce a high voltage, and instead of protecting, the 
choke-coil so may produce destructive voltages, by resonance 
with the capacity of the station wiring. That is, a large choke- 
coil may be a source of danger, and this danger must be kept 
in view. At much higher frequency, and lower capacity and 
inductance, this phenomenon was shown experimentally by 
Professor Creighton: the inductance of the choke-coil in series 
with the capacity of the connection back of it, raising the voltage 
of the leyden jar discharge to the much higher value observed 
beyond the inductance. 

The conclusions to be drawn therefrom are that the length 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1199 


of wiring between the choke-coil and the transformer should 
be as short as possible, and that the choke-coil should be of 
as low inductance as possible; that is, as low an inductance as 
will still give a sufficient decrease of the steepness of the wave- 
front to allow the lightning-arrester to take up the discharge; 
but not more than that, because any increase beyond that in- 
ductance lowers the frequency of resonance and therefore in- 
creases the liability of picking up destructive voltages from 
line impulses. These two conditions should be very carefully 
adhered to: the lowest possible static capacity of the circuit 
between the choke-coils and transformer end of the line, and the 
lowest possible inductance of the choke-coil which still gives 
sufficient protection, and with these two limitations I also be- 
lieve in the desirability of the choke-coil between the overhead 
line and the station, because it decreases the steepness of the 
wave-front of the incoming wave, and so acts beneficially. 

Ralph D. Mershon: I do not care much for choke-coils, unless 
they are small enough to be put out of doors. In my opinion, 
choke-coils inside the station make the station wiring very 
difficult. If indoor choke-coils are used, they should be inside 
the transformer case; oth2rwise, I would rather have the end- 
turns of the transformers itsulated to act as choke-coils. It 
seems to me there is a good deal of needless objection made to 
insulation of the end-turns in cases where different voltages 
must be obtained. Mr. Moody shows how voltage taps can be 
got without interfering with the end-turns, by varying the num- 
ber of turns at the middle of the winding, instead of at the 
ends of the winding. It seems to me that in the case of multiple 
and series connection, to obtain full or half voltage, a somewhat 
similar course could be followed, and the same end-turns used 
for the multiple or series connection. Of course, in such cases, 
the end-turns will have to be made with a carrying capacity 
sufficient for the multiple connection. In most cases, I do not 
think this would be a serious matter. 

The depth to which the disturbance penetrates a transformer 
is a matter of frequency. Until-we get further data as to the 
frequencies which actually occur in practice, it seems to me 
that we cannot make much headway in determining how far 
the disturbance penetrates. 

In regard to Mr. Tobcy’s paper. in most cases I have found 
it very difficult to measure the resistance of large transformers 
by the fall-of-potential method, because of the difficulty of keep- 
ing the direct current perfectly steady. It is not always pos- 
sible to have a storage-battery for such measurements, and the 
voltage of a generator driven from commercial circuits generally 
varies enough to introduce serious errors into the measurement. 
I would like to know what source of current Mr. Tobey uses in 
this method of measuring the resistance of transformers in the 
field. 

I judge from Mr, Tobey’s paper that he contemplates making 


1200 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


the resistance test before the temperature test. It seems to me 
the resistance test should be made after the temperature test 
and with the transformer at normal temperature. I gather, 
also, that he has in mind making the final insulation test before 
the transformer goes out of the factory. Such practice I do not 
consider as either proper or safe. A transformer might stand 
500,000 volts in the factory; but by the time it has been shipped 
and installed, it might not be able to stand 5,000. What the 
customer wants to know is what the transformer will stand 
after it has been installed and under operating conditions, as 
regards temperature, etc. 

I am rather surprised at the dielectric time-voltage curve 
given in Mr. Tobey’s paper. ! had no idea that the dielectric 
strength of insulation in ordinary use diminished so rapidly or 
diminished to such an extent as he shows. It would be inter- 
esting to know the nature of the insulation on which the curves 
are made. If the curves are correct, it seems to me that we 
should have more than a double-potential test of transformers. 

If the end-turns of transformers are to be more heavily in- 
sulated than the rest of the winding, what is the most satis- 
factory and intelligent way of specifying such insulation? And 
what sort of a test can be given the transformer to find out that 
the end-turns have been insulated in accordance with the 
specifications? 

D. B. Rushmore: In any commercial installation, I think 
there is no question but that some kind of choke-coil should be 
installed, and, as a matter of fact, always is installed. The prob- 
lem is, what kind of choke-coil should be used and what amount 
of reactance should it have. 

The choke-coil is of use in preventing the entrance into the 
station of current from a lightning disturbance on the line. A 
lightning disturbance usually takes place during a rain storm 
when the insulators are wet and break down at the lowest point. 
The transformers are usually insulated to withstand twice the 
operating voltage. They will withstand that, and as a matter 
of fact a great many high-potential transformers will withstand 
three and a half times normal operating voltage before rupture 
takes place. If any disturbance occurs on a transmission line, 
it need only be reduced very slightly in order to protect the 
transformer, if it has not gone over the insulators. 

Lightning disturbances are of a very high frequency, as shown 
by the short distance which they travel before they break over 
insulators when the voltage is sufficiently high. The suggestion 
has been made to protect a station by using fine wires leading 
into the station, wires of such diameter that an increase of volt- 
age of 75 to 100% above the normal operating value will be above 
the corona effect on the wires, and thus the automatic disturb- 
ance will be largely dissipated outside the power station. 

W. LeRoy Emmet: In these high potential disturbances op- 
erating through inductive circuits, the danger lies in a condition 


1907} DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1201 


of elasticity. All of these highly insulated circuits are elec- 
trically in a perfectly elastic condition. There is no energy 
dissipation, and consequently, inductance combining with capac- 
ity produces a condition equivalent to that of an efficient 
spring. If these circuits could be made inelastic, they would 
absorb such vibrations as Mr. Steinmetz describes. With very 
high frequencies, small capacities, small inductance may create 
very high local voltages. It occurs to me that in Mr. Moody’s 
arrangement of insulated turns on the transformer, the practical 
efficacy may lie somewhat in the fact that the insulation has 
some power of absorbing energy, and so forms a sort of gradient 
of potential that penetrates the transformer; whereas with 
a device like a separate choke-coil, incapable of absorbing any 
energy itself, that gradient does not exist, and a point of high 
potential may occur beyond the choke-coil. I had one experi- 
ence which was perfectly definite, where a choke-coil inserted 
between a line and apparatus, caused repeatedly the puncture 
of the apparatus and the failure of the lightning-arrester. It 
was in a certain case where lightning always came the same 
way and acted the same way on the circuit. When that choke- 
coil was put in, the lightning made trouble, and when the choke- 
coil was out, the lightning made no trouble. In such a case we 
have a vibrating system with conditions very difficult to predict. 
If we could have inside the choke-coil or somewhere near the 
terminal of the transformer some means of dissipating energy, 
something that would apsorb the impulses of high period and 
voltage, it would kill the resonance, and it seems possible that 
the leakage and dielectric hysteresis in the insulation may do 
this; local absorption of energy in the iron may also effect the 
condition. The electrolytic lightning-arrester should be ap- 
plicable. It seems to me that some effort in these directions 
might be expected to give good results. 

O. S. Lyford, Jr.: There is one important feature of the 
choke-coil proposition which I have not heard discussed since 
I came into the meeting. In his list of objections to choke-coils 
as now used, Mr. Kintner omitted an important objection to a 
coil of high reactance immersed in oil; namely, the use of ad- 
ditional high-tension terminals carried out through a grounded 
case. In a high-voltage transformer station equipped with oil 
circuit-breakers and choke-coils we now have seven or eight 
such high-tension terminals per phase; two, or possibly three, 
for the main transformer, one for the series transformer, two 
for the choke-coil, and two for the circuit-breaker. Insulation 
failures occur most frequently in the bushings around such ter- 
minals, and it is therefore very desirable to minimize the number 
of such terminals. Putting the choke-coil inside the transformer 
case, as proposed by Mr. Kintner, is a step in this direction and © 
also takes care of the point which Dr. Steinmetz raised, that the 
choke-coil should be as near the transformer winding as pos- 
sible, but it leaves us still in a dilemma, as we have not afforded 


1202 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


to the circuit-breaker and series transformer such protection as 
the choke-coil gives to these devices. Mr. Kintner claims that 
a choke-coil affords a fixed amount of protection to any ap- 
paratus placed back of it and to obtain this protection we desire 
to place the choke-coil between the line and all other apparatus. 

One logical way to take advantage of Mr. Kintner’s suggestion 
and at the same time minimize the number of high-tension ter- 
minals and put the maximum amount of equipment back of the 
choke-coil, is to put the whole outfit, choke-coil, circuit-breaker, 
series transformer, and main transformer, allin one tank. There 
would then be only two, or possibly three, high-tension ter- 
minals per phase, and all the apparatus except these terminals 
would be protected by the choke-coil. 1 believe this is a prac- 
ticable arrangement and I recommend it for your consideration. 

H. W. Buck: This discussion for and against choke-coils 
sounds a good deal like a conference on the subject of church 
unity. Every man is setting forth certain dogmatic beliefs 
which he has for or against choke-coils. One man may have 
had a certain experience under a certain combination of cir- 
cumstances with a choke-ccil, which has led to the destruction 
of his apparatus, and for all time thereafter he condemns choke- 
coils. The next man has had very good success during certain 
seasons with similar appliances, while he had choke-coils on his 
system, and for that reason he is equally certain that the smooth 
operation of the system has been because of the choke-coils, 
Both conclusions are probably without any ground whatever. 
The circumstances which lead to surges of potential which bring 
destructive results to electrical apparatus have an infinite num- 
ber of combinations: they depend upon the length of the cir- 
cuit, the number of sub-stations, the size of the transformers, 
the transmission frequency, the particular character of the 
country where the lightning stroke took place, the voltage of 
the line, the conditions of operation at the moment, the load 
on the line, the question whether any circuit-breakers went out 
at the moment or not, etc. Under these conditions, in my 
opinion, it is absolutely impossible to calculate the problem 
beforehand mathematically, and equally impossible to demon- 
strate it experimentally. General conclusions can be figured 
under a given set of circumstances mathematically; or the 
transmission system can be set for a certain set of conditions, 
experiments made, and conclusions reached, but as to whether 
a choke-coil can be condemned as a universally useless piece of 
apparatus or praised as an apparatus which cures all lightning 
or surge troubles cannot be decided at the present moment, 
and in my opinion can never be conclusively decided. 

S.M. Kintner: Mr. Pikler apparently misunderstood me when 
‘he took the stand that I recommended the use of choke-coils 
inside the transformer case. I did not offer that as a recom- 
mendation, but merely as a suggestion of a means by which 
some objections made to the use of choke-coils might be over- 
come. 


1967] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1203 


Professor Creighton has shown the results of an experiment 
in a diagram upon the board, and quite general conclusions 
have been drawn from it. I would like to show by a sketch 
an experiment 1 made, and state the results obtained. The 
experiment was quite simple. This was also a laboratory ex- 
periment. I arranged the apparatus as shown in the following 
sketch, Fig. 2: 

In this diagram it will be seen that a static machine (Holtz 
or one of that type) supplies a charge to an insulated sheet 
of tin which represents a cloud. Directly below this sheet is 
another, also insulated from earth, which represents the ca- 
pacity of a transmission line both to earth and to the cloud. 
The imitation transmission line leads into a metal box which 
can be considered as representing the power-house building, o: 
even the transformer-case which is always of metal and grounded. 
Gap A represents the lightning-arresters, while inductance coil 

' L, condenser C, are representative of the transformer. Spark- 
gap B is a measuring gap and is used in determining the mo- 
mentary voltage maximums to which the transformer windings 


SHEET TIN REPRESENTING | TIN BOX REPRESENTING 


STATIC MACHINE 
A CLOUD POWER STATION 


DISCHARGE 
GAP 


SHEET TIN REPRESENTING 
TRANSMISSION LINE CAPACITY 


GROUND 


Fie. 2 


may ve subjected in strains to ground when charged clouds in 
the vicinity of the power-house were discharging. 

In brief, the results of the tests showed that gap B never dis- 
charged when it was larger than gap A, and the general conclu- 
sion drawn was that a transformer protected by a lightning- 
arrester would not be subjected to shocks, due to bound charges 
inside the transformer when they were released by a cloud 
discharge in the immediate neighborhood, that were in excess 
of the voltage setting of the lightning-arrester. 

W.S. Moody: Ofcourse the purchaser can specify the amount 
of insulation, or the test that it should be capable of with- 
standing, but it is hardly practicable to make tests to check 
this in the finished apparatus. I think the best that can be 
done in the way of testing is to make up a sample coil with in- 
sulation identical to that which will be used in the transformer, 
and then test the sample. I believe that if we use insulation 
between layers which will withstand something like 25 per cent. 
of the line voltage for the outer portion of the winding, we will 
have a very safe design. Theoretically, a uniformly tapered in- 
sulation should be used, but practically, it is out of the question 
to make more than two or three steps in the amount used. We 


1204 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


start with an insulation between adjacent turns or layers that 
will stand 25 per cent. of the line voltage, and taper this in two 
or three steps to the normal insulation at a point, say 200 feet, 
within the winding. 

Ralph D. Mershon: To what percentage of the total winding 
would you give the heavier insulation? 

W.S. Moody: I do not think that we can attempt to deter- 
mine this with any great accuracy. In most transformers 
200 ft. should give a length which would absorb any voltage 
which a good lightning-arrester will not discharge if the voltage 
is really what is commonly known as high frequency. 

H. W. Tobey (remarks made before reading the paper): In 
the preparation ot this paper, the idea was to describe in general 
some of the more important features of up-to-date transformer 
testing and also to outline a few of the methods which have 
been proposed and for one reason or another have been dis- 
carded. (Mr. Tobey read the paper, and then replied as follows 
to various questions): 

We find we have usually obtained better results by using a 
storage-battery for the source of direct-current supply than by 
using an exciter. If an exciter is used, it is usually found de- 
sirable to place in series with it and the resistance to be meas- 
ured, an auxiliary resistance of such value that the exciter 
may be operated at approximately normal voltage. Under 
these conditions, there is ordinarily but trouble due to un- 
steady voltage. We have felt, as I said in the paper, that it 
was rather better to make the high-potential test before the heat 
run, so that in case the insulation was injured by the latter test, 
the fact would become known during the heat run. ‘There is 
no other reason, however, why the order of the tests could not 
be changed if thought desirable. 

As to the curve referred to in the latter part of the paper, I 
may say that it was based on tests made on paper insulation 
and was purposely selected because it showed a marked differ- 
ence in dielectric strength between the short time test and the 
long continued test. The difference is more marked in this 
curve than we find in ordinary insulation. Usually the change 
is perhaps 30 per cent.; that is, the dielectric strength would be 
30 per cent. less in continued operation than when subjected 
to an instantaneous test. Attention should also be called to 
the fact that the sample in question consisted of one thickness 
only, whereas ordinarily in transformer construction the insula- 
tion is made up from a number of laminations so that the factor 
of safety is well on the safe side. 

E. J. Berg (by letter): To me it would seem that relatively 
small reactive coils and reinforced insulation of the end-turns 
afford the best protection. 

The breakwater analogy used in Mr. Kintner’s paper is per- 
haps as close as any mechanical comparison could be, but it 
must be remembered that waves are set up on each side of the 


a —___e———e 


1907] DISCUSSION AT: NIAGARA -FALLS 1205 


breakwater and that the apparatus to be protected is located 
on one side thereof. Consequently, whereas the breakwater 
affords a good protection for a wave coming from the outside it is 
objectionable for waves coming from the inside. 

Briefly, since not only the line, but electrical apparatus con- 
nected to the line under certain conditions that are brought to 
a very high potential above ground and are suddenly discharged 
through the lightning-arresters, it is obvious that whereas the 
reactive coil between the apparatus and the lightning-arrester 
will afford a protection from the surge which comes from the 
line, it would be detrimental for the surge which comes from 
the apparatus itself. 

Unfortunately, the inductance and capacity of the electrical 
apparatus is very small compared with that of the line, or a rea- 
sonable section thereof, therefore the frequency of discharge of 
the apparatus is much greater than the frequency of the discharge 
of the line. A reactive-coil which has a considerable reactance 
for the line frequency has an enormous reactance for the surge 
from the apparatus and therefore may prevent its reaching the 
lightning-arrester, and may even intensify the voltage. 

A practical demonstration of this action of reactive-coils 
was found some years ago in a commercial installation where 
reactive-coils of rather high inductance were installed between 
the lightning-arresters and the apparatus. Upon inspecting 
these coils after some lightning storms, it was found that dis- 
charges had taken place between the inside lead of the coil 
and ground, discharges representing very considerable voltages. 
In view of this and the reasons given above, it has seemed 
best to the writer to use air-insulated coils, which, to be sure, 
have relatively small reactance, but which are self healing, for 
excessive voltages they act as an additional number of gaps. 
The discharge from the transformer being able to reach the 
lightning-arrester over the turns instead of through them, ob- 
viously, insulated reactive coil would not answer in this case. 

B. C. Shipman (by letter): The reasons for using a separate 
choke-coil, as given by the author, far exceed the reasons 
against it, both in number and force, I think the matter is 
generally so regarded. To depend on the insulation of the end- 
turns only, for protection, is hazardous. Even if trouble is es- 
caped in nine cases, the tenth may cause very disastrous results, 
far outweighing any disadvantages of an additional piece of 
apparatus, or complexity in wiring. If it be granted that the 
choke-coil performs the service expected of it, it seems to me 
to be better engineering to hold up excessive surges and poten- 
tial strains outside of a transformer, rather than to admit them 
and then attempt to withstand them by extra insulation. 
Injury to a choke-coil is comparatively unimportant; to the 
transformer it is serious. 

The reactance of the turns of the transformer-coils themselves 
will vary according as the transformer is open-circuited on the 


1206 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


secondary or not; if not open-circuited, with the load con- 
nected. In the latter case, the reactive effect of the primary 
being less, the extra insulation would have to extend farther 
into the coil than if the secondary were open-circuited. I 
recall one instance where three 2000-kw. transformers were 
connected to the transmission line, but only two were supplying 
current from the secondaries, the third being open-circuited. 
A lightning disturbance entered the station, and, passing the 
protective devices, broke down the insulation between turns 
of the idle transformer, while it left the working transformers 
uninjured. This I attributed to the greater choking effect of 
the idle transformer, causing a steeper gradient of voltage in 
its coils. 

Regarding the advisability of putting the choke-coils in the 
same case with the transformer, it might be desirable in certain 
instances for special reasons, but in general I think it would be 
bad practice. There are enough complications now in a high- 
tension, multi-tapped, water-cooled transformer, and the in- 
terior is hard enough to get at without making it more so. 

I agree with Mr. Moody on the desirability of reinforcing 
the end-turns of transformers, not, however, to take the full 
force of the extra strains, but to be able to withstand whatever 
portion of such strains that passes the choke-coils. 

Frank G. Baum (by letter): It has been my experience that 
trouble due to lightning rapidly disappears as the insulation 
of line and apparatus improves, and when the insulation be- 
comes what it seems it should be, the lightning trouble prac- 
tically disappears. That lightning trouble is largely a matter 
of insulation is proved by the fact that, where 15,000-,25,000-, 
and 60,000-volt lines all pass through the same country, the 
trouble generally appears on the lower voltage lines. I doubt 
very much if a first-class insulator will be punctured even by 
a lightning bolt striking the tower, because it would seem to 
be very much easier for the lightning to go to the structure direct. 

In the protection of a line against lightning in the section of 
the country where very severe lightning is prevalent, it is not 
a question of one method versus another, but all the precaution 
that can be taken at reasonable expense. In some sections 
extra insulation could be used, on the transformers, choke-coils 
externally, lightning-rods or ground-wires on certain sections 
of the line, also horn gaps at certain places to protect against 
high surges, these horn gaps probably having some resistance 
connected to ground. It is quite certain, however, that on a 
high-voltage, high-power transmission system the ordinary 
spark-gap arresters are useless. 

A. C. Pratt (by letter): I believe thoroughly in the desir- 
ability of providing extra insulation on the outer turns of a 
static transformer and placing the taps for voltage adjustment 
near the middle of the windings. I advocated this method in 
1904 in discussion of a paper by Mr. Moody and brought out 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1207 


the further advantage that in case the transformer is operated 
with less than the total high-tension winding in service, the maxi- 
mum pressure to ground from the outer turns of the winding is 
normally never more tkan that from line wire to ground, which 
is not the case if the taps are next the outer terminals of the 
winding. 

After eight years’ experience and observation on lines opera- 
ting at from 10,000 volts to 60,000 volts, I am in favor of sep- 
arate choke-coils in all ordinary cases, and for substantially the 
same reasons as set forth by Mr. Kintner; I would however 
favor somewhat heavier insulation between the outer turns of 
the transformer than between the inner turns, as the outer turns 
are doubtless often subjected to quite severe strains due to 
switching and to the inability of the choke-coil to afford complete 
protection under all conditions. There seems to be no doubt 
as to the ability of the choke-coil to afford a very large degree 
_of protection. 

James Lyman (by letter): The resistance offered to a line 
disturbance depends directly upon frequency. The frequency 
of a surge, whether from a short-circuit, ground, or lightning 
discharge, may be anything from the normal frequency of the 
line current to a million cycles per second. If the frequency 
is low, as is the case with many induced lightning charges, the 
choke-coil offers practically no resistance. Therefore, the 
transformer windings should be insulated to stand such strains 
as will not readily be discharged over the lightning and static 
arrester. A form of choke-coil consisting of 20 to 50 feet of 
solid copper conductor-wound on mandrels 5 or 6 in. in diameter 
with 0.25 in. air clearance between turns, takes practically no 
extra room and offers considerable resistance to high-frequency 
discharges. Extra insulation to the outside turns in high-tension 
transformer-coils is also recommended as an additional protec- 
tion against abnormal voltage caused by high-frequency dis- 
turbances. The added insulation does not materially increase 
the size of the transformer, but taken together with the small 
choke-coils and lightning and static arresters of a reliable de- 
sign give the most satisfactory results. Where choke-coils of 
400 ft. of conductor have been installed between the lightning- 
arrester and transformers, instances of discharge across the 
transformer-coils have occurred, indicating a rise in voltage due 
to the reactance of the choke-coil in preventing the discharge 
of the transformer. It is my opinion, therefore, that large 
choke-coils are not always a protection, and, considering other 
objections to them, they should not be used. 

Farley Osgood (by letter): I think it is better to keep the 
insulation cf the transformer as nearly the same throughout as 
possible, as it saves expense and saves space in the transformer 
case. I can see no reason for insulating the choke-coil unless 
it is to be placed in a position where there is insufficient room 
to carry bare copper, and, generally speaking, the position would 


1208 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


not be a good one for any high-tension equipment. If the 
choke-coil is made without insulation, its perfect condition or 
damaged state can be quickly and clearly seen, which might not 
be the case with an insulated coil. 

The proper position for choke-coils is in the high-tension 
chamber, where there should be sufficient room as to make the 
matter of this slight additional equipment, which virtually re- 
quires no attention, of very little consequence from a complica- 
tion standpoint. 

My experience has been that choke-coils are a real benefit 
on voltages of 33,000 or greater, and, therefore, the use of the 
coil is recommended in all cases. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y , June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907 By A. i. E. E. 


NOTES ON RESISTANCE OF GAS-PIPE GROUNDS 


BY J. L. R. HAYDEN 


Earth connections in electric circuits are frequently made by 
driving a gas pipe into the ground. Such grounds are of fairly 
high resistance, and therefore not permissible where a low resist- 
ance ground is required. Their great simplicity and cheapness 
makes them desirable, whe1e very low ground resistance is not 
necessary, as for discharging static charges, eai thing overhead 
ground-wires, etc. To get data on the resistance offered by such 
gas pipe grounds, their permanence, and the variation of the 
resistance with the seasons, an investigation was started two 
years ago. 

Three gas pipes of 2.5 in. diameter were driven into the ground 
at distances of 15.75 ft. between I and II, and 7.4 ft. between 
II and III, in the lawn adjacent to Dr. Steinmetz’s laboratory. 
The soil is a clay loam, overlaying shale rock a few feet below 
the surface. The pipes are driven into the following depth: 

Le Oren 
Lief. 
fies 10" 

The resistance of the three grounds was measured with an alter- 
nating 60-cycle current of 120 volts, and as return ground was used 
the system of the city water pipes. This return ground showed 

- to be less than 0.01 ohms. It was therefore neglected. 

Readings were taken at irregular intervals from August 1905 
to August 1906, and daily from September 1, 1906 to date: during 
fall and spring, morning and evening readings were taken to see 
whether the daily temperature variation had any effects. These 
however, were found so small that in the attached curves the daily 


average has been used. 
1209 


1210 HAYDEN: GAS-PIPE GROUNDS [June 26 


Fig. 1 shows the variation of the three ground resistances during 
the whole period, and Figs. 2 and 3 the variation from September 
1906 to date, in larger scale. so as to show the daily values. The 


values are given in amperes at 120 volts 60 cycles, and so are 
proportional to the conductivity. 


The lower curve gives the daily average of temperature, and 


Byes 


1907] HAYDEN: GAS-PIPE GROUNDS 1211 


the rain fall, the height of the eek line giving approximately 


the intensity of the rain fall. 
The curves show very piainly the sudden rise of conductivity 


Fic. 2 


at rain fall, and the gradual decrease during the following dry 
period. The maximum of conductivity occurs in Julv and 
August. This was rather unexpected, since the wet season is 


1212 HAYDEN: GAS-PIPE GROUNDS [June 26 


in spring. -It seems that the increase of conductivity of the 
moisture at high summer temperature amounts to more than 
the increase of moisture during the wet but cooler spring season. 


y 
A 
bass 
HS 
i 


The minimum of conductivity is towards the end of March. 
Since thunder storms occasionally occur before this period, 
this feature requires serious consideration. So far the values of 


1907] HAYDEN: GAS-PIPE GROUNDS 1213 


the present year approximately repeat last year’s record, except 
in winter: during the last winter the conductivity decreased 
to very much lower values than in the previous winter. Whether 
this was due to the greater severity of the last winter, must 
remain for further investigation. 

Interesting is the great difference between the three grounds 
although closely adjacent to another. Ground I shows the 
effect of rain fall and dry periods very much more than II and 
III. Iland III during summer are very closely the same, while 
I has a considerably higher conductivity, about 30%. From 
October onward the conductivity goes down, and towards the 
end of December, II and III, which until then were very closely 
alike, begin to differ; III decreasing much more rapidly, to a 
minimum in March, of less than 0.5 amperes or less than one-sixth 
_ of the summer value, while IJ reaches a minimum of 1.15 am- 
peres or about one-third of the summer value, and I, which has 
been of higher conductivity during summer, falls below II towards 
the end of January, reaching aminimum of 0.9amperes. Towards 
the end of March all three grounds rapidly rise in conductivity, 
with the spring thaw, in the beginning of April.II and IIIT are 
again alike, and I of higher conductivity than the other two. 

It seems herefrom that such gas-pipe grounds are permanent 
at least for some years, but show a marked annual variation, 
the conductivity greatly decreasing during winter. But, against 
expectations, even at the winter minimum, a very appreciable 
conductivity is left. The most important conclusion is, however, 
that such grounds show very great individual difference in their 
annual variation, even when closely adjacent to each other. 
This matter requires a further and more extended investigation, 
which has been started and will be reported upon at a future 
time. 

An interesting and useful feature observed was that by the 
passage of an alternating current through the pipe into the 
ground, the conductivity gradually increased, for instance: 


Circuit closed at noon: 
0 hours after: 3.40 amperes at 120 volts 


7 “ “ 3 F 90 “ 
9 “ “ 4 ; 33 “ 
I) “ “ 4 3 4? “ 
43 “ “ 4 : 50 “ 
52 “ “ 4 . 69 cc 
75 6c “cc 4 i 78 ce 


103 “ “ 4 : 74 (14 
120 (4 “ 4. 73 3 


1214 HAYDEN: GAS-PIPE GROUNDS [June 26 


Circuit opened at noon: 


0 hours after: 4.73 amperes at 120 volts. 
v6 “ “ 4.02 “ 
23 “ “ 3 } 62 “ 


APPENDIX 


As the daily measurements of the gas-pipe grounds have been 
continued during the time which has elapsed since the reading 
of the above paper, in Fig. 4, the record of Fig. 1 is continued 
to the middle of February 1908. As seen, the curves in Fig. 4 
show the same characteristics and the same values as in Fig. 1: 


HiG7 4 


I gives a higher summer maximum, and a far greater variation 
of the conductance with the rainfall; II and III are practically 
alike until the arrival of very cold weather, which this year 
occurred at the end of January, when III went far down below 
II in conductance, just as it did in former years. 

It seems, herefrom, that at least during the period of observa- 
tion, of nearly three vears, the gas-pipe grounds showed no 
permanent change, but merely periodic variations with the 
seasons of the year. 


oo te 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1215 


Discussion ON ‘Notes oN RESISTANCE OF GAS-PIPE 
Grounpbs” aT Niacara Fatts, N. Y., JUNE 26, 1907 


Chas. P. Steinmetz: It seems that the continuous passage 
of an alternating current through such a gas pipe to the ground 
increases the conductivity. This test of increase of conductivity 
was made in the summer time. It stands to reason that 
during winter the increase will be very much more because 
of the melting ice. The curves given in the paper show 
interestingly how towards the winter the conductivity gradually 
falls and reaches the minimum towards the end of March and 
then very suddenly jumps up. It also shows many times after 
a rainfall a sudden rise of current which gradually fades out, 
and how all three grounds go together until the end of the year 
and then the one current becomes very small, while the other is 
still high, and the low resistance ground has reached a higher 
resistance than one of the high resistance grounds. 

This is only a preliminary refort, but it is interesting to know 


- that such a gas-pipe ground, which has been called bad names 


for a long time, seems to remain a ground even in winter when 
everything is frozen, even if it does not come below the frost 
line. It is naturally not good enough to discharge a large cur- 
rent, but is good enough to dissipate all electrostatic discharges 
which may accumulate in the line. It remains to be investi- 
gated whether grounds in different places, different soils, etc. 
may not give still greater values and show different results. 

Ralph D. Mershon: Why not extend these investigations 
to other forms of ground? Why not compare pipes with some 
of the other forms of ground? ; 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: That is what Mr. Havden is arranging 
to do, to start an investigation on a larger scale. There have 
been a number of suggestions already made, in connection with 
gas-pipe grounds, of filling the hole up with coke and salt and 
other materials. It remains to be investigated, whether there 
is any benefit in digging a hole and filling it with coke, or whether 
driving a pipe into the ground is not nearly as good. Another 
question is as to how the character of the surroundings affect 
the ground, whether to drive the ground pipe in the middle of 
a road, or to drive it under trees. We are putting down a large 
number of these gas pipes scattered over the college grounds at 
Schenectady, and expect to get further results from these tests. 

F. B.H. Paine: Do I understand that the gas pipe introduced 
farthest into the earth has the least resistance? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The least resistance, or highest conduc- 


tivity in summer, but in winter it fallsin conductivity below the 


one which was less deep. The shallowest one showed the best 


‘conductivity in winter, more than twice the conductivity of the 


other one, which was a little deeper, and nearly twice the con- 
ductivity of the one which was deepest. — We measured at lower 
voltages by putting high resistance in series; instead of 120 volts, 
40 or 50 volts gave the same resistance. 


1216 RESISTANCE OF GAS-PIPE GROUNDS June 26 


P. H. Thomas: If you had 100 amperes it might be different? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The resistance would probably go down, 
due to the heating, and so it would show the time effect. Perhaps 
with high voltages and extremely large currents, but with a 
range of 120 volts or less. the resistance would be constant. 

Ralph D. Mershon: We made a somewhat similar investiga- 
tion. The railway companies were very particular about having 
our structures grounded near the tracks, and they designed some 
elabo:ate grounds, groups of steel rails surrounded with coke. 
Mr. Nicholson made some measurements on the concrete tower 
foundations and also the resistance of some of these grounds. 
First he tried to use a Wheatstone bridge, but the stray cur- 
rents from different places in the country bothered him. Then 
he used a modified Wheatstone arrangement in which you make 
use of the stray current to measure the resistance. He got 
results which were concordant, but he tound that with a volt- 
meter he could always get a voltage sometimes in one direction 
and sometimes in the other, between the tower and a pipe driven 
in the ground. Then he drove two exactly similar pipes in the 
ground. to the same depth, and got a voltage between them. 
Then he put two pipes in a barrel of water and got a voltage be- 
tween, and he found he could reverse the voltage by the amount 
of immersion ot the pipe. 

F. B. H. Paine: It is my recollection that the same founda- 
tion resistances were measured at different times in the year, 
but certainly during the summer and fall, but I think later on 
in the winter the variation in resistance was so slight as to be 
comparatively negligible: it varied between 7 and 10, and 7 
and 12 ohms, at different times of the year, the same founda- 
tion, not more than that 

N. J. Neall: What is the ohmic resistance of the concrete 
foundations under the tower? 

Raiph D. Mershon: The highest is 20 ohms, and the lowest 
is 3 ohms from the tower to the ground. These values were 
got by measuring the resistance between the two adjacent 
towers and assuming that half the resistance was in each one. 
I think there is room for turther investigation in regard to these 
grounds, not only as to the ohmic resistance, but as to the part 
they play in case of surges. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: We are going to try to measure not only 
with 60-cycle current, but also with the high frequency current, 
100 000 cycles. 

Ralph D. Mershon: I got one railway company to allow 
me to dig a trench and put in a strip of copper—they finally 
agreed to let me put in galvanized iron—with some coke around 
it to make a good contact with the ground. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: Mr. E. J. Berg some years ago proposed 
to run a shallow ditch along the line and run an underground wire 
in the ditch and connect that up with the overhead ground wire 
and use it as an energy dissipating wire, instead of the ground. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1217 


Discussion 


F. J. Hoxie (by letter): In i906 and 1907, I made a series 
of measurements to determine the amount of protection that 
could be expected from pipe and plate grounds on lighting 
systems. The paper by Mr. Hayden shows considerably less 
resistance for the same area of earth contact than is indi- 
cated by my measurements. This is probably due to a finer 
soil and a greater amount of salts dissolved in the ground water, 
for plates only a few feet apart in different kinds of dirt and in 
the water of the same pond show large differences in resistance. 
References to the resistance of ground plates in electrical litera- 
ture are generally indefinite, but they give the impression that 


O PLATES 1 FT. SQUARE 


VOLTS PER CENT 


: % 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
ST PLATE 


| EAST PLATE Fig, 1 i WE 
RESISTANCE TO PIPE SYSTEM, 2625 Se RESISTANCE TO PIPE SYSTEM, 1470 


a copper plate of moderate dimensions buried in permanently 
moist earth will have a resistance of about ten or fifteen ohms. 
As this is greatly at variance with the facts, in some parts of 
Rhode Island at least, the following measurements may be of 
aterest. 

These measurements were all made in Rhode Island, in a soil 
very free from soluble minerals. Most of them were made 
where there is an underlying ledge of granite about 60 ft. below 
the surface and the ground water level is just above this ledge. 
Between the ledge and the surface loam the soil is mostly silica, 
sand, and small stones of varying sizes, unevenly mixed and 

apparently the result of a violent movement of water in past 
ages. The well-water contains about 100 parts of mineral matter 


1218 RESISTANCE OF GAS-PIPE GROUNDS [June 26 


and the river-water about 30 parts in 1,000,000. The surface 
loam is of a reddish color, somewhat. sandy, and from onc to 
three feet thick. i 

The resistance of plates or pipes buried in this soil varies so 
greatly from the figures mentioned above that it is evident that 
a copper plate of any reasonable size is not a safe ground for a 
lighting system carrying large currents at moderate potential. 
By referring to the table of measurements, it will be seen that 
the resistance of a metal plate one-foot square in the surface 
loam is about 2000 ohms, in the underlying sand about 11,000 
ohms, and in the ground water at the bottom of a well about 
300 ohms. Rainy or dry weather makes comparatively little 
difference to the resistance, except in case of the sand. 


A= DROP IN VOLTAGE BETWEEN COPPER STRIP 90 FT. LONG 


oe AND TOWN WATER PIPES 
1 sae 


80 


VOLTS PER CENT 


Sa 10 20 30 70 80 90 100 


40 50 60 
DISTANCE IN FEET 
FPres2 


As the area of a plate is increased, the resistance is not pro- 
portionately diminished, but in about the ratio of the square 
root of the areas; but when a number of small plates widely 
separated are connected to form a single ground-connection, 
their separate conductivities are added, as shown by the re- 
sistance of 13 ohms of the thirty 1.25-in. pipes driven into the 
ground five feet at intervals of 300 ft. 

The curve in Fig. 1 shows the drop in potential between two 
plates one-foot square buried near the surface of the ground 
100 ft. apart. Fig. 2 is a similar curve of the drop in poten- 
tial, betweea a copper ribbon, buried in a straight line 90 ft. 
long and one foot under the surface of the ground, and a town 
water-pipe system, 


CS  ~_= 


» 1907; DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1219 


Greater depth does not necessarily decrease the resistance of 
a ground plate. In this location the reverse is true until the 
ground water is reached, as is shown by the resistances of plates 
in the surface loam and in the sand where the loam has been 
removed. The conductivitiy of ground plates or pipes is ap- 
parently governed by the laws of solutions of electrolytes as to 
variation with temperature and concentration. The coarseness 
of the soil in contact with the plate also affects the conduc- 
tivity, as the area of contact is greater with a fine than with a 
coarse soil, unless the plate is below the ground water level. 

The method of measurement used was as follows: the 60-cycle, 
104-volt, public service current was grounded on one side to the 
public water-pipe system, the other side of the circuit was con- 
nected to the ground to be measured through a one-ampere 
portable ammeter. In some of the high-resistance measure- 
ments a 10-to-1 transformer was used. The voltage was mea- 
sured with a portable voltmeter. The curves were made by 
connecting the two ends of a german-silver wire 100 ft. long 
with the two sides of the circuit. The ground plates to be 
measured were connected as near as possible to the ends of the 
wire. A telephone receiver was used as an indicator, this being 
attached on one side to the resistance wire by a movable con- 
tact, and on the other side to a rod which was put in the earth 
at regular intervals between the two plates, the point of equal 
voltage being found on the wire and the readings platted as per 
cent. of the impressed voltage. 


Resistances between the town pipe system and the following : 
Plate 6 ft. 2in. by 3 ft. in still water bottom of the Pawtuxet 


PVGL septs ho ees RED DHE Cn cae nae Taletehe Slee sea ie etare ta aN 32 ohms 
Plate 1 ft. square in still water bottom of the Pawtuxet 

ISTORII, SAS Bia IO ROOTS Sle OE ONY TRUE Men Oke eae 1320 
Plate 1 ft. square in current in bottom of the Pawtuxet 

FENCE & bog.t? BE BEE. ES, EOS bad Oh oatnod Staecie onr) Oe ccs aco a rap ec cure Bee he 
One cu. ft. Pawtuxet river water between two opposite faces.. 2800 “ 
Plate 1 ft. square in rain water cistern..........++-++++4+5 LO eaen 
Plate 1 ft. square in stoned well 45 ft. deep.........++..-- Ae 
Plate 1 ft. square in cement cylinder well 50 ft. deep....... 406 “ 
One cu. ft. well water between opposite faces.............. 487 “ 
Plate 1 ft. by 2ft. on ledge in bottom of Pawtuxet river, rapid 

ON ERET Sa RIS 6 RO ERE oe OOO Chto ne emer a TO nonce anE 324 = 
Plate 1 ft. square in stoned well 40 ft. deep............ BK 
Plate 6 ft. by 2 ft. 3 in. in three bushels coke 6 ft. deep in 

aANOHEP lnllaelle Neentaty Q8g ol nino ons Gogo Cg cml Utes NO OroI 13 ‘ 
1.2£ in. gas pipe driven into gravelly ground about five feet.. 630 ‘ 
Nail driven into apple tree about 6 ft. above the ground.... 3855 : 
Wire around and forced into bark of apple tree limb 7 in. in . 

GRIBRTREUTES RUS nus, ot. caste EROORO SAC OORT Saat ne eat ee ere loud 3030 
Seven 1.25 in. pipes 5 ft. long and 300 ft. apart in swampy , 

Fy GES 6, GO ID RO aOR Sta Sok ace ee ne 15 


Ten 1.25 in. pipes 5 ft. long and 300 ft. apart, gravelly ground. —53.. * 
Two 1.25 in. pipes 5 ft. long and 300 ft. apart, gravelly ground 272 
Thirty 1.25 inch pipes 5 ft. long and 300 ft. apart all kinds of 
PLOUTC mney aes erenae tes ee ere eee 13 
Plate 1 ft. square in contact with mud on top of frozen ground 3600 
Plate 1 ft. square in sand, surface soil removed weather dry ...11000 


1220 RESISTANCE OF GAS-PIPE GROUNDS [June 26 


Plate 1 ft. square in sand, surface soil removed after hard rain 2947 ohms 


Average of eight plates 1 ft. square in surface loam. 1940 
Plate 1 ft. square under shed, ground saturated with 
brine;(soil iasiaboves 4.0.0 eed asin Rls SA aee oe ae ibe 75 oe 


Copper ribbon 0.5 in. wide and 90 ft. long buried in surface 
loam 1 ft. deep and in a straight line. 


June 10, aftera heavy rains. . on... es awn eee asks Hewes OR ly 
‘June Boze Ares es Cee eee Cre oes eee rae nn 110 
October iGieVe. A ese Re ter ee 2 Leet 
Octobet-7, atten, heavy, £A10..i 92m sats alae eta taeeeer eee ISSR 
November 12, morning after heavy rain clearing up........ 1.0 Zim 
INOVeriber 12 nOOm Cleat vax seer catia tks sen unterect ees eee ieaeeer ule yo 
November 13, ground slightly frozen on top............... 122 “ 
December 2,tground tirozen ssa eae As ene itch aiets Settee 14200" 


March 17, 1907; ground frozen deeply and covered withsnow. 155 “ 
Plate 1 ft. sq. in medium coarse sand bottom of warm cellar. 9600 “ 


Plate 1 ft. sq. in fine clay-like sand bottom of warm cellar... 2160 “ 
Plate 1 ft. sq. in red sandy loam in bottom of warm cellar... 716 “ 
Plate 1 ft. sq. in sifted red sandy loam under building not 

hea tedicn > sades eae aoaie Seiclas tus ah see eee as os oe 1550“ 
Plate 1 ft. sq. in highly fertilized garden loam............. 860 “ 


Plate 1 ft. sq. in very fine sand in garden under surfaceloam. 1000 “ 
Plate 1 ft. sq. in red loam just under the grass roots of 


oréhand’:. ¢uecHoce Sayan eee aes sient Rie a ai eee 2300 “ 
120 ft. No. 12 copper wire in straight line about 3 in. under 
EE GO) stains sic aesacasar. 4 ac Wareiginar 1a haa suaen eacoee oe eee 220 «<5 


Except the river and pipe grounds, the above measurements were all 
made within a few hundred feet of one another, with the geological con- 
ditions practically the same, and are mostly averages of readings made 
between February 1 and June 1, 1906. 


J. L. R. Hayden (by letter): Mr. F. J. Hoxie’s tests are very 
interesting and show what high resistances ordinary copper 
plate grounds may occasionally give. They hardly represent 
average conditions, but show rather an abnormally low con- 
ductivity of the soil in which they were placed. 

Since presenting my paper, a large number of gas pipes, treated 
in different manners, have been located in different places and 
are being regularly tested; these show about the same magnitude 
of resistance, some even a much lower resistance than the grounds 
recorded in my paper. 

It undoubtedly is necessary, when using a gas pipe or copper 
plate as ground, to test ‘t first, before relying on it, and a very 
convenient way is to put down two pipes’at some distance from 
each other and test them against each other. Connected in 
multiple for use, the resultant resistance is one-quarter or less 
of the sum of their resistances, as given by the test. 

A good location for grounding pipes is on a lawn, and it may 
even be advisable to plant a lawn around the pipes, since the 
keeping of the grass green by w~tering insures moisture to 
maintain the conductivity of the ground, and so gives an indica- 
tion of their operativeness. 


A paper presenied at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Niagara Falls. N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I.E. E. 


TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS AND ECONOMICAL 
SPANS 


BY D. ‘R. SCHOLES 


For any given transmission line there is a certain length of 
span which is most economical. A determination of what the 
economical span is, in any case, can only be made by obtaining 
data showing the variation of each item of cost which changes 
with the length of span. In a steel-tower line the cost of the 
tower is probably the most important among those items which 
vary with the length of span. As the span is made longer, 
the towers must be made higher and stronger. The purpose 
of this paper is to describe a method by which the relation 
between the height, strength, and cost of a tower of given 
form may be expressed. The application of this method 
to the problem of fixing the economical span will also be 
shown. 

A transmission tower has, in general, three duties to perform: 

1. It must have strength to resist wind pressure on its various 
members. 

2. It must have strength to withstand certain external loads 
due to cables, guys, etc. 

3. It must have strength to sustain its own weight. 

The weight of a given transmission tower may therefore be 
considered to be made up of three components, each component 
corresponding to one of these sources of stress. The following 
equation may then be written for the weight of the structure 
shown in diagram in Fig. 1, 


W=Wy +W.,+W; (1) 


1221 


1222 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS [June 26 


in which W = total weight. 
Ww = weight necessary to provide strength against 
wind pressure. 
W, = weight necessary to provide strength against 
external loads. 
Ws; = weight necessary to enable the structure to 
_ sustain its own weight. 


Assume that the structure shown in Fig. 1 has been designed 
for a certain wind pressure, and for certain external loads of 
given amount and manner of application. Each member in 
the structure may be considered to involve three components of 
thickness, each component corresponding to one of the three 


fig I 


general sources of stress. In determining the value of Wy, 
the stress in each member resulting from wind pressure alone 
would first be computed: with this as a basis, the component 
of thickness of each member necessary to sustain the stress due 
to wind pressure alone would then be calculated. Having 
determined the component of thickness of each member cor- 
responding to the stated wind pressure, the value of Wy would 
follow directly. A similar method would be used in finding 
Wet and W,. 

This method will, perhaps, be made more clear by referring to 
Fig. II, which shows in cross-section one of the members of the 
tower of Fig. I. 


1907] SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 1223: 


In the figure, 
t = total thickness. 


Il 


tw = thickness corresponding to wind pressure. 

t, = thickness corresponding to external loads. 

thickness corresponding to weight of structure. 

tsw = thickness corresponding to component Wy of the 
weight of the structure. 

ts, = thickness corresponding to component W, of weight of 
structure. 


ba 
n 
I 


It is seen that ¢ = twt+t, +f; (2) 
and, i= tw t ty + tow + tsp (3) 
since t =tey tits. 


The thickness of any other member of the tower may be con- 
sidered to be divided up into parts inthe same manner. Since 
t; is divided into the parts few and fs., a corresponding division 
may be made in the term W, of equation (1) which gives 


W = WatW. +Wswt+Wer (4) 


where Wey = weight necessary to provide strength to sustain 


1224 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS [June 26 


Wy and Wey, and Wg = weight necessary to provide strength 
to sustain W, and Wg. 

The structure shown in diagram in Fig. I involves members 
of three general kinds; namely, beams, struts, and tension- 
members. 

The bending moment produced in a given beam by a given 
load W may be expressed by the equation, 


M = CWI where (5) 

M = maximum bending moment 

1 =distance between supports 

C =constant, dependent on the manner in which the load is 
distributed. 

The relation between the bending moment and the stress in 
the most remote fiber of the beam is given by the equation, 


M= ee where (6) 


M = bending moment 
P = stress per unit area in most remote fiber of beam 
F = cross-sectional area of beam 
k = radius of gyration of beam section 

= distance of most remote fiber from neutral axis. 
Combining these two expressions, the equation 


oa eh (7) 


is obtained, which gives the load which the beam will carry, 
P’ being the ultimate strength of the material in the beam. 

Now if k is the radius of gyration of a g ven figure, the radius 
of gyration of a second figure similar to the first but of different 
size is equal to nk, n being the ratio between corresponding 
linear dimensions of the two figures. 

If, therefore, a second beam be considered, exactly similar to 
the first but of different size and length, being the ratio 
between corresponding linear dimensions of the two beams, 
the load which this second beam will carry is 

Pr?F n*k? PFk WwW, 


Ws rGainp Ont’ Sele ea ae (8) 


Expressed in words, this relation may be stated as follows: 
The load which a beam of given form will carry varies as the 
square of its linear dimensions. 


v 


1907] _ SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 122% 


The strength of a strut against compressive stress is given by 
Rankine’s formula: 
Fer 
W => er oy where (9) 


I+C 


W = ultimate strength of strut 

P’ = ultimate compressive strength of material 

F = cross-sectional area 

i = length 

k = radius of gyration 

C = constant, depending on kind of material. 

And the strength of another strut, exactly similar to the first 
but of different size and length, 1 being the ratio between cor- 
responding linear dimensions of the two struts, is 


PF 'F | 
W= — Bs = 1? ‘2 Bp also a == 17 (10) 
1+C on PC bk? 


Expressed in words, this relation may be stated as follows: 

The load which a strut of given form will carry, varies as the 
square of its linear dimensions. 

The strength of a tension member is directly proportional to 
its cross-sectional area; that is, it varies as the square of its 
linear dimensions. 

An investigation of the action of a member subjected to 
torsional loads, similar to those just made for beams, struts, 
and tension-members, would show a like relation; that is, the load 
which a member of given form subjected to torsion will carry 
varies as the square of its linear dimensions. This investigation 
is not undertaken here, however, because members of this 
character are little used in transmission towers. 

Returning to the structure shown roughly by Fig. I. It is 
usually assumed that the actual pressure on any part of such a 
structure, produced by a wind of given velocity, is directly 
proportional to the exposed area of that part. Now the ex- 
posed area of any part is, in general, dependent on its length and 
breadth, but not upon its thickness. It therefore follows that 
if the structure shown in Fig. III is geometrically similar to that 
of Fig. I, in every respect except the thickness of its parts, and 
is of different size, the ratio between corresponding linear di- 


1226 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS _ [June 26 


mensions being , the load produced on any part of the second 
structure by a wind of given velocity is equal to n? times the 
load produced on the corresponding part of the first structure by 
the same wind. It also follows that the stress in any member 
of the second structure under these conditions, due to wind 
pressure, is equal to n? times that in the corresponding member 
of the first structure. 
For the structure of Fig. ITI, 


W! =W'wtW'+W' swt W's (11) 
and 
i caeee tae ta baw-b bey (12) 


‘1G LT 


From the foregoing discussion of the relation between the 
size and strength of beams, struts, etc., of given form, it is 
evident that 

ty = nty (13) 
and 


Wie = n3 Ww (14) 


both structures being calculated for the same wind pressure. 
Again referring to the equation for beams, 


PYF. WCle 


Gar Giese RA Pk? (15) 


1907] SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 1227 


It is evident that, if k and e can be kept constant, the sectional 
area which a given beam must have to sustain a load distributed 
in a given manner varies directly as the load and directly as 
the length of the beam. The sections commonly employed as 
beams are angles, channels, and I-sections. By reference to 
any handbook of such sections, it will be seen that for any of 
these sections of a given nominal size the area of the beam may 
vary considerably without producing more than a negligible 
change in the value of k or e. 

Hence, if after the nominal size of a beam has been deter- 
mined, it is desired to vary either the load or the length of the 
beam, the sectional area should be made to vary directly as the 
load and directly as the length of the beam. 

From the formula for columns, 


P 
wae w(1+c5) 
Sor PE (16) 
l yy 
1+ C yr 


it is seen that, if the ratio //k is kept constant, the strength of 
the column is directly proportional to its cross-sectional area. 

From the nature of a tension-member, its strength is pro- 
portional to its sectional area. 

Again refer to Fig. I. It is assumed that this structure is 
subjected to the loads G,, G,, G;, etc., these loads being placed 
upon it through cables, guys, or the like. The application of 
each of these loads will, in general, produce certain stresses in 
each of the members of the structure. The stress in a given 
member produced by a given load will be directly proportional 
to the load, and the magnitude of the stress will depend on the 
particular position which the member occupies. If a certain 
system of loads, as G,, G,, G;, and G,, is applied to the structure, 
the resultant stress in any given part may be considered to be 
made up of the components A G,, BG,, CG,;, and DG,; A, B, 
C, and D being constants. Also, if each of the loads is multi- 
plied by a factor r, the resultant stress in any member will also 
be multiplied by that factor. 

Moreover, if a system of loads, as G,, G,, G3, etc., be similarly 
applied to another structure geometrically similar to that of 
Fig. I, but of different size, the stress produced in a given mem- 
ber of the second structure by these loads will be equal to that 
produced by them in the corresponding member of the first 


1228 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS _ [June 26 


structure. In other words, the stress in any member is de- 
pendent only upon the geometrical form of the stricture and 
the amount and manner of application of the loads producing it, 
and is not affected by the actual size of the structure. 

Let the structure indicated in Fig. IV be geometrically similar to 
that of Fig. I in all respects except the thickness of its members. 
Let the system of loads, rG,, rG., rG;, and rG,, applied to 
this structure be similar to that applied to the structure of Fig. 
I, but of different magnitude, the ratio between corresponding 
loads being r. Also let the structure of Fig. 1V. be designed for 
a different wind pressure from that of Fig. I. the ratio between 
*he wind pressures per unit area in the two cases being p. 


/1G IV 
For the structure of Fig. IV, 
W" =W"yt+W", +V "oot Wa, (17) 


t" = pete +t owt lst (18) 

In view of the relations pointed out between the length, 

sectional area, and strength of the various kinds of members 
involved in the structures, it follows that 

Wy =n pWy (19) 

WwW", = nr Wi (20) 


1907] SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 1229 


Viele = n'* Pp Wswt cer (21) 
Wes = nr Wet... (22) 


To make equations (21) and (22) strictly accurate, terms 
must be added to represent the weight added to provide for the 
strength necessary to take care of each individual increment of 
weight. This will involve a convergent infinite series in each 
case. All terms of these series, except the first, are, however, 
relatively unimportant and will therefore be neglected. 

Substituting in equation (17), 


W”’ = WpWwinrW,t+nutp Wewtn?r Wor (23) 


This is a general equation, and, given the values of Wy, Wy, 
Wew, and Wg, for the structure of Fig. I, it makes it possible to 
calculate the weight of the structure of Fig. IV. without going 
through the routine of calculating the stresses in each member 
and the sizes and weights of the parts necessary to carry these 
stresses. 

The application of this formula to the problem of fixing the 
economical span for a given transmission line is obvious. A 
tower for a given length of span would be designed to furnish 
the strengths necessary for that span. The design would be 
made in accordance with the manufacturing facilities available 
for producing the structures. The stresses in each member 
would be carefully calculated and the values of Wy, Wi, Wew, 
and W., found for the structure. Having found these values, 
the weight of any similar structure for any length of span could 
be determined by substitution in equation (23). 

It is to be observed that this method of treating the case 
assumes that both wind loads and external loads are to be applied 
to the structure simultaneously. This is usually the case. In 
other cases, however, the method to be pursued would be 
similar, but modified to suit the peculiarities of the case. 

It is also to be borne in mind that formula (23) contemplates 
that variations in the cross-section of any member will be 
made in such manner that the radius of gyration of the section 
will be kept proportional to in every case, and also that no 
appreciable variation from geometric similarity will occur. 
These assumptions do not involve any appreciable inaccuracy 
within the range of ordinary practice. 

‘Before the problem of providing steel towers for supporting 


1230 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS _ [June 26 


the cables of a given transmission line can be considered, the 
general features of the line, its voltage, size of conductor, etc., 
must be fixed. To show the application of the formula just 
developed, the following set of general assumptions has been 
selected as a working basis, and it is believed that they are in 
accord with average high-grade practice. 


GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS 

System: three-phase alternating current. 

Conductor: 400,000 cir. mils stranded copper. Cross-sec- 
tional area 0.3145 sq. in. Outside diameter 0.73 in. Weight 
per foot 1.22 lb. 

Spacing: 7 ft. delta, for 500-ft. span. 

Minimum clearance: 30 ft. between ground and lowest conduc- 
tor at center of span. 

Temperature range: 40° fahr. to 110° fahr. 

Sleet: 0.5 in. all around cables. Diameter of conductor with 
sleet 1.73 in. Weight per foot with sleet 1.98 lb. 

Wind pressure: 30 lb. per square foot normal to plane surfaces. 

Test factor of safety: 2. 

It is further assumed that, at occasional intervals along the 
line, the structures will be stayed by guy-cables in the direction of 
the line, and that the cost of such staying will not vary with 
the length of span. To provide in all structures a certain 
amount of strength against loads on the insulators in the direc- 
tion of the line, it is assumed that in the tower for the 500-ft. 
span an unbalanced test load of 2000 lb. will be applied to the 
top of each insulator pin in a horizontal direction parallel to the 
line. 

In explanation of the term “ test factor of safety,” it may 
be said that it has become usual for purchasers, in issuing 
specifications for towers, to require that the structures must 
show, under actual test, their ability to withstand the loads due 
to the assumed wind pressures, weights, etc., with a certain 
factor of safety. In calculating the load to be applied to the 
top of an insulator pin, for instance, to test it for strength 
against wind pressure on cables, the effective area of the cable 
with sleet would be multiplied by the stated wind pressure and 
by the factor 2. The load thus obtained would then be actually 
applied to the structure, and its acceptance would depend upon 
its ability to withstand such tests. In order that the structure 
may have a certain margin of strength over and above that 


1907] SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 1231 


actually required to withstand tests based on a test factor of 
safety of 2, the sizes of the members will be calculated with 
reference to a factor of safety of 2.5 based on ultimate strength. 

In determining the sag corresponding to each length of span, 
reference has been had to the curves given in Fig. 9, calculated 
by Mr. Ralph D. Mershon, and here reproduced through his 
courtesy. These curves indicate in each case the sag for maxi- 
mum temperature, this sag being so determined that, when 
under minimum temperature and maximum wind and sleet 


Lyte nadine 12° ——+| le —— 15’ —__——| 


2 16. 


loads, the conductor will not be stressed beyond its elastic limit. 

With the foregoing set of conditions at hand, computations 
have been made of the cost of each of a series of structures for a 
500-ft. span these structures being of varying width of base 
but uniform in height. The purpose of these computations is 
to show the relation between the width of base and cost for 
such structures. and to obtain an indication as to what ratio 
between height and width of base is most economical. This 
series of structures is shown in diagram in Fig. V. A curve is 


1232 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS [June 26 


given in Fig. VI showing the relation between the width of base 
and the cost per structure. The cost of each structure has 
been figured on a basis of $4.50 per 100 Ib. delivered in the 
field. The construction involves standard angle and flat steel 
sections, standard butt-weld pipe, and some simple forgings. 
It has been assumed that all parts would be properly galvanized, 
so no limitation has been made as to the minimum thickness of 
material, it being simply required that the members be of 
sufficient strength to meet the conditions laid down. The 
construction admits of shipment knocked down and bundled, 
and it is believed that the figure $4.50 per 100 lb. for structures 
of this class delivered in the field, is quite safe. 

It will be seen, by reference to the curve in Fig. VI, that the 


1299 


COST OF TOWER STRUCTURE 1 DOLLARS, 


cost of the structure alone is least when the ratio of width of 
base to height is about 1 to 4. This conclusion has reference, of 
course, only to the span of 500 ft. and to the conditions and type 
of construction adopted. 

The width of base of the structure has an important bearing 
on the cost of the line, aside from its effect on the cost of the 
tower structure itself, since it affects the cost of foundations, 
the cost of right of way, and the cost of assembling and raising 
the structure in the field. Now it is a difficult and uncertain 
matter to estimate the variation of cost of these items for a 
general case. Hence a determination of the economical width 
of base for certain assumed conditions would be of but little 
interest in the present connection. 


1907] 


SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 


APPLICATION OF THE FORMULA 


1233 


The structure having a width of base equal to one-fourth its 
height has been selected as a basis for-calculations of the weights 


of towers for longer spans. 


q 


An investigation of this structure 


Ne 
| 


aes 
a 
iz 
|_| 
|| 

oe 


Hr 


E 
EX. 


p52 Of Isarors | 


700 


Fale aa talbea 
AE a 
ay a 
‘| ; 


600 


a 


ep 
eS LL 


Fic. VII. 


500 


LENGTH OF SPAlY ity FEET 


400 


=a 


300 


/ 

aaa -| |_f 
{ 
icy 


Beas 


SEIcane 
Le 
EEE 


Q ad 
COST WY DOLLARS PER 1OOOF?. OF LIVE. 


=i 
eae 
8 


has been made to determine the values of Ww, W1, Wsw, and 
We, and the following values arrived at: 


Ww = 383 
W, = 813 


Wsw = 34 
Ws, = 60 


1234 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS [June 26 


The table given later shows the results obtained by means 
of the formula for a series of towers similar to No. 4 in Fig. 5, 
but for spans up to 1000 ft. Since all towers in the series are 
to be for the same wind pressure, p is equal to unity in each case. 
Also, r is proportional to the length of span, since the external 
loads are due to wind pressure on the cables and the weight of 
the cables. 

These results are shown graphically in Fig. VII by the curve 
which gives the relation between the length of span and the 
cost of towers per thousand feet of line. By properly represent- 
ing to this same scale the cost of insulators, foundations, right 
of way, etc., per thousand feet of line corresponding to the 
various lengths of span, and adding the corresponding ordinates 
of all these curves, a resultant curve will be obtained. This 


v3 


SSS 
\ 
\N 


Y 


4 


SS 
SY 


SS 


f7/¢ Vill 


resultant curve will show the relation between the length of 
span and cost of those items which vary with the length of span, 
and it will therefore indicate the economical span for the as- 
sumed conditions. 

A curve showing the cost of insulators per 1000 ft. of line is 
given in Fig. VII, the insulators having been figured at $5.00 
each, erected in the tower and with the conductor secured to them. 

The curve in Fig. VII showing the cost of foundations per 
1000 ft. of line has reference to the type of foundation shown in 
Fig. VIII, and to the following method of calculation. 

It is a usual assumption that the strength of a foundation 
against a force tending to pull it out of the ground is directly 
proportional to the weight of the foundation plus the weight of 
earth contained in the figure A BC D. 

If the foundation in Fig. VIII has strength to resist a re- 
sultant force P, a second foundation, exactly similar to it but of 


1235 


RANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 


T 


. 
. 


SCHOLES 


1907] 


GOL 


0°§9 


*T ATAVL 


T0L°0 


6L4F 0 


OLE °0 


992°0 L4€8°0 


9LS°0 669°0 


g2F°0 809°0 


1236 SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS [June 26 


different size, would have strength to resist the force np, n 
being the ratio between corresponding linear dimensions of 
the two foundations. Now it seems fair to assume that the cost 
of such a foundation would vary directly as its volume, The 
cost of the foundation would therefore vary directly as the 
resultant force which it is capable of resisting. 


Bata 
| i i 


60° 


Jo* 


20° 


jo00 FR SPAM 
800 FT| SPAM 
700FT. JPA 


10° 


JEVIPERATURE IY DEGREES FAHRENHE/T. 
Fic. 9 


Referring to some experiments made at Chicago on a founda- 
tion similar to that of Fig. VIII, and to the records showing the 
actual cost of the foundation in the field ready to receive the 
structure, the following basis for calculation was obtained: 


Resultant force sustained by foundation..... 24,000 Ib. 
Cost of foundation ’).;.... kel ee ee eee $15.25 


1907] SCHOLES: TRANSMISSION LINE TOWERS 1237 


By calculating the resultant force which would come upon 
the foundation from each of the structures given in Table I, 
and making the cost of foundation for each structure proportional 
to that force, on the basis of the data above given, the curve 
showing the foundation cost per 1000 tt. of line given in Fig. VII 
was obtained. It is to be observed that this curve is quite flat, 
indicating that the foundation cost does not vary to any great 
extent as the length of the span is varied. 

The curve of combined cost of towers, foundations, and 
insulators was obtained by adding the respective ordinates of 
the curves giving the separate costs of these items. This 
curve indicates that, for the assumed conditions, a span of 
about 425 ft. would be most economical. 

It is to be observed that in the foregoing solution the determin- 
‘ing factors are the tower cost and the insulator cost. If the 
price per insulator is increased, the economical length of span 
would be increased, and vice versa, in other words, the higher 
the voltage the longer the span should be. 

For a low-voltage line the economical span would be some- 
where between 300 and 400 ft., as far as the methods of calcula- 
tion here employed can determine. Each structure in this case 
would, however, be a very light affair. It is probable, that, in 
the average case, a somewhat longer span would be decided upon 
in order to give each structure greater individual strength and 
thus make it safer against damage due to external causes. 

In case it is desirable to impose limitations of this sort, the 
formula must be modified accordingly, by subdividing the 
component of weight into parts: as, tor instance, by letting 


W, Ee WoeitWe2tWestWe, 


where Wo,, Wex, We; and W., are components of weight cor- 
responding to the loads G,, G,, G; and G, respectively. 

These loads may then be made to vary at different rates, 
or some may be kept constant and the others varied in such 
manner as may be desired. Suppose, for example, it is assumed 
that each structure should have strength to resist the loads due 
to the breakage of any two conductors. These loads would 
be the same regardless of the length of span, whereas the loads 
due to wind pressure on the cables would vary according to the 


length of span. 
These assumptions will, in general, tend to make the economi- 


cal span longer. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi 
neers, Niagara Falls, N. V., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright, 1907. By A. I. E.E, 


LIGHTNING-RODS AND GROUNDED CABLES AS A 
MEANS OF PROTECTING TRANSMISSION LINES 
AGAINST LIGHTNING 


BY NORMAN ROWE 

The following is practically a summary of lightning trouble 
during the years 1904, 1905, and 1906, on a steel-tower long- 
span transmission line in the states of Michoacdn and Guana- 
juato, Mexico. 

The main transmission line, built in 1903, was the first one 
constructed on steel towers. These towers were of standard 
type, the height being 40 ft. from the top of the cross-arm 
to the ground. Three wires were placed upon the towers in the 
form of an equilateral triangle, the upper wire being supported 
upon a 3-in. extra heavy pipe, which formed the continuation 
of the tower, the other two being placed at the ends of a double 
channel-iron cross-arm, approximately 7 ft. in length, the sides 
of the triangle being 6 ft. The insulators used were 12 in. 
high and 14 in. in diameter. These insulators were cemented 
directly on cast-iron pins. The pins for the top insulators 
were made to screw on the 3-in. pipe; those for the side insulators 
had a square shank and were secured to the cross-arm by two 
in. bolts. The conductors were 19-strand, hard-drawn copper 
cable, equivalent to No. 1 B. &. S. solid copper wire. There 
were no wooden pins or cross-arms used on the towers. For 
protection against the line voltage as well as any high voltages 
‘ue to lightning discharges, dependence was placed entirely on 
the insulators. 

The ordinary length of span was 440 ft., but there were sev- 
eral spans of 1200 ft. and one of approximately 1600 ft. The 


line was designed for 60,000 volts at the generating end and 
1239 


1240 ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION {june 26 


51,000 at the receiving end. The length of the line was ap- 
proximately 101 miles. 

The line is tapped at Irapuato, approximately 75 miles from 
the generating station and 26 miles from Guanajuato. At this 
point there is a sub-station where lightning-arresters of the 


Fic. 1—Showing line as originally constructed 


usual station type are installed to protect the step-down trans- 
formers. From this it will be seen that there is a chance for 
the line to discharge at this point as well as over the arresters 
at either end of the transmission line. 

Thus far there have been three rainy seasons, which, in the 
part of Mexico where the line is situated, generally last from 


1907) ROWE; LIGHTNING PROTECTION 1241 


June until October. Heavy thunder storms come up nearly 
every day during July and August, and there is a storm on 
an average of every two days through a period of four months. 
During the rainy season of 1904, there was considerable trouble 
with lightning; the next season there was less, and during the 
rainy season of 1906 comparatively little trouble was experienced. 
The nature of the troubles, the expedients tried to overcome 
them, and the provisions for overcoming future lightning 
troubles will now be considered. 

The rainy season of 1904 came on with great severity in April, 
two months earlier than usual, and lasted until October. The 
injury to the transmission line from lightning was mostly con- 
fined to the puncturing of the top insulators by direct bolts of 
lightning, and in most cases a hole was bored through the top 
insulator nearly in a vertical line to the pin. These holes were 
approximately one inch in diameter and the sides were glazed. 
Usually, the insulators were badly shattered, but on putting 
the parts together one could generally find the glazed hole 
above referred to. Some side insulators were lost, but they 
were almost invariably injured at the time when the top in- 
sulators on the same or adjacent towers were injured. The 
side insulators were never punctured from the top in a vertical 
direction, but in some cases they showed a small puncture in a 
horizontal direction from the tie-wire to the pin. In nine 
cases out of ten, however, they were not punctured at all, but 
half of the top and portions of one or both petticoats on the 
same side were broken, presumably by the power current 
following lightning discharges over their surfaces. 

As the principal trouble apparently came from direct bolts 
of lightning striking the top insulators, it was thought ad- 
visable to erect lightning-rods on the towers on the section of 
the line where most trouble had occurred. At that time the 
placing of a grounded cable over the transmission wires was 
discussed, but.as this could not be done before the end of the 
rainy season, for suitable material could not be obtained in 
Mexico, it was decided to put up lightning-rods and get the 
benefit of experience with them during the rainy season then 
in progress. 

Lightning-rods were erected in pairs. starting from the 3-in. 
pipe at the point where the cross-arm in pairs was attached, 
and projecting up on either side of this pipe to a distance of 6 ft. 

above the top insulator at an angle of about 30 degrees from 


the vertical. 


1242 ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [June 26 


By the middle of August one-half of the line giving the 
most trouLie was equipped with lightning-rods, and there had 
been erected quite a few rods on towers that were considered 
as being particularly exposed to danger from lightning. After 


Fic. 2—Showing first change. Top insulator lowered, grounded 
cable in place, and lightning-rods left in position 


the erection of these rods the difficulties were very much less, 
although there was still some trouble on the section of the 
line where they were in place. In no case were top insulators 
punctured through from the top as on the towers where rods 


1907] ROWE; LIGHTNING PROTECTION 1243 


were not in place, but when insulators were injured they 
usually had a part of the top and a petticoat broken on the 
same side. There were also a few cases where insulators were 
punctured in a horizontal direction from the tie-wire to the pin. 
During one very severe storm, eight insulators were broken on 
seven towers spread out over a distance of 14 towers. As the 
towers were spaced 12 to the mile it is improbable that the 
same discharge of lightning could have caused all of this trouble, 
unless it was transmitted over the power lines. Of the eight 
insulators injured none was punctured; they were apparently 
damaged by the current going over theirside. Although these 
insulators were badly injured, the service on them was con- 
tinued, but at a slightly reduced voltage. 

One quite remarkable case happened in the Guanajuato sub- 
station, due, perhaps, to a bolt of lightning striking the line 
about a mile away. One of the men was standing in a balcony 
in Guanajuato watching the lightning display, when apparently 
a very heavy discharge struck the tower line, located over 
a hill just out of sight. At the same moment the lights in the 
room went out, showing that the service had been interrupted. 
The lightning which caused this interruption of service came 
into the sub-station over the top wire and jumped 4.5 ft. through 
air to ground, at the same time going to ground over the light- 
ning-arresters. An insulator over which the arc formed in the 
sub-station had half of the top cracked off, but no injury was 
done to the transformers or other equipment. The towers 
were carefully examined near where the lightning was seen to 
fall, but there were no broken insulators or other evidence to 
show that the bolt had struck the line. However, as lightning 
had been previously seen to strike the towers without causing 
trouble, it was thought that a bolt of lightning had struck the 
tower line, a portion of this discharge coming over the wires 
into the sub-station. At the place where the bolt was supposed 
to have struck, the towers, on exposed places, were equipped 
with lightning-rods. 

These cases are cited to show that insulators at a distance from 
heavy discharges of lightning may be subjected to very severe 
voltages, and, from all the data at hand, it is believed that the 
lightning-rods were efficient in protecting the insulators from 
direct bolts of lightning, and that the trouble that was still 
present on the section of the line equipped with lightning-rods 
was due to discharges traveling along the transmission wires. 


1244 ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [June 26 


During the season of 1904, the line troubles were quite evenly 
distributed over the first 50 miles of line out of the generating 
station. There were only two cases of trouble outside of this 
section that caused injury to the line insulators. Equipping 
this section with lightning-rods was begun in June and finished 


Fic. 3—Showing present appearance of line. Lightning-rods removed. 


in August. This section of the line, except for a stretch of 
15 miles, was left as equipped in August, 1904, until October, 
1906, or through more than two lightning seasons. As there 
was less trouble on this section of the line during these two 
seasons than during a portion of the lightning season of 1904, 
it is evident that the lightning-rods were at least partly effective. 


1907] ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 1245 


After finding that lightning-rods were not a complete protec- 
tion, it was decided to make the experiment of lowering the top 
Wire and putting up a grounded cable in its place. However, 
on account of delay in receiving material, very little was ac- 
complished in time for the rainy season of 1905 and the ex- 
perience with lightning during that season was the same as 
that obtained during the rainy season of the previous year, ex- 
cept that there was much less trouble. 

In the winter of 1905-1906, it was decided to install larger 
insulators on the tower line and at the same time to lower all 
of the top cable to a position below one of the original side 
insulators. On the highest point of the tower, in place of the 
top transmission cable, it was decided to string over the entire 
line a {-in. 7-strand steel cable, grounded at each tower. In- 
~ sulators 17} in. in diameter, 20 in. high, were adopted for the 
first GO miles of line out of the generating station, and the same 
insulator with a 14-in. top for the other 40 miles of line. It 
was unfortunate that the insulators with the 174-in. top were 
not ready so as to complete the line changes in time for the 
rains, but half of the line out of the Guanajuato sub-station was 
finished before the time for severe lightning storms had arrived. 
The other half of the line had been equipped the first year with 
lizghtning-rods, which were still in place, the top cable being in 
its original position on this section, except for a distance of 15 
miles. 

During the rainy season of 1906, the transformers were 
connected in star on the high-tension side, the center of the 
star being grounded, and in order to detect instantly when there 
was a ground on the line, a series transformer was put into this 
grounded line and thesecondary leads carried to the switchboard, 
where an ammeter was connected to them. With this arrange- 
ment, when an insulator broke down, or the power current 
followed the lightning over the insulator, the station operator 
could tell when there was a ground on the line, and, by shutting 
down at once, he was able to prevent the burning off of the 
transmission wire. Usually, when a ground appeared and the 
power was cut off, the line was found in good condition on 
again starting up. 

There was no apparent trouble from lightning during the 
rainy season of 1906 on the section where the grounded cable 
was in place. On several occasions grounds came on the lines 
during lightning storms, and the power was immediately cut 


1246 ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION (June 26 


off in order to clear them. In general. these grounds could not 
be located, so it cannot be said that lightning did not go over 
the surface of the insulators on the section where the grounded 
cable was in place. The section where there was no grounded 
cable in place, but where the lightning-rods were erected, still: 
gave some trouble, but the total amount was much less than in 
any preceding year. 

The part of the line found to be the hardest to protect during 
all three rainy seasons was the middle of the 75-mile section 


Fic, 4—Insulator perforated and broken by lightning bol: 


from the generating station to Irapuato; in other words, the 
part of the line farthest from the location of lightning-arresters. 
This would indicate that arresters for discharging the line, 
located say every 25 miles, would be a valuable protection. 

The experience of the last three seasons prompts the writer 
to offer the following suggestions: 

1. Insulators should not be disposed upon poles or towers so 
that they will be in the path of bolts of lightning going to ground 
by the supporting structure. 


1907] ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION 1247 


2. A grounded cable, strung above the transmission wires at 
the highest point of the tower, is certainly more effective than 
lightning-rods in protecting the insulators and conductors 
from direct bolts of lightning. 

3. Lightning-arresters, for discharging the line in case very 
high voltages are present on the wires, would be of some value 
if located along the line at frequent intervals. 

4. On steel construction, an insulator should be used that has 
a high margin of safety against puncture and arcing over. 

It seems at present general practice to use insulators for high 
potentials with practically no margin of safety, and when the 
conditions are severe there is almost sure to be trouble. Aside 
from trouble with the puncturing of line insulators by direct 
bolts of lightning, which was apparently prevented by the use 
of lightning-rods on towers, nearly, if not. quite all, of the trouble 
on this line has come from the breaking down of insulators by 
the current going over their sides, or through them, from tie- 
wire to pin. The writer ventures to assert that, if the insulators 
had been much better, there would have been little trouble on 
the line where the lightning-rods were in place. Moreover, as a 
grounded cable undoubtedly affords better protection than 
lightning-rods, with a suitable grounded cable strung over the 
transmission wires, and better insulators so disposed as to be 
out of the path of direct bolts of lightning, even without the 
installation of lightning-arresters along the line there would 
result a line that should be practically free from lightning 
troubles. 

Note.—While personal experience suggests that the use, on 
iron construction, of insulators with a high factor of safety will 
greatly reduce troubles from lightning, it was decided to change 
our line insulators on account of trouble from an entirely different 
cause. During some months of the year the insulators become 
covered with condensed moisture just at sunrise, due to a very 
sudden rise in temperature, from the temperature of about zero 
centigrade. This often left insulators, on the portion of the 
line where the temperature variation was most severe, covered 
with condensed moisture nearly as heavy as hoar-frost, and, 
during the few moments when this effect lasted, the power 
current was apt to arc over the surfaces of the insulators. The 
old insulators were considered by the company’s engineers as 
the best obtainable in 1902, and the insulators decided upon in 
January, 1906, were the largest commercial insulators on the 


1248 ROWE: LIGHTNING PROTECTION [June 26 


market. A very much better insulator was desired, but for 
want of time to develop something better it was necessary to 
adopt an insulator with a factor of safety somewhat lower than 
that intended to be used. The apparent freedom from lightning 
trouble on the part of the line equipped with larger insulators 
and grounded conductor is due perhaps as much to the use of 
better insulators as to the grounded cable. 


a 


y SRke MAeP Ne NY kee ND Ae 


= 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1249 


Discussion on ‘“‘ TRANSMISSION Line Towers AnD Econom- 
ICAL SPANS” aND ‘“ LicHtninc-Rops AND GROUNDED 
CaBLES AS.A MEANS or PROTECTING TRANSMISSION LINES 
eee LIGHTNING,”? AT NIAGARA FALE SNe Y a JUNE 26, 


William Hoopes: The method of treatment of this problem 
appears so excellent that one is at once interested in its practical 
application. The first conclusion reached is that the economi- 
cal span-length is determined, not by the original cost of the 
line, but by its annual cost. 

The annual cost is made up of three items: 

1. Interest and depreciation on the first cost. 
2. The cost of repairs and patroling. 
3. The money damage from interruptions to the service. 

If lengthening the span will reduce the number of interrup- 
tions and cost of repairs, then the economical span is longer than 


that which gives the lowest first cost. 


Inquiry into the operation of a large number of transmission 
lines reveals the fact that by far the larger portion of the inter- 
ruptions of service is due to trouble occurring at the point of 
support; this applies particularly to steel-tower lines. Re- 


‘duction of the number of supports does, therefore, reduce the 


annual cost. 

The paper shows that this particular line on 800-ft. spans 
would cost about $300 more per mile than if on 400-ft. spans. 
Interest and depreciation on this at 10% would be $30 per year. 
Halving the number of supports would probably save much 
more than this. 

I believe the subject has not been treated in this way in 
this or any other paper, so I should like to suggest to the com- 
mittee that such a paper would open up a very live topic. 

However, the province of Mr. Scholes’ paper is really to show 
the least first cost of the line, and the above remarks are not 
strictly germane to it. Investigation of its practical applica- 
tion leads to the following queries: 

1. Is the assumption of a uniform price per pound justifiable? 

2. Does the retention of the same geometrical figure permit 
the design of all the towers for the least cost? 

3. It is fair to assume that large foundations for higher towers 
cost as much per cubic yard as small foundations for low towers. 

The cost of a tower to the purchaser is made up of the following 
items: 

1. Cost of steel and transportation. 

2. Cost of shop work. 

3. Cost of galvanizing. 

4. Cost of erection. 

5. Manufacturer’s profit. ; 

If the cost of the tower is directly proportional to the weight 
of the steel, then all of the items of cost must vary at the same 


1250 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


rate as the weight. The cost of the steel does vary approxi- 
mately as the weight. 

The paper gives the cost of a 34.5-ft. tower as $30, and of 
a 70.5-ft. tower as $243, which is about proportional to the cubes 
of the heights. The other costs should therefore be as the 
cubes of the heights. 

Inquiry from a concern which makes a very large number of 
towers elicited the following opinions: 

1. As the number of parts is the same for large as for small 
towers, the number of shop operations will be about the same; 
but as the shop operations will be slower on the heavier work, 
the shop cost will vary about as the height of the tower. 

2. The same opinion was expressed with regard to the cost 
of erection. 

3. The galvavanizing cost is approximately proportional 
to the superficial area, or to the square of the height. The 
galvanizing was said to be a very material portion of the whole 
cost. 

When it came to a question of manufacturer’s profit the 
source of my information ran dry, but if it increases as the cube 
of the height, it would seem to afford a considerable opportunity 
to a resourceful purchasing agent. ; 

From the foregoing it would seem that all the costs which 
go to make up the cost of the tower, other than the cost of steel, 
vary at a less rate than the cost of the steel, and that a smaller 
price per pound should be used in determining the cost of the 
large towers than is used for the small towers. 

It would add to the value of Mr. Scholes’ paper if he would 
answer my three questions, and I should like to ask: further 
if it is actually possible to furnish a 34.5-ft. tower galvanized, 
for $30? or a 32-ft. tower for $21? the prices given in the paper. 

P. H. Thomas: Mr. Rowe has given us valuable data on the 
effectiveness of the overhead ground-wire for protecting high 
transmission lines. The only thing that remains is to draw 
correct inferences from the data, and that is very difficult to do: 
There are some salient points, however, which seem to in- 
dicate the real lesson of the paper. 

In the first place, in judging of the performance of a new 
line, the necessary elimination of weak insulators which 
occurs during the early operation must be taken into account. 
Mr. Rowe says that by the use of a series transformer in the 
ground connection he has discovered a way to get the current 
off the line quickly enough not to break the insulators, so that 
the power could be thrown directly back again. This is an 
important point to consider, for if that is the way the improved 
operation was brought about it is no credit to the overhead 
grounded conductor. 

Mr. Rowe says further: 

On several occasions grounds came on the lines during lightning storms 


and the power was immediately cut off in order to clear them. In 
general, these grounds could not be located, so it cannot be said that 


ee 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1251 


lightning did not go over the surface of the insulators on the section 
where the grounded cable was in place. 

This apparently indicates that, only improvement resulted from 
the grounded wire. 

Furthermore, in addition to the installation of the grounded 
cable, there was a change in the size of the insulators, largely on 
that part of the line protected by the overheadcable. This, 
in itself, is the very best sort of lightning protection. As Mr. 
Rowe himself intimates that the original insulators were really 
too small for their work, it will not be safe to infer too much 
from the increased satisfaction in the operation after the intro- 
duction of the grounded overhead conductors. On the other 
hand, it is probably certain that the overhead grounded conduc- 
tor does relieve the line insulation a great deal; especially 
in the way of reducing the severity of the heaviest strains. 

Is it not true that too great a risk is being taken in using steel 
poles, steel cross-arms and pins, relying wholly on the insulator? 
_It is relatively easy for a charge to pass over the insulator’s 
surface to ground at the pin, and it is usually destructive when 
it does come, starting an arc to ground which breaks the in- 
sulator and tends to shut down the plant. Is there not some 
way to preserve the advantage of the old wooden pin and cross- 
arm, which prevented many discharges to ground from be- 
coming short-circuits? 

W. S. Lee: As Mr. Hoopes has suggested, we should not 
try to get too economical a tower or too economical a span. In 
some cases these transmission lines are carried over a rolling 
country; in other cases over a flat country with no fall for a 
water power, so we have to span from hill to hill, and from point 
to point, and the practical erection of the line means irregular 
spans. We have found that in our service. Now, while one 
may figure on a fixed-span tower, the chances are that the spans 
will be regulated by the topographical conditions. The usual 
practice is to make a profile of the country. If there is to be 
a tower for a 400-ft. span, and the next span has to be extended 
to 550 feet or 650 feet, we would need towers of different strength. 
It would be best to keep the tower standard on the line, in case 
of repairs, or shipments of parts; and for that reason I would 
suggest getting stronger towers which could be used for either 
long or short spans. 

Referring to Mr. Rowe’s paper: In 1897 I was with the 
Anderson Water Light & Power Co., Anderson, §. C., and we 
built an 11,000-volt line for a distance of 10 miles. While 
the poles were being constructed, and before there was a wire 
strung on them, two poles at different points were shattered 
entirely by lightning. The plant was built and has been in op- 
eration since that time; it has two lines of barbed wire overhead. 
Though there has been some trouble with lightning, they have 
not had a direct stroke of lightning on that line since that 
time. The Catawba Power Company, of Charlotte, N. C., has a 
transmission system of 18 miles. When the line was built in 


1252 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


1904 one pole was struck by lightning, but there was no wire on 
it. There is one grounded wire overhead, and no pole has been 
damaged by lightning since that time, nor has there been a 
direct bolt of lightning. . 

We built in 1905 at this same station, a line 20 miles long. 
It had 11,000-volt service, built with 40,000-volt insulators. 
This was a three-phase, single-circuit line, and in order to arrange 
for equilateral triangle construction one wire was placed on top 
of the pole. We endeavored to locate a grounded wire above 
the apex wire, by extending supports up to this point, and cury- 
ing them so as to keep away from the apex wire. ‘This arrange- 
ment did not wor... We found that irregularities in the country 
resulted in a tendency to pull up or down, in some cases to bring 
the grounded wire close to the apex power-wire. For this reason 
the grounded wire was left off this circuit. Since 1904, there 
have been two direct strokes of lightning on this particular cir- 
cuit; neither stroke interrupted the service, but both damaged 
poles by splitting them. All the lines are now being equipped 
with the overhead grounded wire. 

F. B. H. Paine: Mr. Thomas suggested a question which is 
frequently asked, in view of our extended use of steel poles and 
towers; whether we are not putting too much trust in the in- 
sulator, and would we not do better with the added insulation of 
vole, cross-arm, and pin? Fora good while I was in doubt about 
it, but after an experience of two years I think that Mr. Mershon’s 
judgment has been amply sustained. I have recently visited 
many transmission plants, and in every instance J. found that 
the annual destruction of poles and cross-arms, that is, the entire 
destruction of the supporting structure, exceeded our loss of in- 
sulators per mile. We can replace the insulators much quicker 
and cheaper than we can the entire supporting structure, whether 
it be of wood, steel, or what-not. We have something like 200 
miles of 60,000-volt transmission lines on wooden structures 
using the same insulators cemented on steel pins, the steel pins 
being carefully grounded. We have had some terrific lightning 
disturbances in that section, and, although many insulators 
have been lost, in no instance has any injury come to the wooden 
structure on account of the pins being grounded, and to all 
intents the same condition existed as on tlre steel tower or steel 
pole. I think we have answered the question as to the desira- 
bility of wood as an insulator for high-voltage lines very effect- 
ively: use metal pins, ground them, and save the pole and cross- 
arm, 
aK C. W. Ricker: The experience of a railway transmission line 

in western Ohio may be of interest. 

This consists of about 100 miles of three-phase, 3300-volt 
line built in 1901 on wooden poles with wooden cross-arms and 
porcelain insulators designed for use at that voltage by one of 
the largest American makers. Each cross-arm had two steel 
braces applied in the usual way, and the insulators are set 
on steel bolt pins about 9 in. long. The line runs through a 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1253 


country in which lightning storms are frequent but not excep- 
tionally severe. Interruptions of service have occurred during 
thunder storms, and usually two insulators on the opposite ends 
of the same arm would be found punctured from the tie-wire to 
the pin. The interruptions became so frequent that it was 
necessary to make some change, which had to be done without 
disturbing the working of the line; this left about two hours 
each night available for work, and the owners of the line were 
not prepared to incur any heavy expenses. Accordingly, half 
the cross-arm braces were removed, leaving on each pole a 
brace from the pole to one end of the cross-arm only, and 
wooden pins about 15-in. long were substituted for the steel pins, 
using the same insulators. 

After this change the interruptions of service due to light- 
ning were diminished from an average of two or more a month 
to about the same number during the season following the 
change. Several cross-arms were burned off, but caused no 
suspension of service at that time. 

Geo. T. Fielding, Jr.: Incidental to the main subject of Mr. 
Scholes’ paper, I would like to arouse some discussion on one 
of his assumptions: namely, that of allowing for one-half inch 
of sleet upon the conductor. As a matter of common interest, 
it would be profitable to learn if any one here has ever seen sleet 
upon a transmission line that was carrying power or even charg- 
ing current, and also if there was any wind at the time this 
occurred. This is an old question perhaps, but we have had 
experience enough now to cease basing calculations upon ad- 
vance assumptions that were made for the first lines erected. 
The greatest mechanical stresses on transmission lines are due 
to high winds, and a small increase in the diameter of the con- 
ductor, as occasioned by a coating of sleet, results in a consider- 
able increase in the imposed stress. The assumptions made, 
as regards sleet, therefore very materially influence the allow- 
able sags and tower-heights, and while it is legitimate to favor 
conservatism, it is questionable if we are not inclined to be 
over-liberal. 

I notice that Mr. Rowe uses a stranded steel cable for the 
ground-wire. This has been the practice on a number of lines. 
On account of its short life and tendency to stretch and sag, 
one of the larger telegraph companies has recently ceased using 
stranded cable for guy- and messenger-wire service. The old 
solid No. 3 steel galvanized wire is now being substituted in its 
place. It seems quite reasonable that the cable should tend to 
retain moisture, by virture of its strands, and hemp center if 
it has any. This moisture is not helpful in preserving the metal 
against rust. 

Mr. Rowe seems to have had considerable trouble with punc- 
turing of the insulators. This experience has been repeated 
on many other transmissions. On steel-tower lines where 
disturbances cause local and suddenly excessive potentials or 
frequency, the insulators are often observed to puncture before 


1254 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION | [June 26 


they will arc over, due probably to the element of time which is 
necessary for the potential to distribute itself. 

Increasing the thickness of porcelain does but very little 
toward increasing its resistance to puncture. It appears as 
if the use of larger insulators is not the solution of the problem; 
that is, it is not enough simply to install insulators of larger 
dimensions, insuring merely a greater arc-over capacity. It 
is essential to separate the live conductor and the ground, the 
pin, by a greater distance than has heretofore been specified 
to obtain reliable insulation: this has been accomplished by the 
suspension method, described in the paper by Mr. Hewlett. 
We shall be compelled to direct our efforts with this principle 
in view before we can successfully operate at, or above, 100,000 
volts. 

N. J. Neall: One point in Mr. Rowe’s paper is, in my judg- 
ment, misleading; that is, the use of a circuit-breaker attach- 
ment in the neutral of the transformers. In any three-phase 
transmission line with grounded neutral, the puncture of even 
a single insulator is more than likely to result in the fusing apart 
of the conductors, so that in this particular instance any dis- 
turbance of this character would undoubtedly seriously impair 
the continuity of service. I have seen this fusing take place in 
suprisingly quick time and realize perfectly what it means on 
service. Now the conclusion to be drawn from Mr. Rowe’s 
paper is that the additional line protective apparatus, irrespec- 
tive of the automatic cut-out, has been the chief benefactor 
in this case, but this seems to me a very doubtful conclusion. 
In other words, the important result is that a combination of 
these things—overhead ground protection, larger insulators, 
and automatic cut-outs, has produced the desired improvement. 

Ralph D. Mershon: The assumptions as to sleet, wind, and 
various other things which should be taken care of in the design 
of a transmission line are questions on which engineers will 
differ almost as much as on the subject of the use or non-use 
of choke coils. It seems to me that the general solution pre- 
sented by Mr. Scholes is a very admirable and satisfactory one. 
There are some points in it to which exception might be taken, 
but if all the refinements are gone into, such general solution 
would become so complicated that its value would be question- 
able. The value of this general solution is that by sorting 
general assumptions, one can arrive at a preliminary idea as to 
what is going to be the best plan, considered from the stand- 
point of those assumptions, and that this preliminary idea 
will serve as a guide in adapting the construction to meet other 
considerations, such as inequalities of the country, the de- 
sirability of having fewer points of support, etc. 

I shall be interested to hear from Mr. Scholes as to the 
cost in proportion to weight. 

Mr. Rowe’s experience with grounded wires does not en- 
lighten me much. It does not seem to me that he hasoffered 


OO 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1255 - 


any definite evidence that the grounded wires do a great amount 
of good. In the plant of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario 
Power Company, we are trying to avoid the use of the grounded 
wire on account of the expense of putting it up. We are install- 
ing on the top cable—there are only three cables, carried on the 
tower in the form of an equilateral triangle—what amounts to 
a horn lightning-arrester, a grounded horn reaching far enough 
above the tower to serve also as a lightning-rod. During the 
last few days we have had worse storms than we had last year, 
and the results, so far as we have been able to analyze them, 
seem to show that these line structure lightning-arresters, as 
we call them, have been of great value. Their value could be 
greatly augmented by increasing their number. They are now 
spaced at approximately 2200 ft., and are set for a discharge gap 
of6in. This discharge gap will be reduced to 4.5 in. or, perhaps, 
even to 4 in. 

Some of our experiences seem to show that lightning does 
not travel along the line. During one of the storms the last 
two or three days, we have had three insulators punctured be- 
tween two of the line structure lightning-arresters. The light- 
ning chose to puncture an insulator rather than travel 550 ft. 
to go over the 6-in. gap. Possibly, when we reduce the size of 
the gap, we can cause the lightning to travel. 

I am not much of a believer in the idea of being able to fore- 
tell what is going to happen in the matter of lightning, whether 
the prediction involves the nature and contour of the country 
or the apparatus concerned. We now have, I believe, about 400 
miles of main line; 80 miles of this is in rough country, the rest 
of it is over country that is practically flat. In the flat country 
the lightning is at times perfectly fiendish, so that, if there is 
any connection between lightning and mountains, there is 
nothing on our transmission line to indicate that such is the case. 

We do not transpose our lines. We had sometranspositions, 
but found they could be taken out, and have taken out almost 
all of them. We intend to confine the line structure lightning- 
arresters to the top wire, in order that when it operates our 
service will not be interrupted; since, if there are line structure 
lightning-arresters on two or more of the cables, and two of them 
operate simultaneously, a short-circuit will result. Whereas, if 
the lightning-arresters are confined to one of the cables, and 
we have a resistance in the neutral of the generating station, 
the arc will clear itself without necessarily interrupting the ser- 
vice. If we transpose and endeavor to follow out this idea, the 
line structure lightning-arresters would have to be, in some 
instances, on the top cable and in some instances on one or the 
other of the cross-arm cables. It may be that, before we get 
through, we shall put line structure lightning-arresters on more 
than one cable; but, judging from the performance of the line 
structure lightning-arresters with a 6-in. gap and spaced 2200 ft. 
apart, as is the case at present, this will not be necessary. In 


— 


1256 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


the last three severe storms, one of which was worse than any- 
thing we ever had before, the present installation of line struc- 
ture lightning-arresters has done much good. 

The sub-station lightning-arrester equipment is the one which 
Mr. Stott has designated as the ‘‘totem-pole’”’ equipment. There 
are nine horn lightning-arresters to each three-phase circuit, three 
to each conductor of the three-phase circuit. One of the three 
is set for a large gap and high resistance, the next for a higher 
gap and lower resistance, and the next for a still higher gap and 
that has a fuse. So far these arresters have afforded full pro- 
tection. They have discharged frequently. There are no 
choke-coils. 

N. J. Neall: In your line arresters do you get a continued 
arc because of the resistance in the neutral, or is it the cus- 
tomary charging arc which you get if you ground one leg of the 
railway system? 

Ralph D.Mershon: We have the neutral grounded through a 
resistance, and think the line arresters will behave in a good deal 
the same way as the intermediate arrester used at a sub-station 
having an intermediate gap, and which has 1000 ohms in series 
with it. 

D. R. Scholes: It must be borne in mind, in considering this 
problem, that it is impossible to choose a single set of assump- 
tions which will be satisfactory for all lines. Varying climate, 


contour of country, and other varying conditions of this nature | 


make it impossible. The making of such assumptions in the 
paper is incidental to the main object of the paper. 

It is to be observed that the method pursued in the.paper is 
first to derive an equation expressing the relation between the 
weight of a tower of given design and its height and strength. 
This expression is almost wholly accurate. An example illus- 
trating its application to a practical case is then given. In 
the example certain assumptions are made use of. It is ex- 


pected that such assumptions will, in each case, be made to 


suit the particular conditions that are being dealt with. 

Most of the discussion, however, has had reference to these 
assumptions, and while it is not important that their accuracy 
be proved, the following may be said in support of them: It is 
assumed that the towers may be had at a given price per pound. 
This may not always be the case, but, within the range of ordi- 
nary practice, manufacturers are to be found who will contract 
for such structures at a given price per pound, before the size 
or strength of the towers has been definitely fixed. 

It is assumed that the cost of a foundation will vary directly 
as its volume. The foundation cost will, of course, largely de- 
pend on the local conditions. Inasmuch, however, as the 
economical span will almost always be between 400 and 800 ft., 
and since the size of the foundation required will not change 
greatly between these limits, such an assum tion seems ad- 
missible in the present instance. 


oe ee * 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1257 


The builder of steel towers for transmission lines is apt to 
find that the variety of assumptions regarding wind, sleet, 
fa tor-of-safety, etc., with which he has to deal is almost as 
great as the number of different engineers with whom he comes 
in contact. Each engineer seems to have a different set of 
natural conditions to meet. The severity of his assumptions 
seems to depend, generally, on how much.money his company 
can afford to spend on towers. Now it is manifestly impossible 
to give mathematical expression, in advance, to factors which 
vary from causes of this sort. So the paper aims to put in the 
hands of the engineer in charge of line construction a formula 
which will show the effect on the tower-cost of any change in 
assumption he may contemplate, and which will make possible 
a simple solution for the economical span on the basis of his 
own assumptions. 

Frank G. Baum (by letter): Mr. Scholes finds a shorter span 
more economical than is generally supposed to be the case. 
It would be of interest had he drawn two curves showing the 
cost of tewer structures, one using his assumptions of sleet or 
snow on the cable at time of maximum wind velocity, the other 
with no sleet or snow. In a large section of the country sleet 
and snow need not be taken into account in the calculations. 

Farley Osgood (by letter): Will Mr. Rowe please say whether 
with complete overhead grounded wire and lightning-rod in- 
stallation, the use of time-limit relays on the outgoing trans- 
mission lines, is recommended, or whether instantaneous relays 
are preferred? 

It is believed that a lightning-arrester installation about 75 
miles from the power-station would help the system to a con- 
siderable degree, especially if the proper type of electrolytic 
arrester is used, which has been proved to be very efficient in 
cutting off the crests of surge-waves. 

Would Mr. Rowe recommend the use of an overhead grounded 
wire on a wooden pole line, to be grounded at every pole by a 
suitable ground wire running down the pole? 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 


tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


A NEW TYPE OF INSULATOR FOR HIGH-TENSION 
TRANSMISSION LINES 


BY E. M. HEWLETT 


Link INSULATORS. SUSPENSION AND STRAIN TYPES 


The transmission of large amounts of power over long distances 
has reached such proportions that the voltage necessary to 
transmit this energy makes the problem of line insulation 
difficult. The so-called “pin” type of insulator has been 
enlarged to meet the greater demands until it has approached, 
if not already passed, the limits of good construction. Mr. 
Buck has given this matter a great deal of study in his high- 
potential transmission work, and, being dissatisfied with the 
mechanical features of a pin insulator, has devised a method of 
line construction involving the use of “‘ suspension ”’ and “‘ strain” 
insulators. The suspension insulators support the line from 
above, hanging vertically beneath the cross-arm (or other point 
of suspension). The strain insulators are used at turns and at 
intervals of, say, every mile, to support and ‘‘anchor”’ the line, 
also as pull-off insulators on curves and to dead-end lines. 

It is intended in this paper to give some mechanical and 
electrical tests and describe a porcelain insulator which the 
writer has designed to carry out this method of supporting 
high-potential transmission lines. : 

Each insulator unit is a flanged, or a petticoated, disc with an en- 
larged central portion having two interlinked semicircular holes. 
It is called a ‘‘ link insulator’’ because it is used to insulate the 
interlinked tie-wires. The holes in the insulator are so ar- 
ranged that the tie-wires which pass through them exert a com- 
pression strain on the porcelain (Fig. 4). Should the insulator 

1259 


1260 HEWLETT: NEW TYPE OF INSULATOR [June 26 


1907] HEWLETT; NEW TYPE OF INSULATOR 1261 


break, the tie-wire loops would still be intermeshed (Fig. 5), and 
as the discs are used in series, witha factor of safety, the remaining 
discs prevent a ground being formed until the break can be 
repaired. The link insulator for suspension (shown in Fig. 1) 
is a petticoated disc, while the strain insulator (Fig. 2) is a 
disc with a grooved flange. The mechanical and electrical 
features of the two forms of insulators are essentially the same. 
The petticoats and flanges are so arranged that one side of the 
insulator is always protected from rain. 

A diameter of 10 in. for both types of insulators has been - 
found by experiment to be most convenient, and such insulators 
are suitable for a working voltage of 25,000 volts per disc. For 
higher potentials the disc sare placed in series; for instance, 
four 10-in. discs are suitable for.a-100,000 volt line. As the 


Fre. 3 


separate discs arc when wet at approximately 65,000 volts, 
the rated voltage of 25,000 volt is within safe limits. The 10-in. 
discs were tested for strength and supported a load of three tons. 

The insulators described above being made of one piece of 
porcelain, no cemented fittings or sections are necessary. They 
are not affected by extreme heat or cold, having stood the test 
of a severe winter. Tests prove that an insulator with sheltered 
surfaces stand, a much higher rain test than a much larger in- 
sulator which has no dry surface, as for example, a flat disc 
without the flange or petticoat. 

Fig. 3 shows a possible method of line support using ten 
towers per mile, in which the line is anchored at the end of each 
mile and at curves, and suspended at intermediate towers. 
From the cut it will be noted that the conductor is looped around 


1262 HEWLETT: NEW TYPE OF INSULATOR ‘June 26 . 


Fic. 4 


the strain links at the anchorage towers. The use of this type 
of insulator does away with torsional strain on the cross-arms, 
giving it a decided advantage over the pin insulator. It is 
obvious that the link insulator is adaptable to a great variety of 
conditions. 

Fittings have been designed for use with these insulators to fit 
the conditions thus far presented, but each case should be con- 
sidered as it comes up, and such fittings designed as are necessary. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gimeers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907, By A.I. E. E. 


SOME NEW METHODS IN HIGH-TENSION LINE 
CONSTRUCTION 


BY HW. BUCK 


The great economies in the cost of generating power which 
have been obtained in the large steam turbine stations and 
hydroelectric plants, are leading to the general abandonment 
of small generating stations and the increase in transmission 
distances in order -to distribute power over a large territory. 
In other words, 100,000 h.p. can be generated in one station 
and transmitted 100 miles cheaper than it can be generated and 
distributed from ten 10,000-h.p. stations each near the center of 
its load. Onaccount of this tendency toward the concentration 
of generating units, the overhead transmission line has assumed 
a position of great importance in electrical installations, and the 
same permanency and reliability is demanded of it as of the 
generating station itself. The wooden pole line of the past has 
been practically abandoned and steel construction has been 
substituted. 

The long distances covered by many of the modern lines, 
the large amounts of power to be transmitted, and the very 
high price of copper and aluminum—all have combined to force up 
the transmission voltage to the highest practicable limit. In 
consequence, the demand for high-voltage overhead line insulators 
has outgrown the present standard practice, and some new sys- 
tems will have to be introduced to meet the new conditions. 

The method of line construction here described has been de- 
veloped by the writer and Mr. E. M. Hewlett and is believed to 
offer a means of operating lines safely at higher potentials than 
is practicable with insulators of the pin.and petticoat type. 

Fig. 1 illustrates in a diagrammatic way the arrangements for 

1263 


1264 BUCK: HIGH-TENSION LINES [June 26 


one circuit. The tower supports shown here are those which 
were used merely for experimental work and need not be con- 
sidered as a commercial design: Each span is dead-ended at 
each support as shown, through a series of insulating units which 
in this case are plain discs connected together with steel links. 
The various spans are then electrically connected by jumpers 
hung below the insulators. The insulators are directly attached 
to the cross-arms, eliminating all pins. The number of discs 
linked together in series depends upon the line voltage, the 
discs themselves being identical for all voltages. 

Fig. 2 illustrates a design for a 100,000-volt two-circuit line 
which is soon to be constructed for transmitting 50,000 h.p. 
165 miles. The spans in this case will range from 500 to 1000 
ft. in length. Here the line is suspended below the cross-arm 
on most of the towers. The lines will be dead-ended with 
jumper connection, as shown, only at angles and on tangents at 
about every fifth tower. This dead-ending will be for the 
purpose of stopping any creeping of conductors on the line as 
a whole, to check the transmission of longitudinal waves along 
the conductors due to wind, and on curves to take the side 
stress of the conductor due to change in direction. In this 
installation the lines will not be triangulated, but at suitable 
intervals along the lines the conductors will be transposed so 
as to balance up effects of mutual static and magnetic induc- 
tion. Special cross-arms will be installed at transposition 
towers. 

Fig. 3 illustrates another design for a two-circuit line which 
is to be built for £0,000-volt operation. The spans in this case 
will range from 300 to 400 ft. and the conductors will have an 
approximately triangular relation. The conductors will be sus- 
spended by a series of insulators from the cross-arms as in Fig. 2 
with occasional rigid attachment, for the reasons given above. 

ig. 4 shows a method of assembly of the insulators for sus- 
pension under across-arm. Fig. 5 illustrates a method of as- 
sembly where spans are dead-ended at the cross-arm with 
jumper connection. 

The advantages of this construction, which might be termed 
“series unit insulation,” over the pin and petticoat type may 
be summarized as follows: 

a With the standard type of pin insulator now used the difficul- 
ties of construction increase very rapidly at the higher voltages. 
The cost of insulator for a given margin of safety increases for 


—_— 


1907] BUCK: HIGH TENSION LINES 1265 


voltages above 60,000 nearly as the cube of the increase in vol- 
tage. Either very large petticoat diameters must be used, or 
very high insulators with many petticoats. In either case the | 
manufacture of the porcelain parts is a difficult and expensive 
matter, and with the long pin necessary, the mechanical stresses 


from the line on insulator. pin, and cross-arm are objectionable. 
With the series unit system here proposed, the cost of insulator 
progresses only in direct proportion to the increase in voltage, 
the only change being in the number of units in series. ._There 
is practically no limit to the degree of insulation obtainable. 

b One of the most difficult elements of design in a transmission 


1266 BUCK: HIGH-TENSION LINES [June 26 


ower, where long pins and petticoat insulators are used, is to 
ich will resist the torsional stresses due to the 


t 
obtain a cross-arm wh 


Fic. 3 ; 


leverage of the pin. With the pinentirely eliminated, the stresses 
are directly applied to the cross-arm, this cheapens the con- 
struction of the tower. 


1907] BUCK: HIGH-TENSION LINES 1267 


¢ In the arrangements shown where the insulating units are 
attached on either side of the cross-arm, taking the full tension 
in the line with jumper connection between spans, the ‘nsvlation 
can be increased indefinitely by adding discs in series without 
increasing the space occupied on the tower. 

d Where each span is dead-ended, as in (c), all faces of the 
insulating units are exposed to the cleansing action of the rain, 


so that dirt cannot accumulate thereon. This arrangement 
also prevents the dripping water from forming electrical com- 
munication between units as occurs from one petticoat to an- 
other in the pin type of insulator. 

e A standard insulating unit can be adopted for all vol- 
tages, the only variation being in the number linked in series. 
This simplifies the manufacturing problem. 

f If any insulating unit becomes damaged or completely 


1268 BUCK: HIGH-TENSION LINES [June 26 


shattered, the insulation of the remainder is not affected. The 
damaged unit can be replaced without the necessity of renew- 
ing the whole. 

g If a tower is directly struck by lightning the cross-arms 
will be likely to take the discharge, since they are above the 
lines, whereas in the pin type of insulator the line is usually 
the highest point. 

h In long-span installations where the conductor at each 
end of the span is tied fast to an insulator mounted on a pin, 
experience has shown that crystallization is apt to take place 
in the conductor at the tie, due to its rigidity at that point 
and the vibrations in the span. This frequently results in 
breakage of the conductor. The flexible connection between 
conductor and cross-arm afforded by the series of insulators 
should reduce this tendency to crystallization, and should there- 
fore permit spans of any length to be used without further 
precautions against this action. 


Fears may be expressed that with the conductor suspended 
under the cross-arm serious swinging to and fro might take place. 
From numerous observations it is believed that no such swing- 
ing will occur. Long aerial spans under wind pressure take a 
permanent and steady deflection throughout the span pro- 
portional to the average wind velocity along the span, and no 
indications have been observed of long spans responding to 
so-called gusts. The towers shown in this paper are designed 
so that the conductor can safely be deflected by the wind about 
60° on either side of the neutral position. 

Insulators of a great many forms have been built and tested, 
but the one which gives the best results electrically and mechani- 
cally is the link type developed by Mr. Hewlett and hav- 
ing the grooved or fish-tail periphery. Four of these in series 
are sufficient for 100,000-volt operation with a liberal factor of 
safety. 

A very important element in this construction is of course 


yen 


ee a 


1907] BUCK: HIGH-TENSION LINES 1269 


the methods of fastening the insulating units together and 
attaching them to the line and cross-arms. This can be accom- 
plished in many ways and several methods have already been 
worked out, but these details are beyond the scope of this paper. 
Further experience in practical line construction and opera- 


tion under this system will demonstrate the best methods of 
installation and attachment. 


1270 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


Discussion on ‘‘A New Type or INSULATOR FOR HIGH-TEN- 
SION TRANSMISSION LINES,” AND “‘SoME New METHODS 
in HicH-teNsION LinE CoNnsTRUCTION”’, AT NIAGARA 
Fauus, N. Y., JUNE 26, 1907. 


J. B. Whitehead: Have any tests been made to determine 
the potential over these insulators when placed in seties? Is 
the actual distribution 25,000 volts per unit? 

Ralph D. Mershon: The more I consider Mr. Hewlett’s type 
of insulator the more attractive it is from many different stand- 
points, but. 1 should like to know if Mr. Hewlett has constructed 
any spans. using these insulators, with the idea of finding out 
just what sort of mechanical oscillations or waves, or swinging 
can be obtained. It seems to me that there is a possible chance 
of these spans swinging so as to arc to the tower. There does 
not seem to be any chance to use a discharge gap in connection 
with a line. Any arc close to the insulator has a good chance to 
destroy the whole insulator whereas if there were a discharge 
gap, the arc would rise away from the insulator and it could be 
saved. lt would be extremely dificult to install a line using 
such insulators and more di ficult to repair 1t. 

Ralph W. Pope: This appears to be one of the cases where 
there is a decided improvement in insulators, with some 
objections due to manufacturing, which may be eliminated as we 
go along. It is likely that in the course of time, with greater 
experience with the insulator, these di.ficulties may be overcome, 
Is it not the case with most improvements, that in practice 
the shortcomings are eventually overcome ? 

Ralph D. Mershon: For about three years past we have been 
conducting some high-voltage measurements in Niagara Falls, 
under all the various conditions we could think of that would 
approach actual practice. We took a lot of actual loss measure- 
ments on insulators of different sizes, dry and wet. I thought 
that if we assumed a certain thickness of the films on the petti- 
coats of the insulators, and calculated on that assumption the 
-esistance from the neck of the insulator to the pin, perhaps 
we could get some relationship between the loss over insulators 
of various sizes. It would not work out. Some of the smaller 
insulators had less loss than the big insulators. I think that 
the petticoats become charged and act as a condenser plate 
with 1eference to the pin. and the closer they are to the pin 
the more effectively the condenser acts to increase the loss and 
make them flash over. We measured the loss from the neck of 
an insulator to the pin, with a wooden pin and a metal pin. 
The wooden pin, if dry. gives fine insulation, and at first 
thought one would think the loss would be lower with the 
wooden pin than with the iron pin; but it was a great deal higher. 
This surprised me. I thought it over and finally reached a 
probable solution, and this solution has been confirmed by another 
experiment. The way I explained the higher loss is this: the insu- 


1907] DISCUSSION. AT NIAGARA FALLS 1271 


lator is taking a certain charging current; the pin has a straight 
ohmic resistance; and the voltage taken by it is in quadrature 
with the voltage of the supply current. You might increase 
the I?R considerably, without decreasing the current going 
over the pin. We-.got a wooden curtain pole, and stuck 
the insulator on that, and took different lengths of pin. After 
the first trial it was found that the loss continually fell off as 
the length of the pin increased. 

F. B. H. Paine: There are some features of transmission 
engineering which are not altogether electrical. The people 
along the line are likely to insist on having a method of supporting 
the cables which will prevent them from falling to the earth, 
or so close to the earth as to become a menace to travelers on 
the highway because of the loss of one or more points of support. 
If the cable is supported from above, it will necessitate some 
means to catch the cable in case an insulator fails and the cable 
is lowered. Is this provided for in this design ? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: In multigap lightning-arresters very 
great inequalities exist in the potential distribution only 
when very many spark gaps are connected in series across a 
high-potential circuit. With four or five or even ten spark 
gaps in series, the distribution of potential under lightning- 
arrester conditions is still practically uniform. There is to be 
considered, regarding this distribution of potential, between the 
successive insulator discs the fact that it is a function of the 
voltage and that when voltage is raised to a point approaching 
the breakdown strength of one element, then the distribution 
of the potential changes and becomes more uniform. So it 
may well be, if there are, say, four elements in series, you get 
across the first element 50 per cent. instead of 25 per cent. of the 
total voltage at normal impressed voltage. If now you increase 
the potential, as soon as it approaches the breakdown strength of 
the first element, brush discharges occur over the surface etc., 
and to increase the effective capacity of this condenser, and then 
the potential distribution becomes more uniform and may be 
nearly uniform, when you reach the united breakdown strength 
of the whole sstem, at least where the number of sections is not 


very large. 


ee chek 


i < 


res ee ; hikes } hae Tt) Qu ‘ ss, 
. r Sear soe Claas whey pr 


» > i = 


Seta y Ph ie - rey ! 
‘ge J ie OF tah wale “i © we 
pane Se ees 2 . egret “hg te 
Diyos Pe Ai te PUM ge 5 ae a 

Cr Selita. atid Fay sales eat ; 


3 Uap i ete ie 


PSS 


sa 


A paper presented at the. 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical LEngi- 
neers, Niagara Falls, N. ¥., June 26, 190%. 


Copyright 1907. By A. 1. E. E. 


THE TRANSMISSION PLANT OF THE NIAGARA, LOCK- 
PORT AND ONTARIO POWER COMPANY 


BY RALPH D. MERSHON 


.On the seventh day of July, 1906, there was put into opera- 
tion the first of the transmission lines of the Niagara, Lockport 
and Ontario Power Company. This event marks the inaugura- 
tion of one of the first undertakings in the matter of distrib- 
uting Niagara power over a large section of country, and the 
beginning of an enterprise which is one of the most important, 
and in some respects the most important, of its kind anywhere 
in the world. 

The plans realized at present and contemplated for the im- 
mediate future, in the plant of the Niagara, Lockport and On- 
tario Power Company, involve a maximum transmission dis- 
tance of 160 miles. This distance puts the plant amongst the 
longest transmissions of the world. As regards capacity, the 
plant of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power Company 
is now one of the most important in existence, and, in the near 
future, its capacity will be far in excess of any other transmission 
system in the world. In addition to these points of importance, 
there are a number of engineering features somewhat out of 
the usual line of transmission practice which make the installa- 
tion of interest from an engineering standpoint. Inasmuch as 
the description of such a plant is usually more satisfactorily 
accomplished through pictures than otherwise, they will be 
mainly resorted to herein, with the aid of only such brief text 
as may be necessary to cover points which cannot be well 
shown in illustrations. 

The prospective system of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario 
Power Company is a comprehensive one for the delivery of power 

1273 


1274 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


in the United States within an economic transmission radius 
of Niagara Falls, and especially for its delivery in the northern 
and western portions of the state of New York. The company 
expects within the next two years to be transmitting 60,000 
horse power, and its present right-of-way purchases are with 
reference to an ultimate transmission of 180,000 horse power. 
The plans of the company as at present laid out contemplate 
the transmission of this power by means of main lines and branch 
lines therefrom; the contracts for power being, wherever pos- 
sible, made for delivery of the power at the main-line voltage 
of 60,000, less line drop. Where, however, the business of a 
given territory will justify it, the company will install step-down 
transformer stations for the delivery of power at a lower voltage. 
Each of the main transmission circuits will be capable of re- 
ceiving and transmitting 30,000 horse power at 60,000 volts, 
and it is intended always to provide a sufficient number of spare 
main transmission lines to insure continuity of service on the 
main line. Spare lines will be provided in the case of branch 
lines only when the latter are of considerable importance. 

The Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power Company is only 
a transmission company; that is, it buys the power to be 
transmitted and has, therefore, no generating plant of its own. 
The power for the transmission is generated in the hydraulic 
power station of the Ontario Power Company, situated on the 
Canadian side of Niagara Falls. The water for this station is 
taken from the Niagara River, some distance above the falls, 
whence it is brought to a point at the top of the cliff, a short 
distance below the falls, through underground steel conduits, 
and from this point delivered through underground penstocks 
to the power station located at the bottom of the cliff, near the 
foot of the falls. 

The power house contains the generating units with their 
exciters and switchboard apparatus. The generators have a 
capacity of 7,500 kw. each, and deliver three-phase 25-cycle 
current at 12,000 volts. From the power station the current 
is taken at 12,000 volts to the transforming and switcning 
station of the Ontario Power Company located on the bluff 
above the falls. It is stepped up from 12,000 volts to 62,500 
volts, and at this latter voltage delivered to the transmission 
lines. The transmission lines of the Ontario Power Company 
extend from its transforming station to a point some six 
miles farther down the Niagara River, at which point the 


EEE O_O 


1907] ONTARIO TRAI 


ISMISSION PLANT 1275 


5 Ls 
Fic. 1—Niagara crossing, general view 


7 


af 


Fic. 


wm 2 ~*~ _ 
> 


MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND 


2—Niagara crossing, 


water-edge t 


rn he BE pen ae 


Sas 
oF, 


i] 


oly 


VY) 


owers, American 


[June 26 


side 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1277 


lines connect to circuits spanning the Niagara River. The 
Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power Company takes delivery 
of the electric power at the international boundary line in the 
middle of the Niagara River. 

At the present time, the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power 
Company has in its possession a private right-of-way 300 
feet wide from the Niagara River to the town of Lockport, 


‘ ia : ee z: : OPS aeecn x 
Fic. 3—Niagara crossing, top of water edge towers 


about 16 miles east; from Lockport east to Mortimer (six miles 
south of Rochester), a private right-of-way 200 feet wide, a 
distance of about 57 miles; from Mortimer to Fairport a 100-foot 
private right.of-way a distance of 10 miles; and from Fairport 
to Syracuse a private right-of-way 75 feet wide, a distance of 71 
miles. From Lockport south, in the direction of Buffalo, the 
company has a private right-of-way 100 feet wide. In ad- 


1278 MERSHON: NLAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


dition to this, the company has the right to install transmission 
lines on the right-of-way of the West Shore Railroad and has 
acquired the necessary private right-of-way to get from its 
main private right-of-way to that of the railroad company. 

The installation which the company has now in operation is 
for receiving 30,000 horse power and delivering this amount, less 
the line loss. The main transmission consists of two lines in 


Fic. 4—Niagara crossing, cantilevers, American side 


duplicate. From the Niagara River to Lockport, a distance 
of 16 miles, there are two lines on the company’s private right- 
of-way, each capable of transmitting 30,000 horse power. From 
Lockport to Mortimer, a distance of 57 miles, there is a line 
on the company’s private right-of-way having a capacity of 
20,000 horse power. From Mortimer east to Syracuse, a dis- 


tance of 81 miles, there is a line on the company’s right-of-way 


a 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1279 


having a capacity of 10,000 horse power. From Lockport to 
a point about 11 miles east, thence south on the company’s pri- 
vate right-of-way to the West Shore Railroad, and thence on the 
West Shore Railroad to Pittsford is a line having a capacity of 
20,000 horse-power. From Pittsford on the West Shore Railroad 


Fic. 5—Pipe towers 


right-of-way east to Syracuse is a line having a capacity of 
10,000 horse power. From Lockport south to a point south of 
Buffalo, there are two transmission lines on the private right- 
. of-way of the company, each having a capacity of 30,000 horse 
power. These two lines south are tapped into the two lines 


; 


[June 26 


NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND 


MERSHON; 


, 


1280 


oe —————— — ee 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1281 


coming from the Niagara River to Lockport, and constitute, 
therefore, at present, a branch line; but they will be eventually 


extended clear through to the Niagara River, and it is in 
anticipation of this extension that they are constructed with the 
full capacity of 30,000 horse power. As will be seen from the 
above, the distance from the Niagara River to Syracuse is 154 
miles. In addition to this, the transmission from the trans- 


wie 


Fic. 7—950-foot span over Buffalo creek 


forming station of the Ontario Power Company to the Niagara 
River has a length of about 6 miles, making, as previously 
mentioned, a maximum transmission of 160 miles. 

It will be seen, therefore, that in delivering power in Lock- 
port, and in the neighborhood of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, 
and at intermediate points, the company will have transmission 
circuits in duplicate, each capable of transmitting the full 
amount of power to be delivered at the several points. 


1282 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


As previously stated, the power is brought across the Niagara 
River by means of aerial cables spanning the river, and de- 
livery of the power is taken by the transmission company at 
the international boundary line. The cables are brought across 
the river in three spans; one span from steel cantilevers at the 
top of the cliff on the Canadian side to steel towers at the water’s 
edge on the Canadian side; another span from the water-edge 


Fic. 8—1253-foot span over swamp 


towers on the Canadian side to the corresponding towers on 
the American side; and a third span from the steel water-edge 
towers on the American side to the steel cantilevers at the top 
of the cliff on the American side. The use of cantilevers is 
necessitated mainly by reason of the steep angle at which the 
cable descends from the top of the cliff. Their use also makes 
possible the required clearance between the cable and the slope 
of the gorge, a point of special importance on the American 


1283 


ISMISSION PLANT: 


ONTARIO TRAN 


1907] 


Ul] UICU oY} PUL sUTT 
youriq uinqny jo uorjounf jo yu10d 4v sesnj Ire-uedo pue soyo}ims SUTJOOUUOOSIP PUP SUT{eUUOI-ssoIN—G “OI 


1284 


MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND 


Fic. 10—Top of double-guyed steel tower 


[June 26 


~ _ 2 


ee EEO 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1285 


side in view of the fact that one of the branch lines of the New 
York Central Railroad is on the American slope of the gorge. 
The steep slope of the cable at the cantilevers would make it 
bear upon the upper petticoat of the insulator supporting it, 


treet 


“Fic. 11—Tower in Montezuma swamp 


if the cable were attached to the top of the insulator in the 
usual way. As will be seen by the photographs of the canti- 
levers, this difficulty is obviated by attaching the cable to a 
steel cross-bar supported at each end by an insulator. 


1286 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


The steel cantilevers and the river-edge towers are all designed 


to withstand the most extreme conditions of sleet and wind 
that will probably ever exist. The requisite mechanical strength 
of the insulation at the points where the cables are attached to 


oe eee. | 
| 


| 
‘ 
. 
BI 
i] 


Fic. 12—Line structure lightning-arrester on steel tower 


the steel structures is obtained by using a sufficient number of 
line insulators, and the proper distribution amongst these in- 
sulators of the forces which will come upon them is effected by 
means of malleable cast-iron caps cemented to the tops of the 
insulators and to which the cables are fastened. 


gS 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1287 


It was originally intended, and provided for in the contract 
with the Ontario Power Company, that just after crossing the 
river the 60,000-volt lines should be led into a switching sta- 
tion in which, by means of 60,000-volt electrically operated 
oil-switches, it would be possible to interchange the circuits 
coming into and going out of this station. The building itself 
for this switching station has been completed, but, before the 
equipment of the station had been installed, arrangements 
were made with the Ontario Power Company to defer the 


bis 


Fic, 13——Stringing line cable 


outlay for such equipment until the use of it should be more 
necessary than at the present time, when only two lines are in 
operation. 

The main-line construction of the Niagara, Lockport and 
Ontario Power Company is most substantial. With the exception 
of that portion of the main line on the West Shore Railroad be- 
tween Churchville and Syracuse, the main-line structures are all 
steel towers, and the standard line-span is 550 feet. On some 
portions of the transmission line, however, much longer spans 


1288 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


are used, the longest at present installed being 1,253 feet. In 
some cases these long spans had to be provided with towers 
heavier than the standard; in other cases it was possible to 
put them up with little, if any, modification of the standard 
tower construction. For a number of reasons, the principal 
one being lack of the requisite space, it was necessary to use 
on the West Shore right-of-way between Churchville and 


ie ana 


Fic. 14—Tower delivered ready for assembling 


Syracuse wooden construction of special design which will be 
described later on, the standard span being 220 feet. In every 
case on the 60,000-volt lines, each line of towers or wooden 
structures carries only one three-phase circuit. The main line 
conductors installed so far are all of them of aluminum cable 
except on a portion of the line between Mortimer and Syracuse 


where, because of the long spans employed, it is preferable to 
use copper. 


WO Le age tpg, alle 


ee ene eee eee eee 


ence tel 


ANF 


WINANS Fete ea 


~ 1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1289 


The first of the steel towers installed were of the tripod type, 
made of lap-welded pipe; but the later towers, and those which 
in the near future will be installed, are of structural shapes and 
galvanized. The design of these two types of towers is shown 
in the accompanying illustrations. Two types of the structural 
tower are shown. The earlier ones were non-interchangeable; 
that is, the guyed towers differed in construction from the un- 
guyed towers. The later towers are interchangeable; that is, 
the guyed and unguyed towers are exactly similar except for 
the guys and double insulators of the former. Contrary to the 


Fic. 15—Assembling tower (1) 


practice which has heretofore been followed in the matter of 
steel line towers, the towers of this transmission line are mounted 
on foundations of reinforced concrete. These foundations are 
designed to utilize the weight of the earth around them in re- 
sisting uplift. The towers and their foundations are capable 
of withstanding transverse forces which will be brought upon 
them when the line cables are covered with 0.5 in. of ice all 
around them and the wind blowing transverse to the line at a 
velocity of 75 miles an hour. The towers have the same strength 
in all directions; that is, they are capable of withstanding the 
same forces in the direction of the line that they are capable of 


1290 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


withstanding transverse to the line. To meet the contingency, 
not likely to occur, of allthree cables breaking at once, in which 
case the full tension of all the cables might be brought upon 
the towers, there are at intervals along the line certain towers 
guyed both ways in the direction of the transmission line, and 
having double fixtures. The strength of these guyed towers 
is such as would enable them to withstand the forces that 


conv moe BS VET 


Or agile ISON, 
Fic. 16—Assembling tower (2) 


would obtain under the extreme conditions outlined above, if 
all the line cables should break. The guyed towers will, there- 
fore, terminate any progressive failure of the line which might 
under extreme conditions be instituted by the breaking of 
cables. 

As stated above, on the West Shore right-of-way it was neces- 
sary to use wooden line structures. The type of construction 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLAN1 1291 


employed is that which has been designated by the company 
as “‘ A-frame construction.” 1t is clearly shown in one of the 
accompanying cuts. By adopting this type of construction in 
which each structure consists of two poles instead of She. it 
is possible to use twice the length of span that would be teed in 
ordinary wooden pole construction. and employ, therefore, one- 
half the number of insulators. As stated above, the Seaadana 
length of span of this type of construction is 220 feet. On 


fe ‘3 as aa a gy aN 2 SS ies fr if PRP DP he 
Fic. 17—Foot of tower, showing method of fastening tower to 
foundation 


some portions of the West Shore right-of-way it was necessary 
to use steel construction, and in such places there were installed 
galvanized lattice steel poles, such as are shown in one of the 
illustrations. The span on these poles is the same as that 
on the A-frame construction. 

In a number of places on the main line, both on the West 
Shore and on the private right-of-way, it is necessary to cross 
the Montezuma marsh. Where this marsh was crossed with 


1292 MERSHON: NiAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


steel tower construction, the concrete foundations for the 
steel towers were built by first excavating the swamp through 
the soft mud until the soft marl, forming the sub-stratum of 
the swamp, was reached. On the marl was laid a platform of 
two layers of corduroy, and on this platform was built the con- 
crete foundations, the weight of which was made sufficient to 
take care of any uplift which will come upon the towers. These 
foundations were installed, some of them, in cold weather and, 


me nee 


eats 


Fic. 18—Tower foundation dug up for purpose of relocation 


so far, they have shown no settlement. Where this marsh was 
crossed with A-frame construction, it was found in places much 
too expensive to excavate for the proper foundation for the 
A-frames. The A-frames were, therefore, installed by laying 
on top of the ground four line poles in two pairs, the poles 
of one pair being parallel to the line, and the poles of the other 
pair being at right angles to the line.. These poles were spiked 
together at the point where they cross, and at the point of cross- 
ing the A-frame was spiked to them, the A-frame being further 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1293 


secured to the poles by braces. On each end of each pair of 
poles was spiked a box, built up of planking and filled with 
stone, in order to give sufficient weight to take the uplift due 
to any pull at the top of the tower. This structure, while far 
from beautiful, has, so far, proved very satisfactory. The 
tower construction and the A-frame construction in swamps are 
shown in the illustrations. 

It will be noted that, in some of the illustrations of the towers 
and A-frames, there is shown a horn attached to a cap on the 


Fic. 19—Erecting 75-foot tower (1) 


top of the insulator and another horn alongside of it fastened 
to the structure and extending some distance above the in- 
sulator. This comprises a combined line-structure lightning- 
arrester, or spark-gap, and lightning-rod. It has been decided 
to make a careful trial of this method of protection of the 
line before resorting to a grounded cable; partly because of the 
great expense of the grounded cable, and partly because there 
is no reason to think, so far, that it will necessarily afford com- 
plete protection in every case. For the present, these line- 


1294 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


structure lightning-arresters will be installed only on the top 
cable, in view of the fact that during the last lightning season, 
in the course of which a number of insulators were broken by 
lightning, more than three-fourths of the insulators so broken 
were top insulators. 

The insulator used on all the main-line construction is one 
especially designed for this plant by the writer. It has prob- 


Fic. 20—Erecting 75-foot tower (2) 


ably the greatest factor of safety as regards flashing, etc., of 
any insulator in practical use to-day, and is considerably larger 
and heavier than any insulator of which corresponding use has 
heretofore been made. It consists of three shells nesting in 
one another and cemented together by means of neat Portland 
cement, the whole insulator being cemented in a similar manner 
to a steel pin before attachment to the tower. The insulator 
is clearly shown in one of the illustrations. The total height 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1295 


of it from the edge of the lower petticoat to the top of the head 
is 19inches. The diameter of the upper petticoat is 14.5 inches. 
The insulator used on some of the branch lines is smaller and 
less expensive than that for the main line, partly because the 
branch lines receive in general a somewhat lower voltage than 
the main line and partly because the lines, carrying the small 
amounts of power they do, are not considered to be entitled 


Fi, 
bed 


Fic. 21—The making of a joint (1) 


to the same insurance as the main line. Each branch line has 
in series with it, at the point where it is tapped off the main 
line, 60,000-volt outdoor fuses to cut out the line in case of 
trouble on it. The fuses consist of lengths of thin copper 
wire 16 feet long, run through an ordinary small rubber bath- 
room hose and laid in clips on top of a wooden bar supported 
at each end and at the center by line insulators mounted on poles. 


1296 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


The fuses are parallel to each other in the same horizontal plane, 
and the distance from center to center is about 25 feet. These 
fuses have so far proved very satisfactory but will probably 
in time be replaced with fuses of the explosion type. The 
outdoor 60,000-volt fuses are shown in one of the illustrations. 

There are only three sizes of cables used on the main trans- 
mission line, designated by the company as 3/3, 2/3, and 1/3 
respectively. The 3/3 cable is aluminum cable, consisting of 


% 


Fic. 22—The making of a joint (2) 


19 strands, and having a total area of 642,800 cir. mils, being 
equivalent to 400,000 cir. mils copper. The areas of cross- 
section of the other cables are respectively two-thirds and 
one-third that of the large one. 

In ordinary straight-away work, the cable lies in the top 
groove of the insulator, and the pull of the cable is taken care 
of by means of two aluminum wire ties around the neck of the 
insulator. One of these ties extends each way along the cable. 
The tie itself consists of a single loop around the neck of the 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1297. 


insulator, the two ends of the loop being twisted around the 
line cable. The result is that the cable is not really fastened 
to the insulator at all, but simply lies in the top groove. The 
ties do not, therefore, perform any function, except when there 
is a pull on the cable tending to slide it in the direction of its 


Fic. 23—The making of a joint (3), joint complete 


length. The advantages of such a tie are twofold: first, the 
full strength of the tie wire is developed, which is not the case 
if a tie is twisted or ‘‘ pig-tailed,” since in such case the ten- 
dency is for the tie to cut itself in two at the twist; secondly, 
the tie does not damage the soft aluminum cable, as would be 
the case with most of the other ties usually employed. 


1298 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


In other than straight-away work, and where it is desirable 
that the method of fastening to the insulator shall be such as 
will withstand a pull equal to the full strength of the cable, 
in case the cable should break, the tie mentioned above is not 
used, but instead there is employed a cable-clamp and a yoke 
extending each way on the cable. 

In every case the cable near the insulator is protected from 
possible arcs, so that in the event of an arc there will be a chance 


fil A nl JUL SIE 


Fic. 24—60,000-volt main-line insulator with tie. and cable protection 


for the circuit-breaker at the generating station to open before 
the cable shall have been burned off. This protection is accom- 
pushed in the top groove of the insulator by means of sheet 
aluminum wrapped around the cable at this point to a thick- 
ness of $ inch, and is accomplished on each side of the head 
of the insulator to a distance of 12 inches from the head partly 
by the turns of the tie-wire mentioned above, and partly by 
an additional serving of tie-wire. Where, in the case of the use 
of cable-clamps, no tie-wire is used, its absence is made up 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1299 


for by additional serving. The photographs show very clearly 
the methods of attaching the cables to the insulators and the 
methods of protecting the cables from arcs. 

The ends of tne line cables are connected by means of twisted- 
sleeve joints. The method of making these joints is shown in 
the illustrations. 


Fic. 25—60,000-volt outdoor line disconnecting switch 


At intervals along the line there are provided disconnecting 
switches for sectioning the line to facilitate testing out in case 
of trouble, or cutting out any portion of the line which is dam- 
aged. There are also provided at certain points, in connection 
with these disconnecting switches, cross-connecting switches, 


1800 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


enabling the interconnection of different portions of the two 
lines. 

On a considerable portion of the company’s right-of-way is 
a wagon road, for use in patrolling the line and delivering mate- 


Sy 


a Oar 


Fic. 26—Standard A-frame construction showing line structure lightning- 
arrester 


rial for construction or repair. At certain points along the 
line there are patrol houses for the storage of material, for 
taking care of teams, and for the comfortable housing of the 
patrolmen. Each house has in it a sleeping room, kitchen, and 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1301) 


Fic. 27—A-frame construction, Montezuma swamp 


1302 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


See eae 
eset: 


Fic. 28—A-frame disconnecting switches 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1303 


sitting room. On all of the transmission lines, also, the com- 
pany has a private telephone line on a separate set of wooden 
poles. Taps from this line are brought into each of the trans- 
mission houses, and in addition to this the line patrolmen have 


Fic. 29—A-frame transposition 


portable telephones which can be connected to the telephone 
line at any point. 

Most of the contracts which the company has for the supply 
of power cover the delivery of the power at the main-line voltage. 


MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND 


. 


8 SPAN gs rf ; oe 
Jd : 4; a eae ary | nianannte nomnnbe Peis) 


; 


Fic. 30—Galvanized steel poles on railway 


{June 26 


ff 


Pre | Tatar A 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1305 


Thus far the company has installed only three sub-stations, 
two of them of considerable size at Lockport and Gardenville, 
respectively, and one at Baldwinsville, a very small and com- 
paratively inexpensive one. The stations at Lockport and 
Gardenville have each a normal capacity of 3,000 kw. not in- 
cluding the spare apparatus. They are so designed that their 
capacity can be indefinitely increased. The Baldwinsville sta- 


Tic. 31—Lockport sub-station showing 11,000-volt outdoor lightning- 
arresters 


tion has a capacity of 750 kw. The station at Lockport has 
been installed and in operation for some time. That at Garden- 
ville is about complete, but not yet in operation. The accom- 
panying illustrations will, in a general way, make clear the type 
of construction employed in the Lockport and Gardenville 
sub-stations; but, as there are a number of features in connection 
with these sub-stations which are quite different from ordinary 


MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


1306 


howing outdoor 60,UUU-volt bus-pais 


Fic. 32—Lockport sub-station s 


ANE AY 


Ly 


\ 


\ 


- 
= 
— 
4 
< 
E 
‘i 
é 


eh te eee KY Lee 


ee 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1307 


practice in these matters, a brief description of them will be in 
order. 


The 60,000-volt bus-bars at these sub-stations are outdoors: 


? 


in other words, these bus-bars have been treated exactly as if 


Fic. 33--Transformer room, Lockport sub-station 


they were part of the transmission line and located out of doors 
in a manner, so far as insulation is concerned, similar to the 
transmission-line cables. In connection with them are dis- 
connecting switches as shown in the accompanying cut for making 
various combinations of the apparatus connected to them. Of 


1308 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


course, the disconnecting switches are not intended to break 
the working current. When it is necessary to break the circuit 
under load, it will be accomplished by means of the 60,000-volt 
electrically operated oil-switches installed in the station which, 
in the case of the Lockport sub-station, serve also for the con- 
trol of the two lines to the Buffalo district. 

Another feature out of the ordinary in connection with this 


Fic. 34—Switchboard room, Loc«port sub-station 


station is the lightning-arrester equipment. This equinment is 
also out of doors, and consists of a number of horn-type lightning- 
arresters mounted on wooden poles in much the same manner 
as such arresters are ordinarily mounted. The installation 
differs, however, from the ordinary lightning-arrester installa- 
tion of this kind, for, instead of there being only one pair 
of horns for each line conductor, there are three such pairs. 
One pair is set for a comparatively low striking electromotive 


| 
: 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1309 


force and has in series with it a high resistance; the next pair 
is set for a higher striking electromotive force, and has in series 
with it a lower resistance; a third pair is set for very high strik- 
ing electromotive force and has a fuse in series with it. 

The theory on which these arresters are installed is that for 
ordinary slight static disturbances in the line the arrester having 
the lower striking electromotive force will discharge, and, since 


itch and circuit-breaker, electrically operated 


Fig. 35—60,000-volt oil-sw 


it has in series with it a comparatively high resistance, the re- 
sultant disturbance to the system due to the generated current 
which follows the discharge will be comparatively slight. A 
more severe static disturbance (whether due to lightning or to 
any other source), will cause both the arrester having the lowest 
gap and the arrester having the next higher gap to discharge 
simultaneously, thus affording two discharge paths to earth, 
the combined resistance and inductance of which is considerably 


[June 26 


NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND 


MERSHON 


310 


1 


Fic. 86—60,000-volt lightning-arrester equipment; two 3-phase circuits 


1907] ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1311 


lower than that of the first path. This will mean a somewhat 
more severe disturbing effect on the system, due to the generated 
current which follows. Inthe case of a very extreme condition; 
for instance, a direct lightning stroke on the line, the three 
arresters would discharge simultaneously, the fuse, in the case 
of the arrester with the highest air-gap, blowing and inter- 
rupting the arc upon it, the disturbance of the circuit finally 


Fic. 37—Baldwinsville sub-station, showing lightning-arresters 


ending upon the other two arresters. Judging from experience 
in the case of other plants with a much less elaborate arrange- 
ment than that outlined, and the experience during the last 
lightning season with the protection afforded at the Lockport 
station. the writer believes this method of protection to be 
entirely effective in the matter of preventing damage to appa- 
ratus in the sub-station, Such an installation may, in the case 


1312 MERSHON: NIAGARA, LOCKPORT AND [June 26 


of a very severe discharge, such as that due to a direct stroke of 
lightning, mean a temporary shutdown of the system, or at any 
rate of the synchronous apparatus operating upon it; but it 
does not necessarily follow that this will be the case if ex- 
pulsion fuses be used on the highest gap arrester. Such fuses 
as have been experimented with in connection with this work 
operated very satisfactorily. It may be noted in passing that 


Fic. 38—Ty 


pical patrol house 


a lightning-arrester equipment similar to that just described 
for sub-stations is installed also at each point where a branch 
line is taken off at the main line. 

The other features of this station are very similar to those 
usually found in such installations. There is a complete 
system of oil piping for putting oil into or removing it from the 
transformers and oil-switches, and also for storing oil to re- 
place that in the transformers and switches when it may become 


a) (iil el 


~~" CTs 


1907) ONTARIO TRANSMISSION PLANT 1313 


necessary. There is also provided outside of the building an 
oil-storage tank for storing oil that has been damaged until 
such time as it is convenient to put it through the oil-cleaning 
apparatus. In view of the fact that there is no other con- 
tinuous water supply available at this sub-station, it has been 
necessary to drill wells for the supply of water for cooling the 
transformers. In connection with these wells there has been 
installed a pumping plant, a water tower, and a cooling pond, 
the latter for use in case the wells should not be able continu- 
ously to supply all the water required. 

There will be installed shortly on the company’s system two 
switching stations, one at Mortimer and one at Syracuse. The 
one at Syracuse will be for taking care of the two incoming 
10,000-h.p. lines and the outgoing lines to the consumers 
in Syracuse. The one at Mortimer will be for taking care of the 
two incoming 20,000-h.p. lines and five outgoing lines; 
two of them being a line in duplicate to Rochester; two of them 
the line in duplicate to Syracuse; and one the Avon branch line 
supplying several installations, amongst them the station of 
the Erie Railroad Company, operating their trolley line between 
Rochester and Avon. Both these switching stations will be 
equipped with the 60,000-volt electrically operated oil-switches, 
reverse relays, and other apparatus necessary for properly ma- 
nipulating the circuits which they control. 

The transmission lines of this company cross the rights-of-way 
of a number of railway companies, and some difficulty has been 
had in arriving at a satisfactory arrangement with the rail- 
ways in regard to these crossings. In general, the attitude of 
the railways is that of being unduly fearful of the transmission 
lines, and requiring protective precautions of one kind or an- 
other. It is, however, gratifying to note that in every case 
the railway companies have, on investigation, been so well 
satisfied with the reliability of the transmission company’s 
type of line construction as to waive the elaborate steel pro- 
tective bridges which have been insisted upon at times in the 
past, and in most cases little or no extra precautions have been 
required. 


1314 HIGH-TENSION TRANSM!SSION [June 26 


Discussion ON ‘‘ THE TRANSMISSION PLANT OF THE ‘‘NIAGARA 
Lockport, AND ONTARIO PowEeR Company,” at NIAGARA 
FaLis, NEw York, JUNE 26, 1907 


E. J. Berg: You have a telephone circuit in connection with 
the power lines? 

Ralph D. Mershon: We have a separate telephone line on 
separate poles on our own ri,ht of way. 

E. J. Berg: The following observations made in Mexico about 
a year ago have some bearing on this. A 500-volt direct-current 
temporary station was furnishing power for lighting a number 
of buildings on the top of a mountain. The station was located 
in the valley about 500 ft. below. The lines were strung on 
high-voltage insulators and were about 22 in. apart. A short 
time before a thunderstorm, static sparks were seen between 
these lines. At the time, a number of lamps were burning so 
that the circuit was closed between the lines within 50 ft. of the 
spark. Furthermore, these same lines were placed within about 
2 in. of each other in the building, yet the spark chose to strike 
22 in. in air. A lightning-arrester within 50 ft. of the disturb- 
ance would apparently not have taken the discharge. 

Ralph D. Mershon: We have line structure lightning-ar- 
resters about every 2200 ft. Two or three days ago an insulator 
was smashed on the tower within 550 ft. of one of these light- 
ning-arresters, set for six inches. 

J. W. Fraser: It seems to me that the concrete foundations 
we are using at the present time are very expensive. We are 
figuring on a new line, and putting in a sort of button about 
2 ft. in diameter, of cast iron, and putting it down about 5.5 feet 
in the ground. Throughout the Carolinas we have fairly solid 
earth. I see no reason why this foundation should not be as 
effective, and it does not cost as much as concrete. 

Ralph D. Mershon: Mr. Scholes has figured on metallic found- 
ations and anchorages two or three times, and each time the cost 
of metallic foundation is more than the concrete. 

J. W. Fraser: They are using buttons 18 in. in diameter, that 
weigh 106 lb.in the West. I understand that they are perfectly 
satisfactory. 

F.B.H. Paine: The towers used in the West are in places where 
they are not subject to sleet or any of the enormous strains our 
lines are subjected to in this part of the country. It is reason- 
able to suppose that they can adopt the metallic foundation, as 
they can use a lighter tower than we can. 

Ralph D. Mershon: Under the assumptions made for the 
towets of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power Co., the 
resultant of the horizontal and vertical component forces is 
15,000 lb. Under test, the towers must stand twice that. 

J. W. Fraser: Wouldn’t it be as satisfactory to make a lighter 
tower and use one strong tower every mile? 


ele eee 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1315 


Ralph D. Mershon: These towers would not stand the con- 
dition of breakage of all the cables. Every two miles we have a 
guyed tower that will stop all breakages that occur; that is, 
under the conditions of sleet and wind. Mr. Paine can tell you 
something about sleet on telephone wires. 

F. H. B. Paine: <A couple of years ago Mr. Hammond V. 
Hayes was good enough to relieve my mind of the thought that 
Mr. Mershon had provided too great strength in our lines. He 
showed me some plaster casts of wires coated with sleet, which had 
been subject toa wind, according to the United States Weather 
Bureau, of 100 miles an hour, the sleet and wind occurring at the 
same time. That was on telephone wire, and the construction 
came down. The three or four samples I have in mind, which 
he showed me, were either from western Massachusetts or along 
the Hudson valley, in that section, and they occurred during the 
two famous blizzards. 

Ralph D. Mershon: No two engineers will agree on the subject 
_ of sleet and wind. If an electrical engineer who has not done 
much in the way of designing framed structures, designs a line 
in accordance with his ideas of the wind he will encounter, and 
submits his designs to a bridge engineer, the bridge engineer will 
probably say that the assumptions and factors of safety are 
entirely too low. The factors of safety and assumptions for 
our structures have been criticized for being too low and for 
being too high, but I believe we are very close to being right. 

J. W. Fraser: I do not think it advisable to provide against 
abnormal conditions. 

Ralph D. Mershon: It depends on the amount of power; 
a small amount of power is not entitled to the amount of insur- 
ance that a large amount of power is entitled to. If there is 
30,000 h.p. going over a circuit, there is more depending on 
the 30,000 h.p. than there would be with 5,000 h.p. You are 
justified in taking more risk in connection with a 5,000 hp. 
line than you are with a 30,000 h.p. line. The latter serves a much 
greater territory than the 5,000 h.p. and industries and utilities 
which in the aggregate amount to a great deal more than in the 
case of a 5,000 h.p. service. 

J. W. Fraser: We decided that the largest amount of power 
we could carry over oneline normally would be about 6,000 kw. 
Of course that makes a lighter line. 

Ralph D. Mershon: Our conductors starting out over the river 
are larger than they are farther along the line. The cable is 
0.9in in diameter; add 0.5 in. of ice and it becomes a good 
size conductor. 

In regard to the question of wind pressure, I would confirm 
something Mr. Buck said this morning in regard to long spans. 
When we were crossing the Niagara River we had extended over 
the river a light rope used as a messenger rope. It responded 
of course to every impulse of the wind. I have observed this 
rope with the wind blowing pretty hard, and its average position 


1316 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 
scarcely changed at all, but the positions of different portions 
of the rope varied over wide ranges. You could see waves 
running back and forth over it, showing heavy gusts of wind 
in one place, and gusts of wind of lower velocity somewhere else. 
The behavior of the rope confiimed the results of the tests made 
on the Forth bridge, that there is a great difference between 
maximum and mean wind pressure, and that the maximum 
average wind pressure on a small area will be much higher than 
on an extended area. 

J. W. Fraser (by letter): Recently we have had a test made 
on the holding-down power of metallic anchors and the at- 
tached curves have been calculated from data obtained. Mr. 


BASHA RSR ERAS 
SR SSGSr RCRA eee 
Wa AN Veeve sr | TT VV 
tia TT ttt Tg 
i S-e eS 


ae 
NOCH 


BiG sis 


Mershon says that ‘‘ The resultant of the horizontal and ver- 
tical component stresses is, I think, 13,500 lb.” If this is the 
stress at a point 40 ft. from ground, and the base of tower is 
15 ft., each anchor would have to withstand a pull of 18,000 lb. 
Referring to curve B, two 10-in. channels 2 ft. long, spaced 26 in. 
on centers, would have to be sunk 6.5 ft. in the ground. 
The extra cost of these anchors per tower would exceed the 
cost of ordinary anchors by about $18.00. I take it that Mr. 
Mershon was referring to the extra strong towers spaced two 
miles apart, and if I am correct much smaller anchors would be 
ample for the ordinary towers. 


Sey 


BS, Ya ee a el 


ye eee ee eee ee 


1907 DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1317 


It is not only that stone, water, and cement have to be hauled 
long distances by teams, but the work is delayed excessively, 
waiting for either the water or the cement or for the foreman 
to adjust template and set the anchors. In all our line con- 
struction we are obliged to provide camping outfits and board 
for our men, and the delay caused means a great deal more 
money than the paper estimates of the construction of steel 
lines. 


‘we 


Re ae 


te te A 


ee Ne ee ee TT AN PU aR ANE RENT en BM 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


LOCATION OF BROKEN INSULATORS AND OTHER 
TRANSMISSION LINE TROUBLES. 


BY L. C. NICHOLSON 


Injury to a single insulator, under certain conditions of opera- 
tion, renders an entire transmission line, many miles in length, 
entirely inoperative until the faulty insulator be discovered and 
replaced. The longer the line the more difficult it becomes to 
find a broken insulator, or to locate other irregularities in operat- 
ing conditions, and a correspondingly long time is consumed in 
restoring the line to service. 

When long lines are sectionalized by disconnecting-switches 
spaced at regular intervals, it is possible, by successive applica- 
tions of voltage to section after section, to determine the par- 
ticular section which contains the fault, and then to locate 
the exact point of failure by patroling a considerable length of 
line. This process is tedious on account of the necessity of 
manipulating the line-switches upon telephonic advice from 
the generating station, and by reason of the time required to 
patrol the particular section containing the fault. For these 
reasons it is desirable to employ some method of locating faults 
by means of electrical measurements which shall be capable of a 
reasonable degree of accuracy, and of being performed in a short 
time. 

There are several well-known methods of locating faults 
electrically ; among these are the Varley and Murray loop tests. 
These and other ordinary methods operate with low-voltage 
direct current acting upon a Wheatstone bridge arrangement of 
resistances and galvonometer, and are readily applied to metallic 
circuits suffering from a total grounding or short-circuit. If, 
however, the fault be a partial one, such for instance as occurs on ~ 

1319 


1320 NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES [June 26 


a high-voltage transmission system when an insulator becomes 
defective by puncture,or otherwise, it is impracticable to apply 
any of these methods, since a high voltage must act to develop 
any current-flow under these conditions. It is manifestly im- 
practicable to manipulate adjustable resistances quickly and 
accurately in a high-voltage circuit, or to use direct-current in- 
struments such as a galvonometer, because alternating current 
is demanded by the relatively high voltage which it is necessary 
to emplcy. It will be appreciated that, for a fault-locating 
method to be trustworthy, it must be adapted to the normal 
operating potential of the transmission line, inasmuch as 
partial faults sometimes develop which will withstand normal 
voltage for a short time. It is therefore essential and also 
desirable to employ the generating, transforming, and switch- 
board apparatus of the generating station for making fault- 
location tests upon the transmission lines. A simple scheme of 
connections involving the manipulation of a few hook-switches 
has been employed for this purpose upon a long-distance high- 
voltage circuit, and it has been found possible to locate quickly 
and accurately any fault seriously interfering with operation. 

The particular plant upon which such a test has been operated 
transmits power at 60,000 volts, 25 cycles, three phase, over 
lines approximately 160 miles long. The line conductors are of 
aluminum, spaced seven feet apart, and are carried partly on 
steel towers and partly on wooden structures. In both cases 
the insulators are supported on electrically grounded steel pins, 
a ground-wire being used for this purpose on the wooden struc- 
tures. The step-up sending transformers operate delta-star 
with neutral grounded. Under these conditions of operation 
and line construction, it is evident that an insulator becoming 
disabled flashes and holds an arc between the line conductor and 
the insulator pin, which constitutes a short-circuit on one of the 
transformers and prohibits further service until the injured 
insulator be replaced. Causes other than broken insulators 
may interfere with operation; for example, branches of trees 
fouling wires during wind storms, or even malicious interference, 
However, trouble necessarily appears from one wire to earth, 
or from wire to wire. 

The method of locating faults referred to above, consists in 
supplying current from a generator and transformer to the fault 
to earth through a divided circuit or a loop, formed by joining two 
line conductors together at both ends, one of the wires so. con- 


ya Ne SRN a 


AN 


FN ee (oh eee ena 


pias SW) eo 


2907] NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES 1321, 


nected containing the broken insulator to be located. The 
total current supplied divides quantitatively between the 
branches of the loop in a proportion depending upon the ratio 
of the two impedances to the fault which ratio is determined 
by, and therefore is determnative of, the location of the fault. 
Indicating ammeters or integrating wattmeters connected 
in the two branches of the loop by means of proper transformers 
show the current or power supplied through the respective 
conductors. Amperes or watts so measured, together with the 
known electrical constants of the line under test, serve to de- 
termine the geographical location of the fault. Evidently, 
only the relative currents flowing in the two paths at the same 
instant, or the relative integrated power delivered during any 
length of time, need be ascertained. 

_ Fig. 1 shows the scheme of connections which has been em- 


STEP-UP TRANSFORMERS 


FAULT TO EARTH 


= Fig. 1 : 
SCHEME OF CONNECTIONS. 


ployed. The loop consists of wires A and B which have a 
metallic short circuit placed on them at the generating station 
just inside the current transformers, and a similar one at the 
receiving station just outside the disconnecting switches. It is, 
of course, necessary for the generating station operator to order 
a short circuit placed on the proper wires at the distant end of 
the line when a test is to be made. E is the high-tension wind- 
ing of a power transformer. Its connection to earth is 
through the neutral which operates grounded. The particu- 
lar transformer used will depend upon which wire is in distress. 
R isa limiting resistance connected in series with the loop, and 
is designed to limit the total flow of current to the capacity of 
the transformer and the measuring instruments. At V is repre- 
sented a fault to earth, which usually takes the form of a broken 
insulator, over the surface of which current flows through an 


1322 NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES [June 26 


arc. A,, A,, A, represent indicating ammeters in the seconds 
aries of current transformers. 

The limiting resistance R may be connected in either the high- 
or low-tension side of the transformer. The amount of 
resistance used, depends largely upon the character of the 
fault to be located. It must be large enough properly to 
limit the current flow, and must not be so high that it 
will interfere with a continuous flow of current through an arc 
after the fauit has developed. Moreover, when testing for a 
fault which will resist nearly normal voltage on a long trans- 
mission line taking a large charging current, there occurs a loss 
of potential across this resistance on account of the charging 
current flowing through it, so that the potential operating upon 
the fault may be less than normal potential of the system and 
too low to flash over the injured insulator. To obviate the 
necessity, under such conditions of raising the voltage of the 
system above‘normal, an expulsion fuse, F’, shunting this limiting 
resistance has been employed. The capacity of this fuse must 
be at least equal to the normal charging current of the line. 
Its use ensures full voltage at the fault and allows the current 
flow to be properly controlled by the resistance R after the fault 
has developed and the fuse has burned. Any automatic over- 
load circuit-breaker could be substituted for the fuse. 

Since the resistance drop is in quadrature with the condensance 
voltage, a fuse or its equivalent is necessary only when testing 
long lines, and then very rarely. 

A cheap and entirely satisfactory form of resistance, well 
adapted to use in the high-tension circuit, consists of ordinary 
cement concrete columns supplied with expanded-metal termi- 
nals. Four columns, 12 ft. long, a square foot in section, each 
having a resistance cold of about 2000 ohms, have been used in 
multiple or singly as occasion demanded. The temperature- 
resistance coefficient of concrete being large and negative, it is 
an easy matter to arrive at a proper resistance by heating the 
columns with current. Such flexibility in this resistance has at 
times proved very convenient. 

Experience so far obtained, indicates that, in a large majority 
of insulator failures, a 1,000-ohm concrete resistance in the 
high-tension side does not prevent flashing of a broken insulator, 
nor does it interfere with satisfactory current readings. Oc- 
casions do arise when the fuse is necessary, and when a com- 
paratively low resistance must be used to maintain an arc at the 


a 


1907] NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES 1323 


fault long enough to obtain current readings on indicating 


3 ammeters. It appears that after an arc has once been es- 
. tablished it will hold indefinitely, provided the current flow be 
A not too restricted. The more incomplete the fault and the 
3 longer the striking distance, the larger the current required. 
4 From 50 to 100 amperes has proved an appropriate range of 
: current for general testing purposes. Variations that occur 
a when using this amount of current are usually gradual—being due 
ee to decreasing resistance of the concrete—so that there is rarely 
3 any difficulty experienced in obtaining satisfactory simultaneous 
4 ammeter readings during a period of, say, five or ten seconds. 
4 


iBiGwas 


On account of conditions at the fault being unfavorable to a 
steady flow of current, trouble may be had in reading indicating 
instruments which are not dead-beat. In such cases, integrating 
wattmeters may be resorted to, to obtain a comparison between 
the power supplied to the fault through the two sides of a loop. 
Only in extreme cases, such for example as disturbances caused 
by swinging tie-wires or tree branches, is it necessary to use 
wattmeters. 

Fig. 2 shows an insulator broken by a stone in such manner 
that it withstood operating potential for a few seconds, the 
striking distance being about seven inches. This insulator was 

~ located easily with ammeters which were not dead-beat. 


1324 NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES [June 26 


The effect of an arc upon the cable is an important considera- 
tion. If it is burned so as to require splicing, considerably 
more time is consumed in restoring the line to service than if 
only a broken insulator is to be replaced. This is particularly 
true with long spans, on account of the weight of the cable to be 
handled. Under ordinary operating conditions, it is impossible 
to know how much the cable is burned by the short-circuit 
current at breakdown and how much by the testing current. 
Damage to the cable by an are carrying 100 amperes 
sustained forty seconds has been tound to be insignificant 
when the striking distance is several inches. It appears that 
there is some damage if the are is short and confined, such as 
would obtain in the case of an insulator punctured through the 
head. However, during the short period required to read the 
instruments, the cable does not suffer materially. Where 


$+ So, T1, ®, ly 


Se, T2, %e, le 


Fig. 3 


shields are used to protect the cable, there is no damage in any 
event. 

Since the current through the faulty conductor varies from 
one half the total current when the fault is at the distant end of 
the line to the total current when the fault is at the testing 


station, while the current through the other conductor varies — 


from one-half the total current to zero corresponding to the 
same locations, it is desirable that the full-scale value of one 
ammeter should be twice that of the other. For this reason, 
and on account of their superior accuracy, portable instruments 
are preferable to the switchboard type. 

Referring more particularly to the division of current between 
the two paths, it has been found that this division takes place in 
accordance with Ohm’s law, or that the currents J,, J, are in- 
versely proportional to the ohmié resistances 7,, 7, of the two 
branches. 


1907] NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES 1325 


Assuming the resistance volts of the two branches equal, it is 
interesting to note how reactance volts are also equal. The two 
parallel wires constituting the loop, Fig. 3, carry currents in the 
same direction to the fault, and in opposite directions beyond it. 
These currents, J,, [,, are of the same phase and frequency but 
of different magnitude, 7, being larger than J,. Only that 
magnetic flux included between the wires need be considered 
as influencing a division of current, inasmuch as the flux which 
embraces both wires affects only the total impedance of the entire 
circuit. The flux included between the wires up to the fault is 
the resultant of two oppositely acting magnetomotive forces 
separated in space by the distance between centers of wires. 
The flux density at any point within either wire is proportional to 


thecurrent and to the distance from the center, while at any outside 
point it is proportional to the current but inversely proportional 
to the distance from the center. 

Fig. 4 is a graphical representation of magnetic conditions 
existing at any instant. Area ac f b represents flux due to J, 
and area b gka that due to J,, J, being in this case twice as large as 


a vf : 
I,. At m,a point situated so that mage there is a complete 
1 


cancellation of magnetomotive forces. Ifthe two currents are in 
phase, this point remains one of zero flux, and the resultant 
flux on either side of it caused by the difference between the 
two magnetomotive forces is that influencing the current flow in 


1326 NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES [June 26 


the corresponding wires. This resultant, represented by the 
dotted line k u m w f, obtains through a distance S,, Fig. 3, while 
the flux in the loop beyond the fault, represented by the area 
b gka, obtains through a distance S. 


So that, 
d I I,+1 
9 few Ee A Yves 1 2 
ana Las (0.254 log, - 2) TS hs 7 
“onl Go aed ) (1) 
re ay (0.25 + 10g. a” Tore 
1 I, 
—I,S, log. 
I, 
d 
AR (0.25 +108, <) 
where, d = distance between wires 
r = radius of wire 
Assume, 
Via x Meta eer ee 
CARE ITs f i. 
I,—T, 


ies (0.25 + log, <)- Pan, (0.25+1og, ) 


-I,S, (0.25 + log. =) (3) 
Substituting (3) in (1) and expanding, we have, 
PGE PDF 

or the inductance drop is the same over each path. Since the 
total volts are identical, this result follows directly from equa- 
tion (2), as does also the assumption that the two currents are 
in phase. 

From a consideration of resistance only, 


US ae 
Fealy ie 2 = ohms from fault to distant end of line 
I,+2, 144, total resistance of one wire (4) 
2 


Either (2) or (4) may be used to compute fault iocations, 
The latter is less influenced by observation or instrument errors 
and lends itself more readily to graphic representation. If 


on™ 


1907] NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES 1327 


line-structure numbers of a given circuit and the ratio 
I Se! 1 


be used as coordinates, a chart may be constructed, as 


I, = I, 

Fig. 5, from which the fault location may be readily taken. This 

chart contains right lines drawn from the point ‘3 oe 1.00 
2 1 


to the line-structure number at which the loop is closed. 
The use of such a chart makes it possible to test to any point 
along the line at which it may be conveniei.t or desirable to place 
a short circuit, without the inconvenience of computing the 
resistance to that point. Such flexibility and ease of construc- 
tion is not true of a chart based upon the relation between 


has 10 20 30 40 50 60 «70 680) 690 6100 110 120 180 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 
LINE STRUCTURE NUMBERS 


Fig. 5 


2 and the line structure at which the fault occurs, because this 
1 


relation is hyperbolic. 

When testing lines whose conductors are not of uniform 
cross-section throughout, the foregoing method is not applicable 
without modification. Whether large wires be followed by 
small ones, or the reverse, the current flow will not be determined 
by resistance only. If the wires are larger near the testing station 
than farther out, the effect is to locate the fault too far away; 
to locate it too near if small wires be followed by large ones. 
The reason for this is evident from a consideration of the relative 
impedance of the two branches of the loop. The branch having 
the larger ratio of inductance to resistance, of course takes 
relatively less current than that indicated by resistance. A 
comparison of inductances is rendered complex on account of 


1328 NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES June 26 


the phase-displacement which takes place betweer the two 
currents by reason of the disparity between the ratios of in- 
ductance and resistance. 

The error involved through considering resistance only is, 
however, a linear function of the distance from the distant end 
of the line to the fault, if it be in the region beyond the junction 
of the two sizes of the cable, and likewise of the distance from 
the testing station if the fault be nearer than the junction point. 
Thus it is possible, by making a single test upon a fault placed at 
the junction of the two sizes of wire, to obtain a correction which 
is applicable to the entire line. This correction is readily applied 
to the graphic chart mentioned above. It consists of right 
lines drawn from the experimentally determined value of 
PSH to either end of the resistance line. A maximum cor- 
rection of five miles has been found necessary in the case of a 
line made up of 60 miles of 0.75-in. aluminum cable followed by 
70 miles of 0.52-in. cable when testing at 25 cycles per second. 

The following are some of the results so far obtained in locating 
faults by the two-ammeter method: 


Actual 
Length Computed location 
of line I, I, location tower Error 


tower number | number 


25 4472 - 4479 = -|1000 ft. 


118 miles il aa be: 

1 1253 15 4482 4481 200 “ 
ato 1.56 2.4 51/2 Ds 500 “ 
OS ae 0.4 4.5 151 153) 100055 
GO 1.36 3.07 DLs, 513 500 “ 
60 0.8 2.00 520 519 500 “ 
alg) 1.70 2.05 730 731 20085 


This list includes a variety of insulator failures. Some of 
them were complete grounds, while others withstood high 
voltage. In only one case was there any trouble in obtaining 
satisfactory ammeter readings—this being a loose wire swinging 
in a wind storm. 

The time consumed by an experienced operator in making a 
test under ordinary conditions is about thirty minutes There 
is sometimes a delay on account of the necessity of communicating 
with the distant end of the line. 

The test is subject to the following restrictions: when several 


yi 


1907] NICHOLSON: LOCATING LINE TROUBLES 1329 


faults are on a single wire, they must be located in reverse order 
of their insulating values and must be repaired in the order 
located; when all three wires are in trouble, the one having the 
highest insulation cannot be tested until one of the others is 
repaired; if two complete grounds a considerable distance apart 
occur on a single wire, the localizaton will be in serious error. 

These conditions are for the most part exceptional, although 
entirely possible. None of them has presented itself since this 
method of testing has been in use. 


1330 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


D:scussION ON ‘‘ LOCATION OF BROKEN INSULATORS AND OTHER 
TRANSMISSION LINE TROUBLES,” AT NriAGARA FAt.ts, N. Y. 
JUNE 26, 1907 


L. T. Robinson: It seems to me that the method proposed is 
open to some serious limitations, and that the good results ob- 
tained are chiefly on account of the experience of the people 
who have handled it. For instance, in the table, in the first 
example given, an error of 1% in the determination of either 
I, or I, will make the result practically 2,000 ft. instead of 
1,000 ft. 

Ralph D. Mershon: I understand that this break, 1760 ft. 
from the station was located in three-quarters of an hour by an 
ordinary station attendant. One-third of a mile is a small 
portion of 100 miles. 

L. T. Robinson: I was about to say that the thing involved 
is the determination of the ratio between J,+/, and /,—J,. It 
would seem impossible to develop the method further and get 
much greater accuracy. An instrument could be made having 
two windings carrying J, and J, in opposite directions that would 


STEP-UP TRANSFORMER C. TRANS, 2 A 
CBW ee ee ee 
1 5 ©. TRANS.*1 


ee # METALLIC SHORT. 
C. TRANS,” 2 


CIRCUIT ~ 


1 ; ©. TRANS.*3 Aas al 


% 

Lonvnsangns—o~ 
METALLIC SHORT 
CIRCUIT 


RECEIVING STATION 


EARTH 
C. TRANS? 2 


METALLIC SHORT if 


METALLIC SHORT CIRCUIT 


ciRcuUIT =~ 


, 
ANAAAA 0 ae 
C. TRANS.43 ( 


Riced 


STATIONARY 
COILS 


PM 


= 


measure /,—J, directly, and another instrument with two 
windings carrying 7, and J, in the same direction which would 
measure J,+/,, and these could be combined into one instru- 
ment that would determine the ratio of the two quantities di- 
sae This would be an instrument without spring control at 
all. 

_ In Fig. 1 I show such an instrument connected to a circuit 
in the same way that the ammeters are connected in Fig. 1, of 


ee SES 


eee a ee 


1907 DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS i 1331 


the paper. In that part of the sketch lettered Fig. 14 the com- 
pound windings are shown acting on two separate iron vanes, 
mechanically connected, and in 1B both the compound windings 
act on the same iron vane. 

Ralph D. Mershon: You would make these windings affect 
the same core? 

L. T. Robinson: Yes; its action is based on the assumption 
that the two currents are in phase ordinarily, and that the 
line resistance, inductance, and capacity are uniformly distrib- 
uted. An instrument, as described, in which the windings are 
properly placed, and without spring control, would indicate 
the ratio between the two values, previously referred to, and 
its indications could be directly applied to the chart, Fig. 5. 

Ralph D. Mershon: These instrument coils would have to 

be so arranged that they would have comparatively little effect on 
the circuits that feed them. 
_L. T. Robinson: The elements of the instruments would be 
connected to the lines through current transformers, and would 
have no more effect than any ordinary instrument. Being a 
ratio instrument, it would simply be the torque that would fluc- 
tuate for variations in the currents used, and not the torque 
ratio. It would be an instrument similar to a power-factor 
indicator or to a frequency indicator. 

F. B. H. Paine: I think Mr. Nicholson has given a good deal 
of consideration to the various means of improving the details. 
The purpose of the paper is to indicate the possibility of what 
can be done with the ordinary commercial things he had about 
him, and to help us in determining faults and enabling us to 
correct them quickly. He has not quit thinking about the 
matter. Mr. Robinson's comments simply reenforce the im- 
portance of that. 

L. T. Robinson (by letter): To the above I would like to add 
that since this discussion took place it has been pointed out to 
me that a much simpler instrument, embodying the same gen- 
eral principles, but in which there are only two simple windings, 
one carrying / and the other /,, instead of the two compound 
windings, referred to above, would be satisfactory. This is 
obviously true and would simplify the instrument without ren- 
dering it less useful. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By AI. E. E. 


SWITCHBOARD PRACTICE FOR VOLTAGES OF 60,000 
AND UPWARDS 


BY STEPHEN Q. HAYES 

The idea of this paper is to touch briefly on the salient points 
of interest in connection with high-voltage switching practice 
and if possible to bring out in the discussion the opinions of 
various engineers interested in this line of work, relative to such 
points as have not been definitely settled by standard practice 
as being the best solution of the problem. 

The reason for limiting this paper to voltages of 60.000 
and upwards is that, while the design of stations for voltages up 
to 60,000 has often been described, but little has been written 
regarding any for higher pressures. It might be remarked, 
however, that the switchboard practice for these higher pressures 
does not differ very materially from that found desirable for 
voltages from 33,000 to 60,000. In fact. 33,000 volts seems to be 
the critical point at which it is found advisable to change the 
type of switching devices, wiring, etc., and most of the remarks 
in this paper would apply for any installation above 33,000 volts. 

In comparing the merits of different types of apparatus, the 
relative advantages and disadvantages of the conflicting designs 
have been stated in a manner as free from bias as possible, but 
the statements are of course the personal opinions of the writer 
and consequently are open to criticism from others having a 
different point of view. 

The matter of suitable switchboard equipment for any plant 
may be briefly summarized as follows: 

I. General Scheme of Connections. Under this heading it 
is necessary briefly to consider the following matters: 


a. Type of plant. 
1333 


1334 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBUOARDS [June 26 


b. Frequency. 

c. Transformers. 

d. Flexibility versus simplicity. 

e. Main connections. 

Il. Necessary equipment. Under this heading should be 
weighed the relative advantages of the following: 
Switchboards, panel type. 

Switchboards, pedestal type. 

. Switchboards, desk or bench-board type. 
. Types of oil circuit-breakers. 

. Types of disconnecting-switches. 

. Types of protective apparatus. 

Bus-bars and wiring enclosed. 

. Bus-bars and wiring open. 

III. Present design. 

a. Typical station for 60,000 volts. 

b. Typical station for 100,000 volts. 

IV. Future design. 

a. Indoor transformer and switching stations. 

b. Outdoor transformer and switching stations. 

I-a. Type of plant. Without exception, American plants 
operated at or designed for voltages of 60,000 or higher employ 
three-phase circuits and obtain the high voltage by means of 
transformers. For this reason, this is the only type of plant 
which will be considered in this paper as being of practical interest 
at present. 

I-b. Frequency. Nearly all the important transmission 
systems operate at frequencies of 25 or 60 cycles, although 
frequencies between these limits are used in Mexico and else- 
where, and a lower frequency has been suggested for large 
railway work. The switching equipment, however, being 
independent of the frequency, it is unnecessary to consider this 
matter here. 

I-c. Transformers. For plants of the type considered in this 
paper the transformers are invariably oil-insulated and usually 
water-cooled, and may be built either in single-phase or three- 
phase units and connected in delta or star. With delta con- 
nections it is often desirable to cut out any one transformer, 
leaving the remaining two connected in V; knife-switches or oil 
circuit-breakers are sometimes supplied for this purpose in addi- 
tion to the other switches or breakers that would normally be 
used. 


ST MRme Qo TA 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1335 


With star connections, if the neutral is grounded, it is often 
feasible to use smaller switches, breakers, etc., owing to the lower 
insulation strain. By connecting the instrument series trans- 
formers at the neutral point instead of in the main leads a 
cheaper and better arrangement for supplying current to the 
meters or relays can often be made. The relative advantages 
of delta or star connections, being a question of transformers and 
not of switchboards, will not be taken up in this paper. 

I-d. Flexibility versus simplicity. In settling on the design 
of a power plant, it is necessary for the engineer to consider 
carefully the relative importance of flexibility and simplicity, 
and to determine the relative value of apparatus needed only in 
emergencies and the saving resulting from its omission. While 
it is possible to duplicate the equipment of switches, bus-bars, 

etc., so as to take care of almost every contingency, orto reduce 
the equipment so that trouble in one or two places may seriously 
cut down the output of the plant, a happy medium can usually 
be found. 

Although the conditions of each plant have to be carefully 
examined, and due consideration given to the nature of the load, 
capacity of station both for initial and ultimate installation, 
sizes of generator and transformer units available; the general 
problem for all plants is to obtain the maximum amount of 
flexibility and safety, with the minimum cost of apparatus and 
building to house the apparatus. This is particularly true with 
plants for extremely high voltages, and many ingenious and 
effective schemes have therefore been evolved for reducing the 
number of high-tension breakers, switches, etc., to a minimum. 

I-e. Main connections. The paper read by Mr. D. B. Rush- 
more before the annual convention of the Institute in Milwaukee, 
May, 1906, on the subject of ‘‘ Electrical Connections for Power 
Stations,’’ covered the subject so fully that the writer will not 
devote much space to it here. ; 

The relative advantages of the single bus-bar system, double 
bus-bar system, the group system, and the ring system are 
matters for discussion; the particular system decided on is often 
a matter of local conditions and a compromise between flexi- 
bility and cost. 

Except where local conditions of low head or some other cause 
limit the size of the generators, it is usually advisable to have 
the transformer banks equal to the capacity of one or two gen- 
erators, and to have the transmission lines of the same capacity 


1336 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ [June 26 


as the transformer banks, to permit independent operation of 
the outgoing feeders with the minimum amount of apparatus 
and the maximum amount of flexibility. To obtain this flexi- 
bility and ready interchange of units, it is necessary in most 
instances to install a low-tension and a high-tension bus-bar, 
although occasionally it is feasible to have the generators 
connect directly to a bank of transformers or to have the trans- 
former bank feed out directly on the line. 

II. Switchboards. In practically all high-voltage plants of 
recent design, the high-tension circuits are controlled by electri- 
cally operated oil-switches or circuit-breakers. The devices 
for use with these oil-switches are usually mounted on a switch- 
board of the (a) panel type, (b) pedestal type, or (c) desk or 
bench-board type. Occasionally two or more of these types 
are used in the same station. 

The material of the switchboard panels, the top of the control 
desk, or the face of the pedestal is ordinarily blue Vermont marble 
or slate with either oil or marine finish. Blue Vermont marble, 
in the opinion of many people, presents a somewhat finer ap- 
pearance than the slate, but it has the drawback of showing oil- 
stains and scratches, and it is hard to obtain a good match for 
large switchboards. The difficulty of keeping an exact record 
of the shade and markings of the marble shipped to a certain 
customer, in case it is desired to supply additional panels or 
additional desk sections at a later date, militates somewhat 
against its use. 

The slate, whether marine finish or oil finish, has the advantage 
of presenting a far more uniform shade and a shade which may 
be duplicated with almost absolute certainty when additions 
are desired. While it is almost impossible to remove a deep 
scratch or bad spots from a polished blue Vermont-marble panel, 
it is a fairly simple matter with oil-finished or marine-finished 
slate. The oil finished slate panel can be treated with vaseline, 
while with marine finish, additional paint put on with an atomizer 
can be used to cover any spots, scratches, or other imperfections. 
The dull-black finish of the slate, moreover, causes the instru- 
ments, controlling devices, etc., to stand out in bold relief and 
has no tendency to reflect the light in the eyes of the attendant. 

II-a. Panel boards. Where the panel type of board is used, 
the panels aie simply modifications of those required for lower 
voltages. The usual equipment of instruments for the generators 
transformers, feeders, etc., are mounted on the same panels as 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1337 


the controlling devices. This type of construction is used where 
the number of units is comparatively small. and the length of the 
board will not be too great. It is also employed where the 
space needed for the instruments is so great that any attempt 
to reduce the length of the operating board by mounting the 
controlling devices on a desk, or any more compact arrange- 
ment, would result in placing the instruments at such a distance 
from the operator that it wiil be difficult for him to see their 
scales and pick out the meters belonging to any one circuit. 
The plant of the Canadian Niagara Power Company is equipped 
with this type of panel board. 

II-b. Pedestal type. This type of control is ordinarily used 
in plants with voltages lower than those referred to in this 
paper. and where the number of generators 1s small in com- 
parison with the number of feeders. In this case the generators 
are controlled from pedestals while the feeders are controlled 
from panels. This system is, however sometimes used for 
high-voltage plants and was adopted for the distributing station 
of the Ontario Power Company at Niagara Falls. With these 
control pedestals, it is customary to furnish posts for the instru- 
ments. 

II-c. Control desk or bench board. Where it is desired to 
reduce the length of the operating board to a minimum, it is cus. 
tomary to install a control desk or bench board and to mount on 
the top of the desk the various controllers for the circuit-breakers 
electrically operated field-switches, field rheostats, governor 
motors, etc. Wherever possible, the instruments for the 
various circuits are mounted in such a position relative to the 
sections of the control desk as to indicate clearly to the station 
operator the instruments belonging to particular circuits. 

With a control desk, the instruments may be mounted either 
on independent switchboard panels, on panels forming the back 
of the control desk, in an instrument frame back of and 
usually higher than the top of the control desk or on instrument 
posts. Where independent panels are used with a control desk. 
the panels usually occupy a greater amount of space than the 
desk, and it is possible for the station operator to become con- 
fused in determining the instruments belonging with a certain 
generator or feeder whose controlling devices are on the desk. 
As a rule, card-holders or name-plates are placed both on the 
desk and in the panels, and the grouping of the instruments is 
made to correspond as far as possible, with the grouping of the 


controlling devices. 


1338 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS [June 26 


Where the instrument panels form the back of the control 
desk, the instruments are arranged to correspond in location with 
the controlling devices for the same circuits. .This is the type of 
desk used by the Electrical Development Company at Niagara 
Falls. 

A modification of this arrangement permits the station at- 
tendant to face the generator room and readily observe the 
operation of the machine he expects to control. An independent 
instrument frame is provided back of and above the control 
desk and its height is such that the operator looks over the top 
of the desk and under the bottom of the frame. 

A control desk 18 ft. long and an instrument frame of the type 
referred to are shown in Fig. 1, which illustrates the equipment 
- being furnished for the control of six 5000-kw. generators, six 
banks of 88,000-volt transformers, and four 88,000-volt trans- 
mission lines. 

In the plant for which the desk shown in Fig. 1 is used, each 
of the six transformer banks is provided on the high-tension 
side with an electrically operated oil circuit-breaker and a 
double set of disconnecting-switches, so that a bank of trans- 
formers may be connected to either of the two sets of high-ten- 
sion bus-bars. These two sets of high-tension bus-bars are 
divided in the middle, but may be tied together through electri- 
cally operated junction circuit-breakers. The two sets of bus- 
bars on each side of the junction breakers may also be connected 
by means of electrically operated tie-breakers. 

The four outgoing transmission lines are each provided 
with an electrically operated oil circuit-breaker and a double set 
of disconnecting-switches, so that the breaker may be connected 
to either of two sets of bus-bars. With this arrangement it is 
possible to operate the four transmission lines entirely inde- 
pendently, and a very flexible combination of generators, trans- 
formers, and lines may be obtained. 

The top of this desk is made of marine-finished slate, while 
the ends, front,and back are made of planished steel plate, which 
is light, strong and readily.removable to permit access to the 
interior of the desk. The instrument frame is of steel and 
the unit idea has been carried out to allow for future extensions. 

This desk, like most of those where the connections are at all 
complicated, is provided with a miniature bus-bar system with 
the usual red and green lamps to indicate whether a breaker is 
open or closed. As the double-throw system on the high-tension 


Wey 


tol, Me eet ed hk ie es 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1339 


circuits is obtained by means of disconnecting-switches, minia- 
ture disconnecting-switches are placed in the mimic bus-bars. 
The idea is that the station attendant, after closing or opening 
any of the high-tension disconnecting-switches, will report the 


Fic. 1—Control desk for 88,000-volt plant 


fact to the switchboard operator so that the latter may set the 
miniature ones to correspond. As the arrangement of the dis- 
connecting-switches is not likely to be changed from day to 
day, it is believed that this scheme will furnish the operator with 


1340 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ [June 26 


all necessary information as to the conditions of the high-tension 
connections. 

In this plant the electrical control 1s extended to the field and 
exciter circuits as well as to the generators, transformers and 
lines. All the controllers, etc., are mounted on the top of the 
desk, the instruments being in the switchboard frame. With the 
exception of the power-factor meters, where a 360-degree scale 
was desired, and the synchroscope, where it is necessary for 
the needle to revolve, all the meters, both alternating current 
and direct current, are of the same general appearance. 


Fic. 2—Switchboard for exciter and field control for 88,000-volt plant. 


The motor-operated rheostats and the solenoid-operated 
switches for the exciters and the field circuits of the generators 
are arranged to form the panel board shown in Fig. 2. 

The four outgoing 88,000-volt lines were each provided with a 
complete set of graphic recording ammeters, voltmeters, watt- 
meters, power-factor meters, and frequency meters, as well as 
polyphase integrating wattmeters. 

The control desk for the line and transformer circuits in the 
receiving station of this plant is very similar to that for the 
generating station, but some additional refinements are being 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1341 


introduced. Instead of having miniature disconnecting-switches 
on the desk, small green telephone lamps will be placed in the 
miniature bus-bar system on the desk. These lamps will be 
connected in series with a standard incandescent lamp and a 
snap-switch located in the high-tension room, or in the passage 
way from which the disconnecting-switches are to be operated. 
The intention is to have the station attendant, after pulling out 
the disconnecting-switches, turn on the snap-switch and in 
this manner light the green lamp on the desk and the standard 
lamp near the switch. In a similar manner, after closing the 
disconnecting-switch, the snap-switch is turned to extinguish 
the light. Failure of the telephone lamps would indicate the 
danger position ; that is, that disconnecting switches were closed. 

In this receiving station, as it will be difficult for the attendant 
in the passage-way near the disconnecting-switches to see 
whether the oil circuit-breaker is open or closed, red and green 
lamps will be installed opposite each set of disconnecting- 
switches. These lamps will be operated by a signal-switch on 
the oil circuit-breaker in the same manner as the red and green 
indicating lamps on the control desk. 

The synchronous motors of the motor-generating sets, as well 
as the gas-engine-driven generators for the reserve power, are 
to be operated from the control desk, while the railway gen- 
erators and alternating-current and direct-current feeders will be 
controlled from panels. 

II-d. Oil-switches and circuit-breakers. The terms “ oil- 
switch ”’ and “ oil circuit-breaker ’’ are used synonymously in 
this paper. While in a few cases the oil-switches for high-tension 
plants may be and are operated by hand, these cases are excep- 
tional, and only the oil-switches or breakers intended for electrical 
operation will be considered. These are usually one of two 
distinct types, and the engineer has to weigh the relative ad- 
vantages of the different designs. 

One type of switch is essentially a bottom-connected motor- 
operated switch intended for mounting in a masonry structure 
with each pole in a separate fireproof compartment, and each 
contact in a separate pot with terminals at the bottom of the pot. 
The other type of breaker is essentially a top-connected solenoid- 
operated self-contained breaker with the two contacts forming 
one pole in the same tank. The different features of these two 
designs will be taken up in order. 

Bottom-connected versus top-connected. With the bottom- 


1342 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS {june 26 


connected breaker, particularly when made with a wooden pot, 
considerable difficulty is experienced in making an oil-tight 
joint where the contact passes through the bottom of the pot. 
The top-connected breaker does not have this difficulty to con- 
tend with. With the bottom-connected breaker, the operating 
mechanism is entirely separated from the leads, while with 
the top-connected breaker the operating-rod as well as the 
leads pass through the top of the tanks and are necessarily closer 
together than the operating-rod and the leads of the bottom- 
connected breaker, which are at opposite ends of the pots. 

Motor operation versus solenoid operation. On one switch 
the operating mechanism, consisting of a motor with suitable 
rods, springs, clutches, etc., is located on a base above the pots 
and supported by the walls whichform the fireproof compartments 
for the poles. This mechanism is ordinarily at such a height 
from the floor that it is necessary for the station attendant to 
stand on a ladder in order to oil the motor or adjust any of the 
mechanism. 

With the solenoid-operated breaker, the solenoid toggles, etc., 
are located on or near the floor in such a position that the 
station attendants can readily inspect and adjust them while 
standing on the floor. 

Type of oil tanks. The motor-operated bottom-connected 
breaker is arranged with the two pots forming one pole of the 
switch mounted in a common horizontal platform supported at 
the four corners by wooden legs. This type of switch requires 
a comparatively small amount of oil and has the advantage 
that the circuit is opened in two independent receptacles per 
phase. With this bottom-connected arrangement, however» 
the sediment of the oil tends to settle on the contacts. 

The circuit between the terminals in the bottom of the two 
tanks forming one pole of the breaker is made through metal 
plunger-rods attached to a metal cross-piece external to the 
tanks. A motor-operated mechanism connecting through wooden 
rods to the metal cross-piece moves it and the plungers vertically 
upward to open the circuit. The exposed metal parts above 
the tank and the bare terminals below necessitate the enclosing 
of the switch in a masonry structure for the protection of the 
attendant. Doors are provided for each compartment of the 
structure to permit the ready inspection of the tanks, etc., but 
the removal or breaking of a door leaves these live metal parts 
a sgurce of danger. 


————EooOo eee eee 


ay he 


NN 


eT Se Te 


i 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1343 


This motor-operated bottom-connected switch is the type in- 
stalled in the 60,000-volt circuits of the Electrical Development 
Company at Niagara Falls and Toronto. 

With the top-connected solenoid-operated breaker, metal 
tanks with insulated linings are used, and the two stationary 
contacts forming each pole are located under the oil near the 
top of the tank where sediment cannot settle on them. These 
contacts are, however, carefully separated by barriers so that 
the same result is secured as though each contact were in a 
separate tank. 

The circuit between these stationary contacts is completed 
by plungers connected to a cross-arm and moving vertically 
downward to open the circuit. These cross-arms are connected 
through wooden rods to a toggle mechanism operated by a 

_single direct-pull solenoid located on the floor in front of the 
breakers. All the live metal parts are completely submerged 
in oil, while the leads brought out through the top of the case 
are very heavily insulated. As the tanks, mechanism, etc., 
are grounded for the protection of the attendant, there is no 
necessity of enclosing the breaker in a masonry compartment. 

The tops of the tanks are so made that the terminals, contacts, 
etc., can be readily got at for inspection, etc. This top-con- 
nected breaker is built in two different types, one with boiler 
iron tanks for very large capacities and the other with sheet 
metal tanks for smaller capacities. 

The solenoid-operated top-connected breaker with boiler- 
iron tanks is the type installed on the 60,000-volt circuits of the 
Ontario Power Company and is guaranteed to open safely under 
any condition of overload or short-circuit that might arise in a 
plant with 200,000 kw. capacity in generators. The general 
appearance and over-all dimensions of this 60,000-volt breaker are 
shown in Fig. 3, while Fig. 4 covers a similar breaker designed 
for corresponding service at 120,000 volts. 

The other type of top-connected breaker, intended for smaller 
installations and provided with sheet-metal tanks with wooden 
lining, is shown in Figs. 5 and 6, the former giving the over-all 
dimensions and the general appearance of the 60,000-volt breaker, 
while the latter covers the corresponding 88,000-volt breaker. 

While the advocates of the different types of breakers naturally 
favor their own design, and while either type of breaker can be 
arranged to work in with a scheme of enclosed or open wiring, 
the bottom-connected switch is essentially designed for in- 


1344 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS {June 26 


oa 
er 


“WRWAABVALLRABARADERE =| 
WUAUAWUUCuNUTTU UCU 1 


3 
ie 
[  H 
| Re er, 
CQO 
| 4! CAN I 
yt tee 
--- iA 


fa 
AWA RRADRRERER! 


2 AF 


4s 


24F 


$65 


+ {H 


5 

I 

y 

h, RUD i 
A A 
| | 

59 I 

‘ 


TO ee 


21 8 


Fic. 3—60,000-volt, top-connected breaker with boiler-iron tanks 


Wawa savanwan’ 


7 
SY 


49 
f 
% >) 

ja 
+/) 
+ + | 

== Sse) 
LF 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1345 


stallation where the wiring, bus-bars, etc., are placed in masonry 
compartments, while the top-connected breaker is intended 
primarily for plants where the high-tension wiring is over- 
head and entirely open. 

The claim is made for each system that its type of breaker is 
less liable to get out of order than the other design. Both types 
are giving satisfaction under actual operating conditions, and 
the weak points of each breaker are being corrected as rapidly 
as they are discovered. 

Where the control voltage is normal, the speed of operation is 
practically the same for the motor-operated and solenoid-oper- 
ated breakers. If the operating voltage is too low, however, 


—— 20-7" | [= ue at 
Fic. 4—120,000-volt top-connected breaker with boiler-iron tanks. 


the motor-operated breaker closes and opens somewhat more 
quickly than the solenoid breaker, but with the motor-operated 
breaker some little time is required after the breaker closes until 
the motor has wound up the spring to trip the breaker out again. 
Both designs of breakers may be so counterbalanced that in 
case of ordinary trouble either type will tend to fall open rather 
than to fall closed. However, if the wooden operating-rods to 
which the moving contacts are attached should break, the 
bottom-connected breaker would tend to fall closed, while the top- 
connected breaker would tend to fall open. Although there is 
little likelihood of breaking the wooden operating-rods of either 
type, such an accident is possible. Under this condition the 
top-connected breaker would have a decided advantage. 


1346 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ [June 26 
Where it is desired to have the breakers automatic, this is 
done by providing either a series trip-coil, ordinarily located 


in the tank underneath the oil, or a series transformer. In 
either case the operation of the series trip or the series transformer 


Sea 


Fic. 5—60,000-volt top-connected breaker with sheet-metal tanks 


closes the direct-current trip-circuit, instead of operating directly 
on the mechanism of the switch or breaker. 

The advantage of the series trip-coil is largely on account of its 
being cheaper, while the advantage of the series transformer ar- 
rangement iies in the increased insulation obtained and inthe fact 


1907] 


HAYES: HIGH VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 


Oh Jem a | 


MM 
0) 


iii | 
N | 


it 


9 
Ds 


a) 


347 


Fic. 6—88,000-volt top-connected breaker with sheet-metal tanks 


1348 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ [June 26 


that series transformers may be needed in case it is desired to 
operate meters on the switchboard to indicate the current, 
output, etc., of the lines in which these high-tension breakers are 
connected. 

The two types of breakers previously described may be ar- 
ranged for operation either with series trip-coils or with series 
transformers. 

While the question of automatic or non-automatic breakers 
for generators, transformers, and line circuits is orten a matter of 
opinion, the general practice seems to be as follows: 

Generator circuit-breakers are usually made non-automatic, al- 
though occasionally provided with reverse-current relays. The oil 
circuit-breakers on the low-tension side of the step-up transform- 
ers are usually provided with overload relays. The oil circuit- 
breakers on the high-tension side of the step-up transformers 
are usually made non-automatic, although occasionally a 
differential relay is furnished which operates in case of a local 
short-circuit in the transformer to cut off both the high-tension 
and the low-tension breakers. 

The breakers for the outgoing transmission lines are ordinarily 
provided with overload relays. Relays for the different breakers 
are made instantaneous, definite time relays, or inverse time 
relays, depending on conditions. 

Il-e. Disconnecting-switches. The disconnecting-switches used 
on high-tension plants consist almost invariably of a plain 
knife-switch mounted on high-tension line insulators, this 
switch being operated by means of a pole with a hook in one end. 
In some plants an operating mechanism is installed for opening 
the three disconnecting-switches of a three-phase circuit at the 
same time. 

Where the disconnecting-switches are not readily accessible 
from the operating floor, they are sometimes provided with a 
projecting arm so that the station attendant may more readily 
open them by means of a direct vertical pull or push of his 
operating stick. In some cases where the disconnecting-switches 
are located in inaccessible positions, it has been proposed to open 
and close them by means of a solenoid or motor-driven mechan- 
ism. These high-tension disconnecting-switches have in most 
cases been mounted on porcelain insulators, but composition 
insulators have also been used for this purpose. 

The pins for these insulators are made of wood, metal, 
or composition, depending largely on the individual preference 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1349 


of the designer. The relative advantages of the different kinds 
of insulators and pins is not a question which comes within the 
scope of this paper. 

II-7. Protective apparatus. In connection with lightning 
protection for high-tension plants, choke-coils, either of the 
open type or of the oil-immersed type, have been largely used. 
In this work the strain developed across adjacent turns in the 
choke-coils is so great when the coil performs the function 
normally expected of it that oil insulation is necessary to obtain 
the best results. 

II-g. Bus-bars and wiring. As mentioned in the earlier 
portion of this paper, the bottom-connected breakers are chiefly 
used with the enclosed system of wiring and bus-bars, and the 
top-connected breakers with the open system. There is a con- 


siderable difference in opinion between the advocates of the 


enclosed and open systems regarding the relative advantages 
and disadvantages of the two arrangements. 

The enclosed system of bus-bars, wiring etc., for high-voltage 
plants is an extension of what is acknowledged to be the best 
standard practice for voltages up to 13,000, and is intended to 
provide additional safety for the station operator and additional 
security against a shut-down such as might be caused by some- 
thing getting across the bus-bars. 

II-h. Those who favor the open system base their arguments 
on the following grounds. First, the violence of an arc and the 
destructive effect of short-circuit depend on the amount of 
current available at the point of short-circuit, or, for the same 
amount of power, is inversely proportional to the voltage, so that 
while fireproof barriers and cellular construction are required 
on large capacity plants of comparatively low voltage, they are 
unnecessary for higher voltage plants of the same, or even larger 
capacity. 

Secondly, as the fireproof barriers offer a more or less perfect 
ground for high-voltage circuits, the striking distance from wire 
to ground has to be greatly reduced over \hat could be obtained 
with open wiring in the same space. The higher the voltage the 
more perfect the ground. 

Thirdly, the use of enclosed bus-bars and wiring ordinarily 
necessitates several floors or galleries and a more expensive 
building than is the case with the open wiring. 

Fourthly, it is more difficult to inspect and repair bus-bars, 
wiring, disconnecting-switches, lightning-arresters, etc., that are 


1350 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS {June 26 


boxed in masonry compartments and only visible and accessible 
by the removal of doors than if everything is in plain sight. 
Incipient trouble will be noticed far sooner with open wiring 
than with enclosed, and inspection will be more frequent and 
thorough if the station attendant in a few minutes’ walk can see 
everything, than if he had to remove several hundred doors and 
visit two or three floors to examine the condition of the apparatus. 

Typical examples of the enclosed and open systems of wiring 
for 60,000-volt circuits are the transformer houses of the Electri- 
cal Development Company at Niagara and Toronto, and of the 
Ontario Power Company at Niagara Falls. 

One of the most striking differences in the two plants, due 
partly to the use of bottom-connected breakers and enclosed 
bus-bars in one case, and the top-connected breakers and open 
bus-bars in the other, is in the location of the disconnecting- 
switches which isolate the oil-switches or circuit-breakers from 
the bus-bars. 

In the former case they are below the oil-switches and in- 
visible from the switch-room without removing the doors of the 
switch-compartments, and cannot readily be opened without 
going down stairs. The station attendant adjusting or cleaning 
a breaker is on a different floor from the disconnecting-switch, 
which, if closed through a misunderstanding of orders by a second 
attendant, will make the oil-switch terminals alive, with conse- 
quent grave danger to the cleaner. 

In the station of the Ontario Power Company the disconnecting 
switches are directly above the oil circuit-breaker, can be pulled 
by the attendant standing at the breaker, and cannot readily be 
closed without the knowledge and consent of the man working 
on the breaker. 

Ill-a. Present stations 60,000 volts. In order to give an 
idea of the relative space required for 60,000-volt and 100,- 
000-volt plants, the preliminary drawings prepared for two 
different stations of approximately the same capacity and same 
general arrangement are shown in Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. 

Figs. 7, 8, and 9 show the plan, elevation, and section of the 
transformer and switching house to be built on the side of a hill 
for a plant containing eight 7500-kw. 6600-volt generators, and 
twelve 5000-kw. 6600- to 60,000-volt step-up transformers, 
with four outgoing transmission lines. In this station the 
transformers are delta-connected on both the low-tension and 
high-tension sides and knife-type disconnecting-switches, have 


HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1351 


1907] 


We IoA-YUO'OY “eSHOY SulyoyMs puv JouLIOJsaeIy Jo urTG—) ‘Iq 


_ WO0OY YOLVYYINID F TIJZHM YILUM 


Tele ey 
sir cpt yey) 


—=s 


#| 3 SA 
ae ae ala 
ieee 


uP PO 


2a 


= 


| 
02 8E ee he OrS/ 


1352 HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ [June 26 


been provided for cutting out any one transformer in any bank. 
The high-tension connections are so made that each transformer 
bank feeds a short section of bus-bars. This short section of 


hated, 
Sections remen on tines AA EG of shoren/$! 8. 


SECTIONG ES 
: 


tf ag, 
a0 


SECTION 0-0. 
Fic, 8—Elevation of transformer and switching house, 60,000-volt plant 


FLECTAICALLY OPERATED FIELO RHEOSTATS. 


ELLECTAICALLY OPERATED FIELD SWITCHES 


SECTIONC-C 


BARESTER 


SECTIONE-B 


LIGHTNING 


SECTIONRA 


bus-bars can be connected through a circuit-breaker to the 
main high-tension bus-bar, or through a different circuit-breaker 
to the outgoing transmission line. 


it 


1907) HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1353 


III-b. Present stations 100,000 volts. Figs. 10 and 11 show 
respectively the plan and section of the transformer and switching 
house, also on the side of a hill, proposed for the control of ten 
5000-kw. 6600-volt three-phase generators, and twelve 4000-kw. 
6600- to 66,000-volt step-up transformers. This station will 
be first installed with the transformers connected in delta both 
on the low-tension and on the high-tension, and will later be 
changed over to star connections on the high-tension for operating 


\4 


| 
\ 


HK 
5 . = V4 
SSSI TY 


SS 


eZ 


Ey A4 


WAAAY 


Be 
SSS 


f 
f i 
ma 
Chore 
Con | 
== 


es — g 
LAUER LLL LLL LLL LP 


a Uy 
ASS « 
A 


Grade une 


N 
PSH 


SSG ossss 


XY 


sf 


SSS 


EKKOWN 
SV 


Section *ohen or une HH Sketch ® [$108 


Fic. 9—Section of transformer and switcning house, 60,000-volt plant 


at 100,000 volts. All the bus-bars, wiring, etc., have been 
spaced suitably, and all breakers, switches, etc., supplied for 
this higher voltage. 

While operating at 66,000 volts, disconnecting-switches will 
be used both on the low-tension and on the high-tension side of 
the step-up transformers for cutting any one transformer out of 
the bank. 

The main connections of this plant will be similar to those of 
the plant previously described; namely, each bank of trans- 


HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS _ {June 26 


1354 


hinaesel 


= SAMA BAAN EEE QO 


VIZ) 


queld 30A-000‘00T ‘esnoy SUIYyo}IMS PU IOUIIOJsuI} Jo UL[G—OI “SIY 


IMI Dt 2eardefewiay p P4200 D 
Fated asa? 2014 0/f oft! plily 


a ie 


aS 
oS nae 
tit 


CT COMTI TTT 
tance anes 


ZEETTILII MMMM; 


aN 


2 
Cray 


WELLL VL gle 


l 
ea 


Fini 


TT 
ae | 


= 


Einuvey 


{I 


= Bus 


SSS" ESLER 


SS 
FRVVNN 


Z 
g 


ep 


VERMA 


we ao ww 


1907] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1355 


formers feeds a short section of transformer bus-bar, which 
transformer bus-bar can be connected through a breaker either 
to the main station bus-bar or through another breaker to the 
high-tension outgoing feeder. 


Circurt 


Ou 


Penge Nav sa Floor 


H 
iH 
; 4 
ee, Sa 
OSNOW saMdd 


The low-tension connections are arranged on a straight 
double-throw system, as indicated by the miniature bus-bar on 
the control desk shown in Fig. 12, and it may be noted that the 
entire equipment of this station will not be installed at first. 


Fic. 11—Section of transformer and switching house, 100,000-volt plant 


SaQls 9209 ywos/ 
BYE DHSS PUOSFoy 

248 Ysted QultoE 
WuIM paplacd? ¥5aO 


Spee, 1of 
wwyeo yc] 20g 


eel 


buyed 
Aeyep 


1, reer te 
‘ 


quryd 3J0A-000'00T 40} AS9P [o4 


ema ss 2 Senne ry 


rage CUB TF 


on 


2S) BO 98 l $e FF Ete lby 4 


Pomasecjecearclea es senor ree y ween ee 


wr ID svoy7as jo 52/02/02 s70%8 99 114 0-1 $UOM IAF BEIY{ \ 7101 
‘ i ‘ 


' ‘ 
H ‘ 

‘1 ' ‘ ZOU Ors? Oss: 

' ‘ 

ieednes ee ee 


es ee 


woyoyolee: gh Ys BaNdane 
SGac osees 20f sojoroddy 

Cb AS y20/g 41m 

204280) C/O Pup POUfOP eA4s 
enpesoddo 10 f pay4P 8901S 

qesss29 {S==7 


y200 Lanes «0 hem 124/29 
LaU44 29 UO? B{LIWALEY 
biurtwesgIuA$ Gi [UOC C044 
PIbsOsdO OF GPYIOLG LIONS 


ae eps oS A oe ea ee eee 


%n 099 e,41veg /9v0d{| Fy VIQ) 4a OE Sv0rl| bs vID 


H 
1 
' 
Be 199) be YUOT ISUCY' Bx 12D), YUeG SSUOL, | ky VID, Sy VP 
w ' . 
: ! 
' i 
' : 
; 


i i : 
ih-p-y- -L------L.---. ------ J--- 


Mea etaete = oops n= =a 


Bes Raa) ha ee ee ee eer ee tt A 


<a set 0:8 cate Sage a—t oho eas dpe —h—$ 92 


VOae COGO 4S PHIL y aa GB v0ereriaset 1841 
-O6/ ee 


Oe NEB 


wormegsr BrTueZ 


! PUOLUY + ve Ge A aa 


i asoy (00016. ocwootie 


FAG B40 OM PE 


1907.] HAYES: HIGH-VOLTAGE SWITCHBOARDS 1357 


IV-a. Future stations; zndoor. As may be noted from Figs. 
6 to 11 the amount of space necessary for the circuit-breakers, 
switches, bus-bars etc., for a high-voltage transmission plant is 
comparatively great and it requires a large building to contain 
them. 

IV-b. Future stations; outdoor. It is quite possible that in 
the not far-distant future where the climate is not too severe, 
high-tension transformer houses with their breakers, bus- 
bars, etc., will no longer be used; the transformers, oil circuit- 
breakers, disconnecting-switches, bus-bars, wiring, and con- 
nections will probably be in the open air. 

The oil-immersed water-cooled transformers and the electri- 
cally-operated oil-switches are well designed to stand out-of- 
door conditions. Disconnecting-switches have often been used 
-in high-tension transmission lines mounted on the poles, and 
the use of electrolytic lightning-arresters with the choke-coils 
combined in the transformer cases will readily permit of this out- 
of-door operation. 

The top-connected circuit-breakers and the open arrangement 
of bus-bars and wiring are particularly suited for an out-of-door 
transforming station, andit may not be long before such a station 
is designed and installed. 


1358 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


Discussion ON HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION PAPERS AT NIAG- 
ARA Fats, N. Y., JUNE 26, 1907 


P. M. Lincoln: An inspection of some of the illustrations 
shows that there is a very apparent angle in the cables at the 
point where they are attached to the tower structures at the 
bottom of the gorge. This angle would indicate that the 
strain at that point is downward. I would like to know why 
this method of construction was used. It surely cannot be on 
account of relieving the supports at the top of the bank of 
strains due to a long span, because the strains in the cables 
must necessarily be increased by the amount of the downward 
strain at the point where they are attached to these structures. 

F. B. H. Paine: The cables drop from the cantilever loosely 
to the river-edge tower on which they are dead-ended. The 
cantilevers support the weight, and the water-edge towers simply 
hold them out of the vertical sufficiently to prevent their hanging 
too close to the steep hillside. 

P. M. Lincoln: It seems to me that exactly the opposite 
effect would be obtained by this construction, since the curve 
which would naturally fall would be made more abrupt by 
pulling down at this point. 

F. B. H. Paine: The span across the river is quite independent 
of the slope-spans, and is dead-ended on each water-edge tower. 
The crossing is not a catenary into which the water-edge towers 
are inserted and steady the cables. It is three independent 
dead-ended spans; two almost vertical and one almost horizontal. 

P. M. Lincoln: I do not see why it is necessary to attach 
to the towers at that point. 

F. B. H. Paine: Mr. Mershon divided the crossing into the 
three spans to avoid the effects of tremendous winds in the 
Niagara. Gorge—blowing both ways at once—and which un- 
usual condition he feared would result in swinging the cables 
together. He wanted as short a span as possible and as close 
to the bottom as possible, to avoid the effects of the cross-winds 
on one span. I believe our experience shows that the effect 
of these winds was exaggerated by the ‘‘ oldest inhabitant.” 

D. B. Rushmore: Some of Mr. Mershon’s power consumers 
get their power from a single line, and I think it is open to dis- 
cussion whether such a practice is justified. In the line con- 
struction shown, some pertinent questions arise; for instance, 
from the experience given in the paper by Mr. Rowe, it has 
been found necessary to put the top conductor below the others, 
and to run the ground wire in its place. I think that a similar 
change would be desirable here. 

The questions at once arise, why are the wires on separate 
towers? Why is a single tower not used to carry both sets of 
wires? Under what conditions can one high-tension line near 
another be repaired while the otnei is in operation? 

Mr. Buck shows a iine construction for very high voltage 


~ 


ee 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1359 


and he puts both lines on the same tower. Can he repair one 
line if the other is in operation? 

The wooden A-poles which Mr. Mershon shows have got to 
be replaced every eight years, we will say, but not all poles will 
last eight years. Every time a poleis replaced, the transmission 
of power is interrupted, and while at first the interruptions from 
this cause are not many, they finally become so frequent that 
customers grow impatient and new customers cannot be got. 
Under these conditions it seems to me that a single line trans- 
mission with a wooden pole construction is not economically 
justified. 

H. W. Buck: Regarding the possibility of working on one 
line with the other line alive: in Fig. 2, with the tower grounded 
and with the circuit out of service grounded, I see no reason 
why a man should not safely work on that dead circuit. He 
would have the whole tower structure between him and the 
live circuit, and the circuits are quite a distance apart, about 
20 feet. 

J. B. Taylor: Mr. Nicholson’s method of locating breaks, 
or more properly grounds, on high-tension lines is extremely 
valuable, the broken insulator being the trouble which is most 
often experienced. I think that the transmission system on 
which he has made his tests was fortunate in having a man 
who could take up work of this sort, possess the proper ingenuity 
to make the proper application for the particular trouble, and 
be on the ground when the trouble came; but 1 doubt if the 
average transmission plant will install the necessary switches 
and resistances and have the experts to locate troubles in this 
mannet. 

A plant that was started up about five years ago had a fourth 
wire installed on a three-phase system. The idea was that 
when one of the three wires got into trouble, a simple system 
of knife-switches could. cut in the fourth wire, and everything 
would go along as usual. The line has had occasional trouble, 
but for one reason or another—either because the operating 
force did not feel sufficiently sure of the conditions to cut in 
the spare wire, or because they felt that the trouble was of such 
a nature that it was unsafe to attempt to resume service before 
knowing what the trouble was—the fourth line has not been used. 

I have not checked the mathematical equations in the paper, 
but offhand it is not obvious why the reactances of the long and 
short sides of the loop should come out in the same ratio as the 
resistances. The inductive effect of the return current in the 
earth does not appear in the analysis, and under some conditions 
this appears to be an essential factor. However, the accuracy of 
the test locations shows the method to be right for the average 
transmission line when the two sides of the circuit are separated 
by a few feet. 

Without doubt Mr. Nicholson has considered other schemes 
for locating these troubles. I wonder if he has tried to locate 


1360 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 26 


a broken insulator by merely passing the current over the faulty 
wire to ground and measuring the induced voltage in a neigh- 
boring wire—one of the transmission wires, neighboring tele- 
phone lines, or anything that happened to be handy. As- 
suming the wires at uniform separation, the induced voltage 
should be proportional to the length. 

William McClellan: It appears as if every essential point had 
been considered in the design of Mr. Hewlett’s insulator. In 
the long run it should be cheaper, though the first cost would 
remain the same as for present types. Those of us who have 
had experience with large 60,000-volt insulators made of cemented 
shells know what it means to discard an insulator because of a 
simple broken shell. Another point is the benefit of the full 
dielectric strength of the material used. We all know that the 
breakdown potential of a cemented insulator is considerably 
less than the sum of the breakdown potentials of the separate 
shells. 

Regarding Mr. Hayes’ paper, I think emphasis should be 
laid on the desirability of the open type of wiring for potentials 
over, say, 25,000 volts. For higher potentials there is a strong 
tendency among engineers toward outdoor stations, though it 
must be acknowledged that the last word on this subject will 
not be said for some time to come. I think that we should 
cease putting up ordinary knife-switches to be opened with a 
pole in the hands of a man on a shaky platform 25 feet from 
the ground. Very simple switches to be opened from the ground 
have been designed by certain operators in the West and marked 
attention should be given to this simple but, at times, very im- 
portant part of the high-tension apparatus. 

W. N. Smith: Has the matter of icicles forming between the 
successive petticoats of insulators of the type proposed by Mr. 
Hewlett been given due consideration? It would seem as though 
a chain of insulators, one above the other, might perhaps enable 
icicles to be formed that would connect from one disk to another. 
Unless there has been experience to the contrary, I should hesi- 
tate to condemn the ordinary petticoat type on account of icicle 
formation between petticoats, which I think would be fully as 
difficult to consummate with the petticoat type as with the new 
insulator proposed by Mr. Hewlett. 

L. C. Nicholson: In regard to Mr. Taylor’s suggestion as to 
measuring voltage generated in a parallel wire, I will say that 
some such methods have been undertaken, but the results ob- 
tained were not encouraging, particularly on account of parallel 
circuits which were in operation at the time, interfering with 
any measurements of induced voltage in the parallel wire. 
In case of only one line, I presume some such test could be made, 
but having more than one line one interferes with the test on 
the other by electrostatic and electromagnetic induction. In 
any case, I think it would be necessary to have two instruments; 
an ammeter to measure the current flowing, and a voltmeter 
to measure the induction, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS& 1361 


S. Q. Hayes: The 200,000 kw. given as the capacity of the 
oil circuit-breaker is correct; that is, the manufacturers guar- 
antee that that switch will be able to open any overload or 
short-circuit that will occur on the station having that capacity 
on the bus-bars. Up to the present time there is no station 
with that capacity on the bus-bars. 

In connection with the troubles in pulling disconnected- 
switches, it has been proposed in several cases where the dis- 
connecting switches are in rather inaccessible positions to operate, 
them by means of a soleloid or motor-driven mechanism. 

J. H. Finney (by letter): It seems to me that Mr. Mershon’s 
method of tying-in is not so simple as might be employed, 
although the tie is very ingenious; the chief objection to it is 
the large amount of tie-wire required, and the fact that the 
cable is not firmly fastened to the insulator, but simply lies in 
the top groove. 


mee = = 


ae 


Bigs i. FTGaey Fie 3. 


I would like to call attention to a tie which not only embodies 
simplicity and a small amount of tie-wire, but has the advan- 
tage of holding the conductor firmly on every side, as will be 
seen by the accompanying illustrations. The tie is made by 
straddling the line wire and top of the insulators as shown in 
Fig. 1. Both ends are then carried around the neck of the 
insulator in the same direction as shown in Fig. 2. Having 
made a half circle of the insulator, the ends are made off by 
taking a number of turns around the line conductor shown in 
Fig. 3. This makes a symmetrical tie, the conductor being 
held without danger of kinks, and is not subjected to any 
strains which would tend to cause abrasion and breakage of 
either tie-wire or conductor. The strain is uniformly dis- 
tributed around the head of the insulator, the conductor being 
held firmly in the groove. This tie is decidedly cheaper than 
clamps, is more easily installed, and, in my opinion is not only 


1362 DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1907] 


more desirable than clamps, but is one of the best designed 
ties, from all standpoints, of which I have knowledge. 

F. G. Baum (by letter): When trouble occurs on a line similar 
to that considered by Mr. Nicholson, the station operator will 
try to find the section of line on which the trouble is located. 
The trouble may be a broken insulator, or it may be more seri- 
ous, and repeatedly to throw power on a disabled line to test it 
may at some time cause very serious consequences. Furthber- 
more, having located the section of the line in trouble, the oper- 
ator will at once start patrolmen from each end of the sec 
tion. After the point at fault is located it will require one 
man, and very often two men, to repair the break. Until the 
men arrive at the break it is not certain what must be done 
and what materials will be required. Hence, while the tes} 
method may be of some advantage in some cases, generally 
one would have to use the sure way in addition to it. Power 
should not be thrown on a disabled line more than necessary, 
_as life and property may thereby be endangered. 

Ralph D. Mershon (by letter): Replying to the points raised 
‘by Mr. Rushmore. Whether or not service from a single line 
is justified, depends upon the value and importance of the 
customer. One would be justified in going to the expense of 
two lines for a large and important customer, but such expense 
would render the business of a small customer unprofitable. 
Mr. Rushmore raises the question of the grounded wire. I have 
never been fully convinced that the grounded wire actually 
affords an appreciable amount of protection against lightning, 
or, at any rate, an amount of protection which would justify 
the expense of installing it. I had hoped that Mr. Rowe would, 
in his paper, bring more convincing proof of the value of the 
grounded wire than has been submitted in the past by those 
defending it, but I must say I cannot see that he has done this. 
The question of two-circuit towers vs. single-circuit towers is 
one on which many arguments can be advanced on both sides. 
In the end, the choice must be largely decided by the conditions 
to be met. In our case it seemed best, for a variety of reasons, 
to make use of the single-circuit towers. What Mr. Rushmore 
says in regard to wooden pole-line construction is true in many 
cases; it is not true in this case however. Where the A-frames 
were installed, the amount of space available was not sufficient 
to allow of tower construction, and steel-pole construction 
would not only have been more expensive than wooden poles, 
from every standpoint, but the necessary deliveries of steel poles 
could not have been obtained. 

As regards Mr. Finney’s tie, I would say that the tie we used 
was adopted for the reasons set forth in the paper, and only 
after an exhaustive series of tests on all the ties we knew of or 
could devise. If Mr. Finney will make actual pulling tests on 
his tie with aluminum cable and aluminum tie wire, he will 
find, I think, that it will not fulfil the conditions which, as ex- 
plained in the paper, it was desired to meet, and which the tie 
adopted does meet. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


DEFLOCCULATED GRAPHITE 


BY EDWARD G. ACHESON 


The subject-matter of this address is not in any sense elec- 
trical in character, but the effect described was discovered 
as the result of electrical work and the products obtainable by it 
may, with advantage, be used in electrical work and machinery. 
Such is my excuse for offering these remarks before this Institute. 

In the year 1901, I was engaged in a series of experiments hav- 
img as their object the production of crucibles from artificial 
graphite. In this work I was led into a study of clays. What 
I learned may be briefly stated as follows: 1. The American 
manufacturers of graphite crucibles imported from Germany 
the clay used by them as a binder of the graphite entering into 
the crucibles. 2. The Germany clays are much more plastic 
and have a greater tensile strength than American clays of 
similar chemical composition. 3. Residual clays—those found 
at or near the point at which the parent feldspathic rock was 
decomposed—are not in any sense as plastic or strong as the 
same clays are when found as sedimentary clays at a distance 
from their place of origin. 4. Chemical analysis failed to account 
for these decided differences. 

I reasoned that the greater plasticity and tensile strength were 
developed during the period of transportation from the place 
of their formation to their final bed, and I thought it might be 
due to the presence of extracts from vegetation being in the 
waters which carried them. I made several experiments on 
clay with vegetable extracts, tannin being one of them, and I 
found that a moderately plastic, weak clay, when treated with 
a dilute solution of gallotannic acid or extract of straw, was 


increased in plasticity—made stronger in some cases as much 
1363 


1364 ACHESON: DEFLOCCULATED GRAPHITE [June 27 


as three hundred per cent.—required but 60 per cent. as much 
water to produce a given degree of fluidity, was caused to re- 
main suspended in water, and made so fine in particles that 
it would pass through a fine filter-paper. Being acquainted 
with the record of how the Egyptians had the children of 
Israel use straw in the making of bricks, and believing it was 
used not for any benefits derivable from the weak fibres but 
for the extract, I called clay so treated Egyptianized clay. 

Having in 1906 discovered a process of producing a fine puwe 
unctuous graphite, I undertook to work out the details of its 
application as a lubricant. In the dry form, or mixed with 
grease or oil, it was easy to handle, but I wished it to enter the 
entire field of lubrication as occupied by oil. In my first efforts 
to suspend it in oil I met the same troubles encountered by my 
predecessors in this line of work; it would quickly settle out of 
the oil. My unctuous graphite was just plain simple graphite, 
and obeyed the same laws covering the natural product. So 
things stood until the latter part of 1906 when the thought oc- 
curred to me that tannin might have the same effect on graphite 
that it had on clay. I tried it with satisfactory results. I 
will now show you the effect and how it is produced. 

I will take for the experiment two equal quantities of my 
unctuous graphite, as produced in the electrical furnace. When 
in this form, I call it disintegrated unctuous graphite. To one 
sample I will add plain water, and, after rubbing up in a 
mortar, I pour it into a test tube. To the other sample I will 
add water, a little gallotannic acid, and a few drops of ammonia. 
This last is not always necessary, but I find it improves the 
results with some waters. I will now rub the mixture inthe 
mortar as in the first case, and then pour into a test tube. I will 
now shake up both tubes simultaneously and place them in a 
rack to settle. 

Two minutes have now elapsed since the shaking and we find 
the graphite in the plain water has very completely separated 
from the water, not being miscible therewith, while the mixture 
of graphite, water, tannin, and ammonia remains as black as 
when shaken up. The graphite is miscible with the water in 
this mixture; it is suspended and would continue so indefinitely, 
at least I have found it to remain so for months, and I do not see 
why it should settle or separate thenext day, week, month, or year. 

While this experiment,-as you have seen it performed, shows 
the effect, the result is much improved by time. I have here a 


1907] ACHESON: DEFLOCCULATED GRAPHITE 1365 


bottle in which there are graphite, water, tannin, and ammonia 
which have been mixed for some weeks. The graphite isin what 
I calla deflocculated condition, a condition of fineness beyond 
that attainable by mechanical means, a condition approaching, 
if indeed not actually attaining, the molecular state. It is so 
fine as to pass with ease through the finest filter-paper. Here 
I have a glass funnel containing one of the finest filter-papers 
manufactured, and on this paper I will pour_a little of the 
water and deflocculated graphite. See it run through the 
paper and collect in the tube, as black as ever and apparently 
unchanged. In fact it remains so black and has passed through 
so rapidly that a doubt exists in your minds as to its really 
being a mixture of water and solid matter—water and graphite. 
I can quickly convince you that such is the case. 

Into the test tube containing the black liquid which has 
passed through the filter, I will now introduce a few drops of 
hydrochloric acid, and then slightly warm it over this spirit- 
lamp flame. These acts have caused the suspended graphite to 
floccluate and when I now pour the liquid onto a second filter 
paper, you see the water run through clear, the graphite re- 
maining on the paper. Removing a little of the graphite and 
smearing it on a piece of paper, drying the paper and rubbing the 
black spot, it is at once recognized as graphite. This effect is 
obtainable with amorphous bodies generally; I have obtained 
it with alumina, lampblack, clay, graphite, and siloxicon. 

I have successfully used deflocculated graphite in water in- 
stead of oil in sight drop-feed oilers and with chain-feed oilers. 
I have a shaft in my laboratory measuring 2); in. in 
diameter, revolving at 3000 revolutions per minute in a bearing 
10 in. long that had no oil on it for a month, deflocculated 
graphite being the only lubricant used, the feed being by chain, 
and it ran perfectly. On the same shaft is a similar bearing 
lubricated with oil; this runs much the warmer of the two. 

A few days after this test was started a pessimistic friend re- 
marked that just plain simple water would give the same results, 
that the presence of graphite was unnecessary. We are in- 
fluenced by the opinions of others even when we know or think 
they are wrong, so I emptied the oil out of the second bearing on 
the shaft and substituted plain water. The results during the 
first twelve hours seemed to support the contention of the friend. 
The next day after the machine had stood motionless over night 
things did not look so rosy for the water; it was a lame second on 


1366 ACHESON: DEFLOCCULATED GRAPHITE _ [June 27 


account of rust and was hurriedly removed. I think I shall not 
recommend clear water as a permanent lubricant. 

Deflocculated graphite in water possesses the remarkable power 
of preventing rust or corrosion of iron or steel. This graphite, 
even after flocculation, is so fine in its particles that when dried 
en masse it forms a hard article. I have here a cake of dried 
deflocculated graphite. You can see it has the curvature of the 
watch glass in which it was dried. No pressure was used on it, 
but still you see it is comparatively hard, like a sun-dried clod of 
clay. It is self-bonding. 

While, as I have stated, deflocculated graphite in water is an 
efficient lubricant, it has the drawback or disadvantage of losing 
its water by evaporation. I also appreciated that much time 
would be consumed in converting the world to water lubrication 
from the present one of oil. Therefore I set before me the 
problem of replacing the water medium with oil. A very great 
deal of difficulty and many discouraging conditions were met 
with, but I am pleased to say success was arrived at, and I have 
here a bottle containing kerosene oil holding about one-half per 
cent. of deflocculated graphite, that percentage being sufficient 
for most work. Here is another bottle containing spindle oil 
with a like percentage of graphite. The graphite has been in 
these oils for some weeks and shows no tendency to separate or 
to settle. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907 


Copyright 1907, By A.I. E. E, 


SINGLE-PHASE VERSUS THREE-PHASE GENERATION 
FOR SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS 


BY A. H. ARMSTRONG 

The introduction of the alternating-current single-phase 
railway motor calling for a single-phase secondary distribution 
system makes it pertinent to inquire into the question of power 
generation and primary distribution for such systems. While 
the simplicity of single-phase generation and distribution is 
unquestioned, it is not always possible or desirable in these 
days of general power distribution to install a generating station 
and primary distribution system capable of taking care of 
alternating-current railway load alone, to the exclusion of 
synchronous converters and other receiving machinery requiring 
three-phase input. 

As the use of either the single-phase or the multiphase generator 
seems to be open to certain objections, various methods of 
distribution are presented herewith, with some of the advantages 
and disadvantages pertaining to each. 


SINGLE-PHASE GENERATION 


1. Single-phase generation and transmission makes it im- 
possible to use synchronous converters, self-starting synchronous 
motors, or induction motors starting under load. Poorly 
adapted for general power distribution, it is chiefly limited 
in application to alternating-current railway operation; its 
use is, therefore, open to grave objections of a commercial 
nature where there exists any possibility of selling power or in 
any way utilizing it for general converter and motor work. 

2. The single-phase generator has an unbalanced armature 
reaction which is the cause of considerable flux variation in the 

1367 


1368 ARMSTRONG: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS _ [June 27 


field pole-tips, and in fact throughout the field structure. In 
order to minimize eddy currents, such generators must, there- 
fore, be constructed with thinner laminations and oftentimes 
poorer mechanical construction, resulting in increased cost of the 
generator. The large single-phase armature reaction results in 
a much poorer regulation than that obtained with a three-phase 
generator; it calls for increased amount of field copper; it 
requires more liberal design; it also requires larger exciting 
units—these make the cost of the single-phase generating unit 
throughout considerably more than that of a three-phase unit of 
the same output and heating. 

. The difficulties of single-phase generator construction appear 
to increase with decrease in frequency. The adoption of any lower 
frequency than 25 cycles may therefore result in serious diffi- 
culties in construction for a complete line of machines of the 


Fic. 1—Single-phase primary and secondary distribution 


single-phase type, especially of the two- or four-pole turbine- 
driven type, where the field flux is very large per pole. 

3. To offset the difficulty of single-phase generator construc- 
tion, its greater cost and poorer efficiency, there are the ad- 
vantages of simplicity in the entire generating, primary, and 
secondary distribution systems for single-phase roads. These 
advantages are so great that they justify considerable expense ; 
looked at from the railway point of view only, the single-phase 
system throughout may be considered as offering the most 
advantages. 


THREE-PHASE GENERATION 
Three-phase generation and distribution is in almost uni- 
versal use. Many single-phase railways receive power from such 
systems. The commercial advantages resulting from the use 
of such generators may in certain cases justify the complication 
of single-phase secondary distribution obtained from a three- 


Ee 


1907] ARMSTRONG: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS 1369 


phase source. As these commercial advantages are in many 
cases controlling, various combinations of three-phase-single- 
phase connections are presented herewith. 

1. Three-phase generation and primary distribution to motor- 
generator sets feeding into the single-phase secondary distribution. 
This system has all the advantages of obtaining power from a 
three-phase distribution which may also feed synchronous 
converters and a general power load; it is independent of the 
trequency of the generating system, being equally adapted for 
60 or 25 cycles. It is the only system which will give perfect 
balance on a three-phase distribution system. Its disadvan- 
tage lies in the cost of the motor-generator sub-station. 

2. Three-phase generators operating alternating-current ratl- 
way load on one leg, thus calling for both primary and secondary 
single-phase distribution. Commercial considerations of a pos- 


Fic. 2—Three-phase primary and single-phase secondary distribution 


sible future synchronous converter or power load may justify 
the installation of three-phase generators designed for single- 
phase output for railway load and three-phase output for general 
power distribution. This system is open to the objection of 
serious unbalancing due to railway load on one phase only, and 
this unbalancing may be so great as to cause undue heating in 
synchronous converters, synchronous motors, and induction 
motors fed from the unequal potentials of all three legs of the 
three-phase generator. Tests have been made which indicate 
that receiving apparatus may have its capacity reduced from. 
30 to 50 per cent. with normal heating with the unbalancing 
caused by a single-phase railway load fed from a three-phase 
generator in commercial operation. : 

~ A three-phase generator run as a single-phase generator 1s open 
to all the objections of excessive armature reaction, poor regula- 
tion, and pulsating flux in field structure noted above for single- 


1370 ARMSTRONG: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS [June 27 


phase generators. Such generators must be rated single-phase 
at two-thirds or less of their output when operating on a balanced 
three-phase load. 

3. Three-phase generation and primary distribution to sub- - 
station, feeding successive trolley sections with separate phases. 
Where the length of the road is sufficient to permit sectionalizing 
the trolley into three sections, or multiples of three, having an 
equal load on each section, this method provides for balancing 
the three-phase load, thus securing full output of the generator, 
non-interference with power load, etc. Each sub-station must 
contain two sets of transformers connected to separate phases, 
so that adjacent sub-stations may feed like phases into a common 
trolley section extending between them. The installation of a 
single transformer in each sub-station would necessitate the 
sectionalizing of the trolley midway between sub-stations, hence 
losing half the effective value of the copper as obtained with the 


Fic. 8—Three-phase primary and single-phase secondary distribution 


trolley sectioned at the sub-stations and two adjacent sub- 
stations feeding a common trolley section. 

This method of obtaining a balanced three-phase load is open 
to the objection of complication and possible ineffectiveness, 
with serious disarrangements of schedule such as take place in 
railway operation during different periods of the day and season. 

4. Two-phase generation, generating station located in center 
of system and feeding one phase each way. So long as the 
load is balanced upon the two primary distribution systems, this 
method of connection is capable of good results; but operation 
under the necessities of commercial service shows it to be very 
difficult to balance the load upon the two phases, thus resulting 
in considerable unbalancing and extreme voltage variation on 
the less loaded leg. This same criticism holds true of method 3. 

5. Three-phase generation and primary distribution to trans- 
former  sub-stations connected — three-phase-two-phase, and 


ee ee ee 


1907) ARMSTRONG: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS 1371 


jeeding secondary distribution in such manner that adjacent 
sub-stations feed like phases into a common troiley section. 
This method of connecting is capable of giving good results in 
operation, although occasional serious unbalancing may occur 
in the primary distribution with a disarrangement of schedule 
or improperly proportioned trolley sections. Each sub-station 
must contain two transformers for regular service, and possibly 
one spare; these, together with the necessary switchboard 
arrangement, increases the complexity and cost of such sub-sta- 
tions compared with the simpler arrangement possible with 
straight single-phase distribution. 

There are other methods of connection, such as independent 
transmission lines to several outlying sub-stations, thus giving 
the generating station operator the opportunity to balance the 
load on the several phases of the generators; but the methods 
outlined are those commonly proposed for single-phase secondary 


Fic. 4—Three-phase primary and two-phase secondary distribution 


distribution used in connection with three-phase generation and 
primary distribution. 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


The matter of properly selecting generating apparatus for 
single-phase roads seems to be closely connected with questions 
of a commercial nature relating to a possible future load 
requiring a three-phase input. From a purely engineering 
standpoint, and considered from the point of view of the railway 
load only, the single-phase system of generation and dis- 
tribution is to be recommended. The possible installation of 
generators having a lower frequency than 25 cycles would help 
this decision, owing to the unfitness of such a low frequency for 
general power distribution work. Cig 

Of the several methods of single-phase combinations proposed, 
the motor-generator set best protects the three-phase distribu- 


1372 ARMSTRONG: SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS [June 27 


tion system where power is purchased from foreign distributing 
systems, and such a method presents many advantages which 
may outweigh its increased first cost. Where the railway 
company finds it expedient to generate and distribute its own 
power from three-phase generators, the use of a single leg for 
the railway load (3) or the installation of three-phase—two-phase 
transformer sub-stations (5). Both seem to ofier advantages 
justifying their recommendation, the choice between the two 
may perhaps be left to the needs of local requirements, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1373 


Discussion on ‘ SINGLE-PHASE versus THREE-PHASE GENER- 
ATION FOR SINGLE-PHASE RaiLways”’, AT NIAGARA PLAUSe 
N. Y., June 27, 1907 


P.M. Lincoln: I agree with the author of this paper, that it 
is highly desirable to keep power service and street railway 
Service separate if it is at all possible. However, at times 
commercial considerations may make it essential to supply 
both polyphase power service and single-phase railway service 
from the same generating station. When that is necessary, 
the author of this paper has pointed out several methods by 
which it may be accomplished. There is one modification, 
however, which he has not mentioned, but which I believe has 
considerable advantage over any of the methods mentioned by 
the author. 

The ordinary three-phase system may be represented by an 
equilateral triangle, in which the three sides of the triangle will 


FINAL 


INITIAL DISTORTION 
FINAL DISTORTIONS 


ONE~PHASE LOAD 


ONE-PHASE LOAD 


Eres! 


NE-PHASE LOAD 


be the voltages of each of the three phases, as in (a), Fig. 1. 
When we put a single-phase load on one of the legs, this triangle 
becomes distorted, affecting both the relative lengths and phase 
relations of the three phases. It assumes a form something like 
(b), Fig. 1, so that the three-phase triangle is considerably 
distorted from its original shape. When it is necessary to supply 
both single-phase and three-phase from the same generating 
system, we can give the three-phase voltage an initial distortion 
so that a true three-phase relation shall lie somewhere between 
the initial distortion selected and final distortion which may be 
expected due to the single-phase load. By this means the 
maximum unbalancing that can take place in the three-phase 
circuit is approximately one-half what it would be if we started 
with a balanced three-phase. Fig. 1, (c) shows roughly in dia- 
gram the condition that might be expected. At best the effect 
on the three-phase circuit is anything but good. 

Therefore, I do not feel like recommending any method or any 
system where a single-phase railway and a general power dis- 
tribution are drawn from the same generating system; but, as I 


1374 SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS [June 27 


have already said, commercial considerations sometimes make 
it necessary to consider such a system. 


Henry G. Stott: One other method, not mentioned in the 


author’s paper, might be brought up for discussion; that is, the 
method of using the grounded neutral on the three-phase system. 
Where power is required for general purposes, as well as for 
single-phase railroad work, this method might be applicable, 
as, by the use of partly loaded induction motors in different 
parts of the line, the balance of the phases and also of the 
voltages would be restored. This makes an extremely simple 
combination where general three-phase power, as well as single- 
phase operation, is required. 

V. Karapetoff: It seems to me that where difficulties 
should arise, on account of unbalancing, in cases where single- 
phase and three-phase lines are fed from the same generators, 
we would have to regulate the three-phase system by means of in- 
duction regulators. It is not necessary to regulate the three 
legs; only one phase needs to be regulated. The triangle of 
voltages is originally an equilateral triangle; then it becomes a 
distorted triangle. It is plain that this latter triangle can be 
made again an equilateral triangle by moving in a certain direc- 
tion one of the phases, by having in the three-phase system a 
suitable induction regulator in one leg, so arranged that a vector 
of any desired direction or magnitude can be added to the line 
voltage. Therefore, the problem of regulation is not as difficult 
as it might seem at the first glance. 

John B. Taylor: I fail to see how a single-phase induction 
regulator can be practically applied to a three-phase system 
in such a way as to compensate for the unbalancing effects 
of a single-phase load. More important than the drop in volt- 
age due to line resistance, etc., is the distortion due to the 
reaction in the generator under single-phase load conditions. 

All things considered, there will be many cases where the 
expense of the motor-generator set will be justified. This en- 
ables the transmission system to work on balanced three-phase 
load, at unity power-factor, and also removes the grounds from 
the transmission system. Where the single-phase load is taken 
as a part of a large system, unless transformers or motor-gen- 
erators are introduced, a ground on the single-phase system in- 
volves, of course, a ground on the entire system and this in 
many cases would be decidedly objectionable. 

William McClellan: The paper has reference to large systems 
giving opportunity for sectionalized distribution. So far, single- 
phase electrification has been over short distances with not more 
than two sections to be fed. Such a system presents little diffi- 
culty where a company is generating its own power. While 
from a technical standpoint the unbalancing may be incon- 
venient, it does not affect the coal-pile seriously. When, how- 
ever, power is bought from a power company and taken from 
three-phase transmission lines, the effect is more serious. Under 


a 


19071. DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA. FALLS 1375 


modern contracts for power, unbalancing over a certain maxi- 
mum amount, must be paid for. Under such conditions it is 
possible to connect the transformers in V which, however, would 
never give a balanced three-phase load. A better method is to 
connect the transformers in T and use the 90° phases on the two 
sections of the trolley. When these two sections are equally 
loaded, the three-phase load will be balanced and the average 
balancing of the load will be considerably better. Such a Sys- 
tem requires, however, that the three legs at the high-tension 
side of the transformers be opened nearly simultaneously. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The problem of taking care of single- 
phase loads on three-phase systems is rather complicated. I 
do not believe any induction regulator can take care of it to the 
extent of balancing the load. The cause of the unbalancing on 
single-phase load is to be found in the flow of power which with 
single-phase load is not constant, as it is with the balanced three- 
phase system, but pulsating. This pulsating flow of power gives 
a pulsating armature reaction; superimposed upon the funda- 
mental sine wave of the generator it produces the effect of a 
double frequency pulsation or magnetism due to the pulsation 
of the flow of power. This results in the production of a strong 
third harmonic. In some conditions, in extreme cases where 
the single-phase load is short-circuited, this triple harmonic may 
reach disastrous values, 250 per cent. of the normal voltage, or 
even more. This is merely the extreme case of unbalancing. 

To restore the equilateral triangle by giving it an initial dis- 
tortion is open to the objection that the distortion of the triangle 
is not always the same but depends on the nature and the power- 
factor of the load. If the power-factor of the load is approxi- 
mately constant, within a moderate range, as with single-phase 
railroading, this can be done. But, after all, with any generator 
of reasonably good regulation, the matter usually is not serious 
because an induction motor can take care of a very great dis- 
tortion of the equilateral triangle and still work with no appreci- 
able change in efficiency, no appreciable change of heating. 
In most cases then we can let the triangle become as distorted as 
it chooses, and the induction motors and other apparatus will 
show no difference, except perhaps synchronous converters. 
Synchronous converters in such systems would necessarily be 
installed, as they usually are in railway work, with heavy react- 
ances, reactances of ten per cent. or more in the leads. This 
reactance, by phase displacement of lead or lag, can take care, 
not only of line drop and control of voltage, but also of distortion 
of the triangle, and thus supply at the converter the equilateral 
triangle with a greatly distorted generator triangle, by merely 
a small change in the angle of lag of the three different phases, 
one of the three currents lagging perhaps while the other is lead- 
ing to a small extent. So the converter can also take care of 
itself. 

The main difficulty is where lighting is done from several 
phases. But even there, if we look at the distortion of the tri- 


1376 SINGLE-PHASE RAILWAYS ° [June 27 


angle with single-phase load, we find that naturally the loaded 
phase drops with the ordinary single-phase load. Of the other 
two phases, one drops more than the loaded phase arid the 
other remains practically constant; that is, of the two unloaded 
phases the distortion is such as to keep one of the phases altnost 
constant and in that phase through a potential regulator which 
has relatively little work to do, constant potential may be stip- 
plied. That is probably the simplest way of taking care of tn- 
balanced loads. My old scheme, the monocyclic system, was to 
build the generator three-phase; use one phase for lighting and 
maintain it at constant voltage, and carry the three-phase load 
by the auxiliary phases. After all, that was another form of 
Mr. Lincoln’s proposition to start with a distorted three-phase 
system and use the distortion to distribute the load between the 
different circuits in the desired manner. 

A. H. Armstrong: Iam inclined to look at this matter a little 
more broadly than some of the previous speakers. For instance, 
the method proposed by Mr. Lincoln can be used successfully in 
cases where the railway company generates its own power, al- 
though in such cases the company would have the privilege of 
generating and distributing single-phase power, and the sim- 
plicity of single-phase distribution would recommend it above 
all others. We are contronted, however, with the problem of 
power purchased from foreign concerns, and the tendency of the 
times seems to be toward establishing large centers of power 
distribution. The generation and distribution of power is 
carried on as a separate business by itself. It may be associated 
with lighting, railway, and power industries, but in any case it is 
generated and distributed three phase. Itisa very difficult prob- 
lem to connect single-phase railway systems toa three-phase power 
distribution system without interfering in some degree with 
other uses of a common power supply. In fact, managers of 
power distribution systems are very loathe to make contracts 
which involve the use of single-phase power for railway purposes. 
In such cases the introduction of a motor-generator set seems 
almost necessary, aside from the question of frequency supply, 
if the distribution circuit of the power producers is to be properly 
safeguarded. 

Unfortunately, in a large number of single-phase projects 
suggested, the margin of profit between installing alternating- 
current apparatus and direct-current apparatus is rather small. 
Owing to the inferiority of the alternating-current railway motor, 
there is no advantage in adopting alternating-current car equip- 
ments unless there is a considerable reduction either in first cost 
or operating expense, or both. The added expense of motor- 
generator sets oftentimes acts as a serious handicap when con- 
sidering the installation of alternating current railway equip- 
ments fed from a foreign three-phase source of supply. In such 
cases it will be necessary to use some of the methods proposed for 
balancing the load on the three phases rather than consider 
the expense of a motor-generator set. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


THE CHOICE OF FREQUENCY FOR SINGLE-PHASE 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTORS 


BY A. H. ARMSTRONG 

Owing to the success attending the several installations of 
single-phase alternating-current railway motors in this country 
and abroad, and the suitability of this type of motive power 
for the electrification of certain steam lines, the questions have 
been asked as to whether the 25-cycle frequency thus far uni- 
versally used is the frequency best adapted for alternating-current 
motor design and operation, or whether the benefits obtained by the 
use of a lower frequency are sufficient to justify its introduction. 
This paper is intended to open a discussion on the relative 
merits of 25 cycles and a lower frequency, and will touch briefly 
upon the advantages and disadvantages of the present standard 
of 25 cycles and any proposed standard of a lower frequency. 

All the alternating-current railway motor installations thus far 
made in this country have employed a frequency of 25 cycles, 
and, with one exception, the service has consisted of the move- 
ment of single-car units at maximum speeds of approximately 
50 miles an hour at intervals of one-hour headway over a single- 
track line. That is, all alternating-current roads have been 
designed to take care of interurban passenger business with the 
incidental movement of express matter and miscellaneous freight. 

It has been found that the alternating-current single-phase 
commutator motor can be developed to a commercially successful 
stage at a frequency of 25 cycles; and although some benefits 
in respect to weight, efficiency, and commutation are to be 
obtained with the adoption of a lower frequency, the advantages 
do not as yet seem great enough to justify the standardiza- 


tion of a new frequency suitable to alternating-current com- 
1377 


1378 ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


mutator motor operation alone. Recognizing the enormous 
commercial advantage of offering an alternating-current railway 
motor which could operate from existing power plants, the 
manufacturers have perfected alternating-current equipments for 
interurban service for the standard frequency of 25 cycles already 
universally in use for this class of work. 

The introduction of a new frequency calling for the design 
and establishment of a complete new line of generating, trans- 
mitting, and receiving apparatus is a most serious mat- 
ter; it should not be undertaken without carefully con- 
sidering all the factors, both commercial and engineering, 
entering into the case. With the coming electrification of 
steam roads there is a demand for motors of increased capacity, 
and the possible limitations of 25-cycle design in large alternating- 
current motors of certain types is more keenly felt, hence the 
inquiry at this time into the question of the proper frequency to 
be adopted when the alternating-current motor is selected as 
the type of motive power for steam-road electrification. 

The various points to be considered may be classed under the 
following heads: 

1. The effect of frequency on design of motor equipment. 

2. The effect of frequency on coefficient of adhesion. 

3. The effect of frequency on generating and distributing 
systems. 

4. Commercial considerations. 

5. Locomotive design and selection of motive power. 

The effect of frequency on design of motor equipment. 
Taking the weight of a direct-current motor as 100 per cent., it 
is probable that the values in the following table hold approxi- 
mately true. 


CoMPARATIVE WEIGHT OF DirREcCT-CURRENT AND ALTERNATING- 
: CurRENT Morors 


25-cycle 15-cycle 
Direct Current alternating current} alternating current 
One-hour capacity 100 150 130 


Continuous capacity 100 125 120 
| 


oo SSSSSeSSeeeSSSeSeSsSesSse 


These figures apply to motors designed to give in all cases the 
same output and heating at the same speeds, but with an ad- 


1907] ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY 1379 


mitted superiority in commutation in motors of direct- 
current commutating-pole design. While the weight of the 
15-cycle alternating-current motor is less than that of the 25- 
cycle motor, this will be partly offset by an increase of 30 per 
cent. in the weight of the step-down transformer on the car. 
Although the car transformer weighs but approximately 20 per 
cent. of the complete equipment, including control and motors, 
an increase of 30 per cent. in its weight will practically offset 
the reduction in motor weight when recourse is had to 15 cycles. 
Therefore, while there are other advantages in superior com- 
mutation, higher efficiency, etc., obtaining with the use of 15 
cycles, there is no material reduction in weight of the complete 
alternating-current motor and control equipment. 

Until recently the commutation of alternating-current motors 
has been considerably poorer than that of direct-current railway 
motors in use. Various expedients, such as high-resistance leads, 
lower frequency, etc., have been suggested to improve the 
commutation and reduce the losses and heating at the brushes. 
Recent improvements in alternating-current motor design 
have resulted in the production of an alternating-current single- 
phase motor which compares very favorably in commutation 
with any of the standard direct-current railway motors now in 
operation, although inferior in this respect to the commutating- 
pole type of direct-current railway motor. In fact the com- 
mutation of the alternating-current single-phase motor has been 
so improved and the commutator losses so reduced with a fre- 
quency supply of 25.cycles as to make it unnecessary to adopt 
any of the above mentioned expedients in order to eliminate 
commutator troubles. 

Where it becomes necessary to design motors for the greatest 
output per cubic foot of space allowable, as in the case of very 
large motors designed for locomotives under the restrictions of 
4-ft. 8.5-in. gauge and reasonable wheel-base, it is possible that 
the adoption of a frequency lower than 25 cycles permits a greater 
latitude in design of alternating-current single-phase motors of 
certain types. 

2. The effect of frequency on coefficient of adhesion. The 
torque delivered to the driving-wheels by the alternating- 
current commutating motor is of a pulsating character, and its 
effective value is somewhat less than the uniform torque 
imparted by the direct-current motor. Experiments show 
that the effective torque is a function of the frequency of motor 


1380 ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


supply, and also depends upon the construction of the truck 
and the method of motor suspension. The values given in Fig. 1, 
express the relation between tractive effort and frequency for 
periods from 25 cycles down to zero; that is, direct current. 
The values given will hold true only with the combination of 
truck springs, motor suspension, etc., in the test, and the use of 
stiffer or lighter springs, more rigid or flexibly suspended motor, 
the use of springs between gear and axle, etc., might give re- 


pay COEFFICIENT OF ADHESION FOR ft | 
or ALTERNATING CURRENT MOTORS. 


Fig. 1 7: 
: | | | | 
H—1- otvep RAIL | | 
21 NORMAL|SURFENSION | Aah 
| 


18 SPRING UNDER MOTOR|NOSE——> on 
[ NORMAL| SUSPENSION 
Ps | 
fT | | 4 
Ss a) 
> 
3 | ) By 
12 } + } + + | 
7 Pb 
| ‘L SPRING REMOVED 
9 i 1 
6 \ = +} - | 
3 = TshNM Lig 
Sal chek: gale 
0 i i DN a 
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 


PER CENT WEIGHT ON DRIVERS 


sults differing considerably in degree from those submitted here- 
with. 

The three curves given represent normal motor suspension, 
additional spring suspension under the motor nose, and with 
springs removed, giving practically rigid suspension except for 
the spring of the armature shaft, gear teeth, etc. While the 
tests are incomplete, they indicate a slight reduction in the 
coefficient 9f adhesion with lower frequency; but so far as can 


1907] ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY 1381 


be determined this reduction is not a serious matter in the 
consideration of 25 cycles or a lower frequency, say 15 cycles. 

With normal motor suspension, the coefficient of adhesion as 
obtained with 25 cycles alternating-current was 82.5 per cent. 
of the value obtained under the same conditions with the same 
motor supplied with direct current. 

3. The effect of frequency on generating and distributing 
apparatus. The question of generator design at 15 cycles is a 
serious one and presents many difficulties which can only be 
partly overcome at an increased cost of the apparatus perfected 
for 25 cycles. In fact, while certain capacities of low-frequency 
turbo-generator units may be constructed fairly comparable with 
25-cycle units, it is probable that the adoption ot 15 cycles 
or less would seriously handicap the standardization of a com- 
plete line of such units; in any case it will increase the cost of 
those units which it is possible to construct. The steam turbine 
has shown itself a most excellent prime mover, and the adoption 
of 15 cycles is seriously handicapped by the difficulties opposing 
the successful construction for this frequency of a complete line 
of generator units of all sizes. 

Both step-up and step-down transformers are handicapped 
at 15 cycles by an approximate increase in cost of 30 per cent. 
over that of 25-cycle design. This applies to step-up and step- 
down transformers used throughout the low-frequency system. 

4. Commercial considerations. Perhaps the benefits of stand- 
ardization to both the customer and the manufacturer have 
not been appreciated to any greater extent than in the electric 
railroad industry. The universal adoption of 25-cycle three- 
phase supply feeding into the distributing system of railway 
networks constituted so strong a claim in favor of adopting 
this frequency when developing the alternating-current railway 
motor as to outweigh certain known benefits to be obtained with 
a lower frequency supply. The great field for alternating-current 
motors of 150-h.p. capacity and less is on interurban lines 
acting as feeders to the surface, elevated, and subway lines 
of large cities. The ability of such motors to run from the 
same alternating-current generating and distributing systems 
without requiring the introduction of frequency-changer sets 
constitutes a strong argument in favor of continuing the present 
practice of installing 25 cycles on such lines. 

The type of apparatus adopted for new installations must 
necessarily be largely dependent upon the apparatus already 


1382 ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


installed for similar purposes in its neighborhood; it is a 
question, then, when considering the electrification of steam 
roads in and about large cities, whether engineers can afford to 
neglect this principle and cut loose from standards already es- 
tablished and universally used. Furthermore, steam railroad 
electrification often commences in station and signal lighting and 
car shops, and 25 cycles is already largely in use for such work. 
Small motors and transformers are much higher in price at 15 
cycles; there is no line developed; and station and car light- 
ing is most unsatisfactory at this frequency. 

5. Locomotive design and selection of motive power. One of 
the principle arguments in favor of the electric locomotive is 
that it permits the concentration of a very large amount of power 
on the driving-wheels. In this respect the electric locomotive 
equipped with alternating-current series compensated motors 
does not compare favorably with other types of motors of both 
alternating-current and direct-current design. Furthermore, 
the successful exploitation of these other types of motive power 
does not demand the adoption of a frequency less than 25 cycles, 
and hence it is pertinent to inquire if, with our present knowledge 
of the art, the alternating-current single-phase motor of the series 
compensated type possesses qualifications which make it so 
superior to other types of electric motors as to justify the intro- 
duction of an odd frequency of benefit only to that one type of 
motive power. The writer feels much gratified at the success 
attending the development and operation of the various alter- 
nating-current roads already completed, but it should be pointed 
out that this success has been attained with a frequency of 25 
cycles. 

Admitting the coming of steam-road electrification, we have 
not had any demonstration or even convincing figures sub- 
mitted which would prove beyond doubt the desirability of adopt- 
ing 15 cycles and the alternating-current series compensated mo- 
tor to the exclusion of direct-current motors of all types and 
voltages, three-phase induction motors, or even single-phase 
alternating-current motors of other types which can be 
built in large capacities at 25 cycles. In the opinion 
of the writer it becomes, not the choice of the best fre- 
quency for the alternating-current series compensated type 
of motor, but a question of the proper selection of motive 
power for the exacting demands of locomotive construction de- 
signed for hauling trains of any weight at both high and low 


1907} ARMSTRONG: CHOICE OF FREQUENCY 1383 


speeds over roadbeds of any gradient. The question of fre- 
quency might well be left in abeyance until the coming of fuller 
knowledge of the operation of electric locomotives equipped 
with motors of different types. Considered from the engineering 
standpoint of alternating-current series compensated motor 
design alone, the use of 15 cycles offers advantages in the better- 
ment of commutation, efficiency, and output per pound of 
motor which may justify its adoption, provided that type of 
motive power it best suited to the needs of the problem in hand. 
Taking into account, however, the commercial interests involved, 
and considering the serious claims that may be advanced in 
favor of other types of electric motors for which a frequency of 
25 cycles is well suited, it appears to the writer that much 
stronger claims for recognition must be brought forth before the 
adoption of 15 cycles can be seriously considered. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E, E. 


TWENTY-FIVE VERSUS 15 CYCLES FOR HEAVY RAIL- 
WAYS 


BY N. W. STORER 

At the regular meeting of the Institute, on January 25 of this 
year, a paper was presented by Messrs. Stillwell and Putnam 
dealing with the electrification of steam railways and referring 
briefly to the question of the adoption of a standard fre- 
quency for single-phase railways. This question aroused a 
great deal of interest and was discussed at greater length than 
any other feature of the paper. The authors, while enumerat- 
ing the advantages of both 25 and 15 cycles, drew the con- 
clusion that the advantages were greatest on the side of the 
lower frequency, and this opinion was concurred in by most 
of those who discussed the matter. Many good points were 
brought out, but all were more or less general; and while it is 
obviously impossible for the Institute to standardize at this 
time a frequency for railways using alternating current, a free 
and full discussion of the matter can hardly fail to produce 
good results and to furnish more definite information than 
was available at the time the paper was presented. The argu- 
ments in favor of 25 cycles may be reduced to the following: 

1. It is a standard frequency which is in use in a great many 
plants throughout the country. 

2. It is probably better suited for general power distribution 
and is certainly better for lighting than 15 cycles; therefore any 
railroad having a 15-cycle plant for operating its road would 
be somewhat handicapped in power for lighting and shop pur- 
poses. 

3. The higher frequency is better suited for speeds of steam 
turbines of small size, it being at present uneconomical to build 

1385 


1386 STORER: 25 vs. 15 CYCLES [June 27 


turbo-generators for less than 2000 kw. at 900 rev. per min., 
which is the maximum available for 15 cycles. 

4. Transformers are lighter and cheaper for 25 cycles. 

The principal arguments in favor of 15 cycles are: 

1. An increase of from 30 to 40 per cent. in the output of 
a motor of a given size and a consequent reduction in the total 
number of motors required to operate a railway, and in the cost 
of equipment. 

2. Better performance of the 15-cycle motors, including higher 
efficiency, higher power-factor and better commutation. 

3. Less dead weight to be carried on cars and locomotives. 

4. Lower line losses. 

The first argument in favor of 25 cycles; namely, that it is 
a standard frequency in use in a great many plants of the 
country, is certainly a good one. It is undoubtedly a very 
serious matter to consider the introduction of a new frequency 
for any purpose whatsoever. There are, as is well known, a 
number of frequencies in use at the present time for which there 
is no justification except that they are in use, and there is no 
class of service of which we know that cannot be handled with 
equal efficiency by one of the standard frequencies, with the 
exception of the alternating-current railway systems. Railway 
electrification, if developed as every electrical engineer hopes 
it will be, will mean an undertaking of such magnitude as to 
make it practically independent of other electrical interests, 
so that if a frequency differing from the standards now in use 
will be advantageous it should be adopted. 

The second argument in favor of 25 cycles; namely, that it 
is better suited for power and lighting purposes than 15 cycles, 
may be granted without admitting that it is a particularly valu- 
able point. Satisfactory lighting can be obtained with 15 
cycles by using a low-voltage lamp having a large filament 
with high thermal capacity. This will be entirely suitable 
for ordinary railway lighting. While not having as wide 
a range of speed as is possible with 25 cycles, 15-cycle in- 
duction motors can undoubtedly be used to accommodate 
practically any class of service required of them. The fact 
that the single-phase commutating motor is more satisfactory 
on the low frequency may make the low frequency even more 
satisfactory for shop purposes than the high frequency. In 
the discussion of the Stillwell-Putnam paper one speaker called 
attention to the fact that railway companies would probably 


we ee ee oh 


1907] STORER; 25 us. 15 CYCLES 1387 


Sell a Jarge amount of power along their right-of-way to con- 
Sumers for various purposes, and stated that 15-cycle current 
would be unsuitable for such service. In reply to this it is 
only necessary to call attention to the fact that the voltage 
on any railway circuit is so variable as to make it absolutely 
unsuitable for lighting purposes, and it would therefore be neces- 
sary to introduce a motor-generator set in order to get good 
results. This might just as easily be made a frequency-changer 
to supply current at either 25 or 60 cycles, as might seem best 
for that particular locality. While this unquestionably destroys 
some of the simplicity of the scheme, it is undoubtedly what 
would be necessary in order to give satisfactory service, even 
if 25 cycles were in use on the railway, unless a separate gener- 
ator were used for the lighting circuits. It seems therefore that 
the 15-cycle current would be little or no handicap to the rail- 
way company in this respect. 

The third argument; namely, that the higher frequency is 
better suited for speeds of steam turbines is undoubtedly true, 
but it affects a very small proportion of the work. Heavy 
railroads will require in practically all cases larger generators 
than 2000-kw. units. In cases where they do not, high-speed 
turbines can be used and frequency-changers employed. At 
the same time we must admit that the last word in regard to 
steam-turbine design has not yet been spoken, and it may 
shortly be an easy matter to make comparatively small units 
for use with 15-cycle generators. 

The fourth argument, that transformers are lighter and 
cheaper for 25 than for 15 cycles is undoubtedly true. There 
will be a difference of probably 25 per cent. in the cost of the 
transformers for any given service. This difference must be 
ofiset by the difference in the cost of the motors. 

The meat of the entire argument for the lower frequency is 
in the greater output of the motors for a given size and weight. 
It was well shown in the Stillwell and Putnam paper that the 
cost of car equipments and locomotives would far overbalance 
the cost of power houses and transformer stations; and while 
I do not wish at this time to give a mass of estimates as to the 
saving, I will adhere to the statement previously made that the 
output from a motor of a certain size will be increased from 
30 to 40 per cent. by the use of 15 instead of 25 cycles. This 
has been proved by tests on several different motors. 

A well known 100-h.p., 25-cycle motor operates with full 


1388 STORER: 25 vs. 15 CYCLES [June 27 


load at a speed of 620 rev. per min., and in the regular 
one-hour test on the stand has a temperature rise of 89° cent. 
in commutator and 75° cent. in armature, other parts of the 
motor being well below 75° cent. Operated at the same speed 
on 15 cycles, this motor carried a load of 113 h.p. with a maxi- 
mum temperature rise in commutator of 76.5° cent. and in 
armature of 72.5° cent. It is safe to say itis good for 115 h.p. 
with the limiting temperature of 75° cent. in armature. This 
same motor with a larger number of turns on the field and 
run on 15 cycles carried at the same speed of 620 rev. per min. 
a load of 135 h.p. with a temperature rise in commutator 
of 76° cent., in armature of 75° cent., and in field-coils of 76.5° 
cent. It is quite safe to rate this motor at 135 h.p. on 15 cycles. 

A larger motor carried a load of 255 h.p. with a temperature 
rise of 71° cent. in commutator and 76° cent. in armature. 
other temperatures being well below 75° cent. This motor, 
operated at the same speed under identical conditions on 15 
cycles with a load of 300 h.p., rose 73° cent. in commutator 
and 81° cent. in the armature. With new field-coils having 
more turns, the motor will carry at least 325 h.p. and probably 
340 h.p. with a rise in temperature not exceeding 75° cent. 

While these results are all based on the one-hour test, the 
continuous capacities will have the same increase on 15 cycles. 
The inference to be drawn from these results is, of course, that 
the temperature rise being the same for both frequencies, the 
losses must be approximately the same; and since the output is 
greater on 15 cycles, the efficiency must therefore be much higher. 
Further, the tests are all based on 25-cycle motors modified 
only in field-coils. If the motors are designed especially for 
the low frequency, the results will be still better. | 

A comparison of the weights of car equipments for 25 and 
15 cycles indicates that there will be an advatnage in favor 
of the lower frequency, even with the same number of motors. 
For instance, a four-motor equipment of 100-h.p., 25-cycle mo- 
tors, with oil-insulated transformer, will weigh approximately 
30,000 Ib. Such an equipment for 15 cycles would weigh ap- 
proximately 28,5001b. The difference is small, but it is in favor 
of the lower frequency. If two 15-cycle motors of 200 h.p. each, 
such as are now building, be furnished, the weight of equipment 
will be reduced to approximately 23,000 Ib., or a reduction of 23 
per cent. in the weight of the car equipment. While it is perfectly 
practicable to furnish two motors for a 400-h.p. equipment for 


is — = ee ¢ 
\ 


1907] SPORE R625 ws..15. CYCLES 1389 


operation on 15 cycles, it will be necessary to furnish three or 
four motors for 25 cycles on account of the great increase in the 
size of the motor. It is therefore absolutely necessary that 
the 25-cycle equipment weigh considerably more than that 
for 15 cycles. In the case of smaller motors aggregating 280 h.p. 
it is possible to furnish a two-motor equipment operating on 
25 cycles. There would, however, be a difference in weight 
of at least 1500-Ib. in each motor in favor of the 15-cycle equip- 
ment of the same capacity. This would offset the increased 
weight of the 15-cycle transformers by at least 1000 lb. In 
every case, therefore, even where the same number of motors ~ 
are in use for both frequencies, the 15-cycle equipment will be 
lighter. On account of the smaller motors the motor trucks 
will also be lighter, the amount of saving here depending upon 
the size of the motor. 

The greatest gain from the use of 15 cycles is to be found in 
heavy railroading where locomotives are used. In building 
locomotives it is desirable, on account of the weight, cost, and 
maintenance charge, to concentrate the power in as few motors as 
possible consistent with weight on the drivers and the tractive 
effort desired. We have found that in virtually all cases 
the weight of useful apparatus on the drivers, even with 15 
cycles, is sufficient to give the necessary adhesion without add- 


. ing dead weight; therefore the use of 15 cycles means that in 


practically all cases for the locomotive a smaller number of 
motors can be used than is possible with 25 cycles. It is fre- 
quently the case that three motors which are sufficient with a 
certain size of driver for 15 cycles would have to be replaced 
by four motors having the same dimensions. It would some- 
times happen that three motors necessary for 25 cycles could 
be replaced by two of the same dimensions for 15 cycles. In 
the case of locomotives of very high-speed the extra weight en- 
tailed by the use of higher frequency motors, and consequently 
heavier mechanical parts, would increase the weight of the train 
to such an extent as to call for a considerably larger output 
from the motors, simply to haul the extra weight. Such acase 
we have in mind in a high-speed passenger locomotive that 
has recently been built. 

This locomotive is designed to haul a 400-ton train 
both on heavy grades and at high speeds on a level track. 
The locomotive as built for 15 cycles weighs approxi- 


mately 140 tons, and has four motors each with a nominal 


rating of 500 h.p. With a 400-ton train behind it, this loco- 


1390 STORER: 25 vs. 15:CYCLES [June 27 


motive would thus have to handle a total of 540 tons. A 25- 
cycle locomotive built to handle a 400-ton train at the same 
speeds and on the same grades would require six motors of 
approximately the same dimensions, and these extra motors 
together with the extra weight of mechanical parts would bring 
the total weight of the locomotive up to approximately 185 
tons. The total weight of train would thus be 585 tons, or an 
increase of about 8 per cent. The capacity of these motors 
would be in the neighborhood of 375 h.p., which would be just 
about sufficient to handle the extra weight. It must be seen 
at once that the motors for this locomotive would cost 50 per 
cent. more and the mechanical parts also considerably more. 
The only parts of the equipment which would cost less would be 
the transformer and preventive coils, and the control equipment 
would be enough more expensive to counterbalance this. 

In this connection it may be of interest to give a brief de- 
scription of the locomotive as built. It is of the articulated 
type, each half of which has two pairs of drivers and a four- 
wheel truck similar to the standard American type of steam 
locomotive, the two halves being coupled back to back. The 
drivers are 72 in. in diameter with 7 ft. 6in. between centers 
of axles. On each axle is mounted a gearless motor having a 
nominal rating of 500 h.p. and a continuous capacity with 
forced ventilation of about 375 h.p. The motors, weighing 
approximately 19,500 lb., are spring-supported, mounted, and 
connected to the drivers in exactly the same way as the 
motors on the single-phase locomotive for the New York, New 
Haven & Hartford Railroad. This feature has been described 
so many times that it is unnecessary to repeat it. The frame 
of the locomotive is of the standard steam-locomotive type 
placed outside of the wheels. It is of cast steel connected at 
the front and rear and at three places between the ends by 
heavy cast-steel girders. The truck, which is of the standard 
steam-locomotive pattern, has 36-in. wheels, with a wheel-base 
of 6 ft. 2 in. 

The electrical and other equipment in the cab is mounted 
on a raised platform which is about 2 ft. above the floor-line 
and occupies the middle of the cab, allowing for a passageway 
on either side. There are numerous windows along the sides 
of the cab which afford, excellent light for the inspection of the 
apparatus. The equipment is extremely simple and accessible. 
The main transformer, which is designed for 11,000 volts, is 


1907] SAOKRER. 250s, lo CVGIES: 1391 
mounted above the truck, with the top just below the platform 
in the cab. Directly above the transformer is located: the 
electropneumatic switch-group to which the various taps in the 
transformer are carried. Back of the switch-group are ‘the 
preventive coils used in passing from step to step on the trans- 
former, and from these preventive coils runs a single lead to 
the reverser switch-group, which is placed directly above the 
main motors. On this raised platform are also placed the 
motor-driven air-compressor, the motor-driven blower for fur- 
nishing air for ventilation of the motors and transformer, and 
the air reservoirs. Suspended from the structural work between 
the platform and the Z-bars in the roof of the cab are the oil 
circuit-breaker in the high-tension circuit leading to the trans- 
former, the small switches used in connection with the auxiliary 
motors, and the 20-volt battery which is used for operating the 
valve-magnets in the controller. The high-tension current is 
collected from the overhead wire by the standard type ‘of panta- 
graph trolley. On account of the large drivers and the com- 
paratively high position of the apparatus in the cab, the 
center of gravity of the locomotive is higher than is usual in 
electric locomotives. The riding qualities of the locomotive 
are exceptionally good. The weight of the locomotive, as stated, 
is 140 tons, there being 50,000 lb. on each driving axle and 
40,000 lb. on each truck. 

In the case of geared locomotives for heavy freight service, 
there is still the advantage in favor of 15 cycles. Where the 
same number of motors is used for both frequencies, it will be 
necessary to use larger wheels for the 25-cycle locomotive. 
Low-speed locomotives are especially at a disadvantage with 25 
cycles. It is possible to make a geared motor with a capacity 
of 400 to 450 h.p. for slow-speed freight service with 15 cycles, 
while with 25 cycles a 300-h.p. motor is as powerful as it is prac- 
tical to use. This means that in the freight service there is 
virtually the same condition as in passenger service; namely, 
that about one-third more motors will be required to perform 
the service. The locomotive will weigh from 10 to 35 per cent. 
more. 

An examination of the efficiency curves for 15-cycle motors 
compared with those for 25 cycles will show differences in the 
losses in the motors alone which will mean a considerable 
difference in the capacity of the power station. This, when added 
to the power required to haul the extra weight, and the 


1392 STORER: 25 vs. 15 CYCLES [June 27 


increased line-loss due to the higher frequency, will make a 
_ difference of from 5 to 15 per cent. in favor of the 15-cycle equip- 
ment. Without giving estimates or long tabulated state- 
ments, I leave it to the judgment of the members of the Insti- 
tute to decide whether it is not advisable, with these facts 
in mind, to recommend a new frequency. 

It is well known that when the advent of the first successful 
single-phase railway motor was announced by Benj. G. Lamme 
in his historic paper before the Institute in 1902 the frequency 
which he advocated was 2000 alternations per minute, or 163 
cycles per second. It was believed at that time that this fre- 
quency was best suited to meet the many requirements of 
power plants for railway apparatus.. However, owing to the 
experimental nature of the undertaking, it was deemed ad- 
visable to use the standard frequency of 25 cycles 
until the commercial success of the system was assured. At 
the same time it was realized that the practical difficulties to 
be overcome in the single-phase system would be much greater 
with the higher frequency. Moreover, in the first equipments 
sold the motors were of comparatively small size, so that the 
space occupied by them was not limited. Furthermore, the 
number of motors in an equipment was fixed by conditions other 
than dimensions and weight, four-motor equipments being se- 
lected in nearly every case, partly on account of the prevailing 
fad for four-motor equipments and partly because most of the 
equipments were built for operation on both alternating current 
and direct current. At any rate, aside from the greater difficul- 
ties met with in the design of the high-frequency motor in order 
to get good performance, the question of frequency was of 
comparatively small importance. Since that time some 15 or 
20 roads have been put in commercial operation with 
single-phase current at 25 cycles. It has been proved beyond 
doubt that the single-phase motor is a thoroughly practical and 
commercial machine. At the same time, as was anticipated, 
all our experience goes to show the advantage to be gained 
by the use of a lower frequency. This frequency need not 
be fixed at exactly 15 or 163 cycles. As far as the motor of era- 
tion is concerned, a variation of one or two cycles either way 
will have comparatively little effect ; but we believe, for the sake of 
using proper ratios between this and existing frequencies, that 15 
cycles, which is one-fourth of the standard 60-cycle frequency, or 
163 cycles, which is two-thirds of the standard 25-cycle frequency, 


“o =" 


1907] STORER: 25 vs. 15 CYCLES 1393 


should be adopted for use, especially on heavy railroads. While 
this will undoubtedly make it necessary for the manufacturing 
companies to keep a larger variety of apparatus in stock (as 
there is no doubt that 25-cycle railways will be operated for a 
long time to come) the advantage to be gained from the lower 
frequency in the wider use of apparatus will far outweigh any 
slight disadvantage of this kind. 

The mistake made by the blacksmith when he made the 
template which fixed the gauge of the standard railways at 
4 ft. 8.5 in.isamatterof tradition. It is recognized as being one 
of the most far-reaching mistakes ever made, inasmuch as it 
has ever since placed a limit on the capacity of the railroads 
of our country, both by limiting the capacity of steam loco- 
motives and the size of cars, and last but not least, the capacity 
of. electric railway motors and locomotives. What an enor- 
mous benefit would be gained from even a paltry increase from 
4 ft. 8.5 in. to 5ft. What powerful machines could be built 
for a gaugeof 6ft.! But the mistake has been made, and it will 
cost so much to rectify it, that the boldest of our railway mag- 
nates is staggered by the suggestion. 

Electrical engineers have an enormous responsibility in decid- 
ing upon matters of detail, such as frequency, which will have an 
effect that will far outlast anyone who has a voice in the matcer; 
and it certainly behooves us as engineers to consider carefully 
before recommending the continuance of the present standard 
frequency of 25 cycles, where it imposes such a handicap on the 
capacity of our transportation systems. 


1394 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


Discussion ON ‘“‘ THE CHOICE OF FREQUENCY FOR SINGLE- 
PHASE, ALTERNATING-CURRENT RaiLway MorTors’’, AND 
““ TWENTY-FIVE versus FIFTEEN CYCLES FOR HEAvy RalIL- 
ways’, aT NraGaRA Fatts, N. Y., JUNE 27, 1907 


H. G. Reist: With engine-driven generators the problem 
is a comparatively simple one, since not much difficulty is experi- 
enced in building machines for 15 cycles. The cost of the 
generators will be increased somewhat, perhaps 30 per cent. 
With turbine-driven generators the increased difficulty is very 
much more serious. As has been pointed out by one of the 
speakers, in smaller size generators, about 2000 kw. capacity, 
the increase of steam consumption on account of the limit in 
speed becomes serious, and undoubtedly there will be many 
places where generators of that size, or smaller, will be needed 
for long distance railway work. On larger sizes, the speed is 
more favorable for the turbine, but the generators have to be 
built with two poles only, which makes it a difficult designing 
problem. The machine becomes massive, the magnetic circuits 
become exceedingly long, and the weight of the machine must 
be greatly increased over that of the 25-cyclemachine. Roughly, 
probably the weight and the cost would be increased fifty per 
cent. over a similar 25-cycle machine. The efficiency would 
also be a little less, although that is probably not a very serious 
matter; it might be one per cent. less at full load than with the 
higher frequencies. 

C. W. Stone: If the design of turbine-driven generators is to 
be complicated by a combination of lower frequencies and single- 
phase operation, the generator becomes almost prohibitive un- 
less 450 revolutions instead of 900 are used on the large capacity 
machines. On machines of 8,000 or 10,000 kw. capacity, 450 
revolutions is very bad from the steam end. All the recent 25- 
cycle machines of large capacity have been run at approximately 
750 revolutions. To increase the speed from 750 to 900 rev. 
per min. and make the generator both single-phase and 15 cycle 
is not to be considered. ‘ 

E. J. Berg: While I do not believe that it will be necessary 
to resort to a frequency lower than 25 cycles, I think that some 
of the objections raised against the lower frequency are not well 
taken. A so-called half-frequency generator was invented several 
years ago, a generator with a given number of poles giving half 
the frequency of the regular generator operated at the same 
rotative speed. In construction, this generator was similar to 
the induction motor; in its action, to the well-known frequency- 
changer. Instead of exciting the field by direct current, alter- 
nating current of a given frequency was used, and the magnetic 
field made to rotate in the same direction as the armature but 
at half its speed. By this scheme, the frequency corresponding 
to one-half the speed could be obtained, not only from the sta- 
tionary, but from the revolving member. Obviously, the excit- 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1395 


ing current had to be delivered at the lower frequency, but this 
was not objectionable, as the actual power supplied was slight 
and therefore the inefficiency of the low-speed turbine of little 
consequence. 

L. B. Stillwell: I am much pleased to find a question of such 
transcendent importance as this, of the best frequency for rail- 
way work, receiving the serious consideration of the engineers 
of our manufacturing companies. 

The electric railway fraternity now for the first time is under- 
taking the electrification of railways operating heavy traffic and 
employing steam locomotives. This work presents a problem 
more important commercially than any we have hitherto at- 
tacked. We are dealing with people who are not of the type 
that we had to deal with in the early days of electric lighting. 
The railways of the United States are managed by men whose 
education in most instances is largely an engineering education. 
They have their own excellently prepared and thoroughly ex- 
perienced engineering staffs who will pass upon these questions. 
Therefore, it is of especial importance in considering such 
questions as this, that we should take a broad view, saving 
money tor our clients by fighting out differences of opinion on 
paper and on the floors of these conventions, and, if possible, 
agreeing among ourselves upon all necessary fundamental 
standards. 

The paper which Mr. Putnam and I had the honor to present 
before the Institute in January last, raised this question of fre-- 
quency in railway service. Our feeling was that a mistake in all 
probability was being made. The figures which we worked out 
were intentionally broad, probably broader in application than 
any we shall see in our time, but it seemed advisable to look at 
the entire railway field and attempt to realize the magni- 
tude of this problem. We therefore followed out our analysis 
of the comparative costs of operation, by figures showing the 
total cost of electrifying the railways of the United States. 
Some of the technical journals, whose specialty is steam railway 
practice, have ridiculed the idea of considering even the possi- 
bility of the electrification of all the steam railways in the 
United States. Probably no one here expects that this will be 
done in the near future, if ever; but it is significant to find that 
if we consider the average railway in the United States upon 
which there are but seven trains in each direction per day and 
apply to its operation single-phase alternating current, using 
a transmission voltage equal to that which is to-day in use 
transmitting power from Niagara Falls to Rochester and Syra- 
cuse, it would be possible to save approximately 18% of the pres- 
ent operating costs. This conclusion has not been assailed in 
respect to anything that is material. Even if we admit every 
exception to our total figures which was noted in the discussion, 
we still have a saving of at least 15%. This isa very important 
and a surprising fact. It indicates not that all of the railways 


1396 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


in the United States will be electrified in the next ten years, 
but it does indicate strong probability of a more rapid extension 
of the application of electricity to the operation of trunk-line 
systems than has been generally realized, even by electrical engi- 
neers. 

In calculating the reduction in operating costs, it is hardly 
necessary to say that we recognize also what several of our 
critics have kindly pointed out; namely, that the principal ob- 
ject in view, when the management of a railway decides to 
electrify its lines, is not reduction of operating expenses but in- 
crease of earning power. This fact is well known and has been 
referred to in many previous papers and discussions. The two 
reasons undoubtedly constitute an argument operating power- 
fully to induce railway electrification. The point which I wish 
to emphasize is that this electrification is in all probability coming 
at a rate which greatly emphasizes the importance of early stand- 
ardization of everything essential to interchange of traffic. 

A recent bulletin of the Census Bureau of the United States, 
prepared by Mr. Martin, shows that from 1900 to 1905 the prod- 
ucts of companies manufacturing electric apparatus were more 
than doubled. In the year 1900 few would have dared to predict 
such an increase. 

When we take the broad view and realize the probability of 
a more rapid extension of the use of electric equipment in trunk-: 
line railway service, the suggestion that it is of utmost im- 
portance to adopt a standard frequency especially adapted to 
this work appears less radical than it does to the factory engi- 
neet who is interested primarily in the problem of designing a 
complete line of turbo-generators. 

The total cost of electrifying a railway, is in general not less 
than $200 per kilowatt of generating capacity installed, and in 
considering the effect of 25 versus 15 cycles the difference in the 
cost of the average turbo-generator might easily be $5 one way 
or the other without materially affecting our conclusion. More- 
over, in dealing with the problem of trunk-line electrification we 
may as well throw aside all of the smaller generators, as this 
service will rarely, if ever, call for a generating unit of less than 
3000 kw. A single freight train, such as is hauled over some of 
our trunk lines, would require one 3000-kw. generator. 

There is another field the limits of which, while not clearly 
defined, are sufficiently understood; that is, the interurban. 
Much argument has been presented at various meetings of the 
Institute this year bearing upon the question of the possible use 
of a 1200-volt direct-current system as a substitute for the high 

potential alternating-current system. This system, perhaps, 
has its field in the interurban service. I think it can have no 
proper application in the broad service of trunk-line railways of 
which I am speaking. A potential of 1200 volts on the trolley 
or third-rail will never be satisfactory for the operation of freight 
trains. We must go radically higher. Anything less than 6000 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1397 


volts in single-phase service is out of the question, and the 
question for us to decide is: ‘‘ What frequency shall be adopted 
for alternating-current railway operation ’’? 

The paper which Mr. Storer has read is one of the exceptionally 
valuable papers of the year. It contains precisely the kind of 
information which is needed in dealing with the very important 
question of frequency; and a half dozen pages of facts, such as 
he has given us, are worth any number of pages of general 
speculative opinion. In the discussion of my paper in January, 
the engineers of both the great manufacturing companies en- 
gaged in single-phase work, who had to do with the design of the 
motors and their application to trucks within the limits of space 
available, testified unanimously to the effect that at given cost 
15 cycles secures one-third more draw-bar pull than does a fre- 
quency of 25 cycles. The people who wil! buy electrical apparatus 
to equip trunk-line railways will buy draw-bar pull. Recog- 
nizing this, it seems to me that we must recognize also the fact 
that, in view of the evidence set forth in the Institute papers and 
discussions this year, 15 cycles should be adopted in general for 
heavy railway work. I do not mean to say that a resolution to 
this effect should be passed, but I do say that unless evidence in 
favor of 25 cycles not hitherto presented can be brought forward, 
15 cycles should be chosen by consensus of sound engineering 
opinion and should be introduced into practice as promptly as 
possible. 

At the meeting in May when Mr. Sprague’s paper was read 
some interesting facts were brought out in the discussion, es- 
pecially the statement that one of the great manufacturing com- 
panies since January had produced a new single-phase motor of 
remarkable characteristics which operated substantially as well 
at 25 cycles as at 15 cycles. Thisis a very interesting statement, 
and it suggests information which I hope will be promptly and 
conclusively disclosed because some of us in the consulting field 
are now confronted by the problem of frequency for railways which 
at the present time are considering only the equipment of a 
terminal or a short division, but which by reason of the saving 
effected in operation and of increased earning power are morally 
certain to extend that electrification over much greater parts 
of their existing systems. 

W.N.Smith: I cannot escape the conclusion that the question 
of electrification of steam railroads is so extremely broad that, 
as has been indicated by both Mr. Storer and Mr. Stillwell, we 
should not deliberately tie ourselves down to any existing com- 
mercial frequency which was developed primarily for lighting 
and stationary power. 

If the steam railroads want draw-bar pull, which is unques- 
tionably what they need to get the maximum amount of tonnage 
over a given track in a given time, they will not wish to be 
handicapped by the facilities offered by some local power com- 
pany, no matter how large it may be, which may have 25 cycles 


1398 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


to offer, if 15 cycles is going to be the best thing for them to use. 
Great as is the power development here at Niagara Falls, I 
doubt if there would be enough 25-cycle power generated to 
supply the commercial demands of this region, now developing 
so rapidly, and at the same time supply the railway power re- 
quired by such wholesale electrification as it is conceivable that 
large railway systems might eventually undertake. I do not 
believe that there is sufficient power capacity at present in- 
stalled in any one plant anywhere in the country which would 
justify the undertaking of the wholesale electrification of a large 
steam railroad in its own vicinity, in addition to its own com- 
mercial load. It appears to me that the problem will without 
doubt result in the railway companies either having their own 
power stations, and getting developed for themselves the kind 
of machinery that they need the most, or calling into existence 
commercial power companies which will do it for them, develop- 
ing coal mine power or large water power in such units and by 
such methods of distribution as the railway companies, their 
biggest customers, may demand. 

William McClel'an: If we examine these papers carefully, 
we shall find a decided agreement between the two authors as 
to facts, though the opinions and conclusions given are some- 
what different. Apparently there is no uncertainty as to the 
weight-efficiency. Variable adhesion is eliminated as having no 
practical bearing. As far as the difficulty of generating 15-cycle 
power by turbines is concerned, Mr. Berg has anticipated me. 
We had a paper a year or two ago on a type of generator excited 
with alternating current. It was suggested that such a ma- 
chine could be built self-exciting, in our case for 15 cycles, and 
run at double speed, thus making it possible to drive it efficiently 
by a turbine. 

Apparently, the chief argument against 15 cycles is the diffi- 
culty of changing present commercial standards; this is cer- 
tainly entitled to most serious consideration. Nevertheless, it 
should not be forgotten that great advances have been made in 
the past by discarding what seemed at the time as fixed practice. 
This was one of the arguments against the adoption of the 
metric system. Notwithstanding this, it was announced a few 
days ago that the Baldwin Locomotive Works had built a loco- 
motive with its regular workmen and had used the metric system 
throughout. The engineers and workmen were well pleased 
with the system, and the arguments against its adoption were 
apparently refuted. 

It has also been stated that a low frequency would not be 
suitable for other purposes than motive power. In this connec- 
tion it should not be forgotten that it is probable that large 
lighting and power loads will not be worked from the same bus- 
bars as traction loads. It is also worth noting that the present 
tendency of economic progress is to limit transportation com- 
panies strictly to the transportation business, and it is not likely 


eee 


es 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1599 


that they will go into the business of selling power. Lighting and 
power for their own shops, stations etc., is relatively unimportant. 

The important point noted in the Stillwell-Putnam paper was 
that the cost of the motive power equipment is by far the greater 
part of the expense of electrification. This brings us directly 
to the motor and its efficiency. 

A short time ago there seemed to be a decided unanimity of 
opinion that the compensated-field single-phase motor was the 
type which the manufacturers had found to be most advan- 
tageous. It was expected that it would be greatly improved 
but the type would remain standard. With this motor, much 
would be gained by using 15 cycles! The engineer with the facts 
before him, and if not limited by local considerations, would 
necessarily hesitate a long time before refusing to adopt this 
motor. 

Recently, however, we have had public notice that another 
type of motor is developing rapidly and is said to be nearly as 
good as the direct-current motor without commutating poles. 
From the standpoint of both weight and efficiency, this motor 
will perhaps not offer increased advantages when adjusted toa 
circuit of lower frequency than 15 cycles. If so, the whole 
matter is uncertain, and it would be exceedingly unwise to make 
any decision whatever until we have more definite information 
in regard to this motor. 

It is worth repeating that the whole argument centers around 
the motor, or motor capacity, if you will, and no decision should 
be made to standardize frequency until the type of motor is 
standardized first. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: Probably the railways will generate their 
own power. At the same time it is a serious matter to depend 
on one power house only, or even two power houses, and if in an 
emergency power can be derived from some other station it is a 
great advantage. 

The amount of power which would be required by the steam 
railways after electrification is frequently vastly overestimated. 
I understand some investigation on this subject has been made 
by Mr. Ferguson of Chicago, which I hope will be communicated 
later. 

I believe the conclusion was that if all the railways entering 
Chicago received their power from Mr. Ferguson’s steam- 
turbine station, the railway load would by no means be the largest 
load on the system, but probably within the overload capacity 
of the station. 

The question before us is: first, whether the adoption of the 
lower frequency is necessary; secondly, whether this lower fre- 
quency should be 15 cycles or any other frequency. At present 
we have two standard frequencies, 25 cycles and 60 cycles, but 
the spectres of sundry other abandoned frequencies still haunt 
the electrical engineer—125 cycles, 133 cycles, 50, 40 and 30 
cycles. It appears to me, and probably to everybody who re- 


- 


1400 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


members and still sees the difficulties due to the existence of 
these odd frequencies, that it would be disastrous to introduce 
another frequency and then after a year or so find it was not 
necessary and have to abandon it. Therefore, we should be 
extremely careful to see whether a lower frequency is neces- 
sary. If it is necessary, which frequency should be chosen? 

I do not believe 15 cycles is a suitable lower frequency. If 
we have to use a lower frequency it would be because the alter- 
nating-current railway motor is practically inoperative, at least 
in larger units, at 25 cycles. If that is the case, then 15 cycles 
probably is not yet the most suitable frequency ; but the most suit- 
akle frequency is far lower than 15 cycles, and 15 cycles would per- 
haps be a compromise frequency. The experience of compromise 
frequencies and compromise designs has been disastrous, and 
would better not be repeated. If it seems wise to adopt lower 
frequencies, we should probably have to adopt not 15 but 12.5 
or even 10 cycles. 

In considering lower frequencies we must realize that, with the 
single exception of the series alternating-current motor, every 
part of the system, from the steam turbine generator to the in- 
candescent lamp lighting the cars, the lower frequency is a 
handicap. This brings us to the need of a lower frequency. We 
must consider that every type of electrical apparatus has a fre- 
quency at which its design is most economical, most satisfactory, 
and most reliable. For small apparatus usually a somewhat 
higher frequency and for large apparatus a somewhat lower 
frequency is best suited. For instance, economically the most 
efficient frequency for the induction motor is 40 cycles; as a 
result, induction motors are built for 60 cycles or 25 cycles, both 
frequencies being sufficiently near the economical frequency for 
practical purposes. The 60-cycle frequency is mainly used with 
smaller motors, and 25 cycle with larger motors; and the maxi- 
mum economy for smaller sizes shifts upward, and for larger 
sizes downward in frequency. 

In the transformer we find the maximum economy is beyond 
the commercial frequencies. The 125-cycle transformer is 
better and more economical than the 60- or the 25-cycle trans- 
former. Where the maximum economy lies we do not know; 
there must be some definite frequency, because we know that 
the alternating-current transformer is not well suited for 10,000 
cycles; it is difficult to design; not economical; that 1s, 10,000 
cycles is too high a frequency, but within the range of available 
frequencies, the higher the frequency the better for the trans- 
former. 

The maximum economy of the synchronous converter is at 
25 cycles. A converter designed for a frequency higher than 25 
cycles, or lower than 25 cycles, is, as a rule, inferior to the 
25-cycle converter. 

In the alternating-current series motor the maximum economy 
is at the lowest possible frequency; the lower the frequency the 


YS 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1401 


better the motor. The best series alternating-current motor 
would be the motor designed for zero frequency; that is con- 
tinuous current. In that, I agree with Mr. Sprague. In any 
other apparatus, the larger the size the more urgent the need of 
lower frequency, and, while good results have been obtained 
with 25 cycles on moderately small motors in interurban service, 
for large units, as heavy locomotives, 25 cycles seem almost im- 
practicable for the series alternating-current motor. 

It is evident then that the frequency must be lowered so as to 
approach that of maximum economy, or the type of the motor 
must be changed. There is no reason to assume that the series 
motor is the final development of electric railroading. I have 
really never felt satisfied that the series commutator motor is 
the solution of the problem and have repeatedly said so. There 
are other kinds of motors in which the maximum economy is 
not at the minimum frequency, but is, as near as we can judge 
at the present time, not far from 25 cycles. If then we adopt 
the lower frequency, we might find that we have handicapped 
ourselves in designing alternating-current commutator motors 
of different types. 

Mr. Ernst Alexanderson has succeeded in devising a type of mo- 
tor in which it appears that the maximum economy of the alter- 
nating-current commutator motor is not at zero frequency but 
probably is in the neighborhood of 25 cycles, and for this motor 
that would be the best frequency. In this respect, I disagree 
with Mr. Armstrong in the data on the relative comparison of 
25-cycle and 15-cycle motors. I believe that his statements 
rather represent a period which is past, but still influenced by 
the experience with the series motor. As far as our present ex- 
perience goes, the two frequencies, 25 and 15 cycles, in railway- 
motor design at the present time seem to be equal in economy, 
and for all I know 25 cycles may be the better frequency. That 
necessarily means that 15 cycles has no right to exist. 

The great and only difficulty with the alternating-current 
motor is the commutation; all other troubles are secondary, and 
merely results of the limitations imposed upon the design by 
the attempt to make the sparking at the commutator least de-. 
structive. During the operation of the motor electromotive 
forces are induced in the short circuited coil under the brush, 
which lead to more or less disastrous sparking and heating of 
the commutator, destruction of the brushes, energy losses by 
parasitic currents, etc. To reduce this effect we can either 
reduce the electromotive forces induced in the short-circuited 
coil, by reducing the frequency—and that is after all the gist 
of the desire to lower the frequency: to get lower electromotive 
forces induced in the short-circuited coil at commutation—or 
we can attempt to reduce the currents produced by these elec- 
tromotive forces by inserting high resistance commutator leads. 
This is beneficial to some extent, although it introduces the 
great difficulty to protect these high resistance leads against self- 


1402 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


destruction by excessive local heating. But the benefit is limited, 
because while we reduce the current the insertion of resistance 
raises the voltage. The solution of the difficulty is to modify 
the type of the motor so that no electromotive forces are induced 
in these short-circuited coils, and that is what Mr. Alexanderson 
has done and concerning which I believe he will give us a paper 
in a very short time. : 

Peter Junkersfeld: Considering passenger trains only, and 
assuming for the sake of argument that it would be physically 
possible to electrify all the steam railroads centering in the city 
for a distance of 25 miles from the respective passenger stations, 
within the next year, we have estimated that the total power 
demanded by these various railroads would probably not exceed 
20 per cent. of all the power generated in Chicago by all the 
various companies. This figure of 20% would cven then be true 
only for the next year. After that, the proportion of power de- 
manded by the steam railroads would decrease, due to the fact 
that the amount of power required for all other purposes in- 
creases in a much faster ratio. The large amount of industrial 
power and the very large amount of interior lighting not yet 
supplied electrically and that still to be developed in Chicago 
would justify the opinion that at the end of five years the total 
steam railway demand would not exceed, possibly would be less 
than ten per cent. of the total electric power generated in the 
city. This applies to Chicago and to the railroads for a distance 
of 25 miles radiating outward from their passenger terminals, so 
that, as Dr. Steinmetz has said, the proportion of power which 
will be demanded by the electrification of the steam railroads is 
not nearly so much as we might imagine. 

Gano S. Dunn: How would it work out if freight were 
included ? 

Peter Junkersfeld: We made no calculations on that, and it 
is a hard thing to estimate. 

The most optimistic speakers on this subject of railway 
electrification have said that they hardly expected to see all of 
the railways electrified within their lifetime; in other words, it 
is largely a problem of the next generation. We all agree that 
we should look out for the next generation, but in doing so we 
should not neglect the present. The electrification of steam 
railways at and near their terminals, however, is particularly im- 
portant, in fact that problem is a live and pressing one now. 

In the electrification of such terminals the question of direct 
current or alternating current has by no means yet been settled. 
There is still a great deal of controversy on this point, and the 
probabilities are, in my mind, that ultimately the direct current 
will perhaps be largely used in electrifying terminals. This 
does not apply to the electrification of long steam railroad lines, 
trunk lines, etc., but it does apply to the electrification of termi- 
nals, not only because of the present state of the railway motor 
art, but also because of agitation against overhead high tension 
wires and things of that sort particularly in large cities, 


a 


—— oo 9 


———— 


a a ae 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1403 


We seem in this country to be passing into an era in which 
public regulation will perhaps have quite a great deal more 
effect on electrical development than in the past, and we are 
confirmed in that impression if we observe the experiences in 
other countries. In many of these, the electrical development 
has not been so great as in this country, not because they are 
less ingenious, but because they have had certain handicaps. 
These handicaps may appear here, thre is already some evidence 
that they will appear, and may work somewhat against the 
operation of terminals with high tension overhead trolleys, but 
may not work against future similar single-phase operation of 
the long railway lines. 

Coming now to the question of power supply for terminals, 
and even admitting for the moment that possibly single-phase 
motors could be used for that purpose, we should be extremely 
careful before recommending an odd frequency, because on the 
crowded tracks of the terminals the question of reliability and 
continuity in moving the trains is of primary importance; 
of much greater importance than the moving of the trains be- 
tween the large cities. In order to secure the best results it 
should not only be possible for the railway companies to buy 
power, when this can be done more economically, but at least to 
be in a position to readily interchange power with other power 
supplying companies. Otherwise, the railroad companies will 
have to make large investments in reserve power equipment 
to protect their business. The greatest factor in economical 
electric power generation is a diversified demand, which means 
a very large number of peaks, and as a result non-coincident 
peaks. One of the greatest factors in electrical development in 
a community is low cost of electric power. That can only be 
secured in the ultimate by having an arrangement so that the 
interchange of power can be made readily and quickly between 
the different power consuming systems whether owned or operat- 
ed by one or by several companies. 

The selection of the frequency for any given service should be 
based on the predominating demand. In a number of the 
larger cities in this country the predominating demand has been 
in favor of 25 cycles. That condition still exists to-day, and Dr. 
Steinmetz has told us that for synchronous converter work, which 
is 75 per cent. at least of the total demand in three or four of the 
larger cities, that 25 cycles is the best frequency. For that 
additional reason, we should be careful before recommending any 
odd frequency if we want to conserve the best interests of the 
various companies or clients we represent. 

Henry G. Stott: I think that the question of supplying power 
for railroads has been looked at from a slightly different stand- 
point than it is by those who are accustomed to the conditions 
obtaining in most of the large companies that are developing 
their own power. I wonder which power plant in the United 
States could ‘give an emergency supply equal to 25% of its rated 


1404 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY [June 27 


capacity. Railroad plants and lighting plants have to be de- 
signed for a peak load. In a lighting plant the peak load will 
last not to exceed 400 hours per annum. ‘That means an enor- 
mous investment for a short time. The railroad plants have 
practically a peak load of from 800 to 1000 hours per annum. 
How can we expect either our lighting plants or railroad plants 
to carry a reserve of 25% above their peaks for the purpose of 
guaranteeing a supply to anyone else, and if they do it, at what 
price can they do it? 

The question seems to me to be one which will be solved by 
the location of a number of plants along our railroad lines. 
These plants will be able to give a much more reliable service, 
which, after all, will ultimately be the criterion applied by every- 
one to the question, rather than the cost. Imagine, for example, 
a transmission line from Niagara Falls to New York, and our 
railroads depending upon it, and subject to every thunder storm 
that comes up. I have no data at hand to show what the 
average interruptions of such power would be, but I know this— 
it would be greatly in excess of the interruptions which would 
obtain in a number of smaller plants distributed along the line. 
In other words, we can get better insurance by carrying our 
power in the shape of coal on freight cars than we can by carrying 
the power on high-tension wires. The insurance given by a 
number of distributed plants is going to be infinitely greater 
than we can obtain in any other way. 

A. H. Armstrong: From the discussion it would appear that 
certain advantages in motor design can be taken advantage of 
at 15 cycles which are not possible with higher frequencies. 
The problem now becomes one of weighing possible advantages 
of motor construction against the handicap of using 15 cycles 
for the gencrating and distributing system, and seeing if these 
advantages cre sufficiently great to warrant the introduction of 
an odd frequency with all its engineering and commercial com- 
plications. The history of alternating-current distribution has 
been a constant tendency toward the adoption of lower fre- 
quencies as the demands of new apparatus became pressing. 
Up till now the question of low frequency has been governed by 
the performance of converters. A frequency of 25 cycles has 
been sufficiently low to satisfy all the needs of the situation. 
With the advent of the alternating-current single-phase motor, 
we have a type of apparatus calling for low frequency, but the 
greater advantages of 15 cycles must be great indeed to warrant 
a departure from the standard 25 cycles now in universal use, 
especially as the single-phase motor is not in any sense inopera- 
tive at the higher frequency. It is not a question of the adoption 
of 15 cycles in order to make alternating-current motor installa- 
tions possible, as the recent inventions of Mr. Alexanderson and 
others have given us a motor which is thoroughly commercial 
at 25 cycles. 

I agree thoroughly with Mr. Junkersfeld that the electrification 


a 


Se ee ee ee ee 


EE 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1405 


of steam railroads is not to be considered entirely from an 
alternating-current standpoint, and, instead of steam road termi- 
nals presenting a problem calling for a change in the frequency of 
supply in order better to accommodate the limitations of alter- 
nating-current motor design, I would suggest that this class of 
railroad electrification presents a problem of alternating versus 
direct current with a decided preference for direct current. 

While recent improvements have made the alternating-current 
motor a thoroughly commercial piece of apparatus with a fre- 
quency supply of 25 cycles, due weight must be given to the 
further consideration that any continued development of this 
type of apparatus must show further improvements which will 
make 25 cycles still more desirable; in other words, having a 
successful 25-cycle alternating-current motor to-day, we can 
look to the future with the confident hope that any continued 
development will still further minimize any possible advantage 
which 15 cycles may enjoy over 25 cycles. At such a short 
period as two months ago, it appeared that a frequency of 15 
cycles was necessary in order to make possible the construction 
of large alternating-current single-phase motors giving good 
commutation. The improvements made in two months, how- 
ever, have made the adoption of 15 cycles less attractive, and it 
is fair to assume that we have not heard the last from alterna- 
ting-current motor designers and that the future holds bright 
promise of still further developments. If we can get a motor 
just as good at 25 cycles, or even nearly as good, there is no 
reason to adopt low frequency. In fact, there is every reason 
to adhere to a frequency so universally in use as 25 cycles. 

WN. W. Storer: I have only a few words to say in conclusion. 
Mr. Steinmetz raised the point in regard to suitability of 15 cycles 
for railway work. He insists that the lower the frequency the 
better the motor willbe. Onthis point, I cannot agree with him. 
There is much more to be considered in building a single-phase 
motor than simply to reduce the short-circuit current to a 
minimum and thus obtain good commutation. If the frequency 
is reduced much below 15 cycles, the pulsations of. torque will 
cause considerable trouble. Everything considered, I regard 
15 cycles as the best frequency for railway purposes. It is a 
simple matter to obtain very satisfactory commutation in a 15- 
cycle single-phase motor. Within the last few days we have 
been testing the locomotive of which I speak and I have seen 
the motor carry 100 per cent. overload in current for several 
minutes at a time when hauling a train with the brakes set, and 
there was practically no sparking at the commutator, the com- 
mutation being much better than almost any of the standard 
direct-current series motors could do under similar circumstances. 

So far as commutation is concerned, we have not regarded that 
as the main reason for recommending a lower frequency than 
25 cycles for railway work. Our desire has been simply to in- 
crease the capacity of the motors. If this Alexanderson motor 


1406 CHOICE OF FREQUENCY ~ [June 27 


which has been mentioned by so many speakers is able to give 
the same capacity at 25 cycles that the compensated series-wound 
motor gives at 15 cycles, I should say by all means stick to 25 
cycles, unless there are some other defects in the motor of which 
we are not aware. No one wishes to add another to the standard 
frequencies any less than I do. We should cling to the standards 
as far as possible. I believe that, if in future development it is 
found that the installation of 15-cycle current for the electrifica- 
tion of a large system can be done more cheaply and operated 
more cheaply than the same work can be done with 25 cycles, 
the 15 cycles will certainly be used. As I have said before, it 
is solely a matter of dollars and cents. 

Now, in regard to power distribution, I am much gratified to 
learn that the power required by the steam railroads entering 
Chicago is such an insignificant amount compared with that re- 
quired for other purposes. For this very reason, there should be 
practically no interference in that case with the systems now in 
operation. The steam railroads certainly will require enough 
power when they electrify their terminals in and about Chicago, 
or any other large terminal, to build their own power houses and 
furnish their own power throughout. Ido not believe it would be 
at all feasible for the company to draw, even to a very limited 
extent, from the lighting companies for power to operate their 
railways. 

I agree with Mr. Stott that it is impossible for the various in- 
dustrial plants to carry sufficient reserve capacity to take care 
of 25 per cent. or 20 per cent. of their normal load to provide 
for railway emergencies, particularly as the biggest railroad 
loads will come just as they do in street car service, at the hours 
of the day where the lighting load is heaviest and all the people 
want to travel at the same time. Steam railways must work 
out their own salvation. In electrifying their lines they must 
provide sufficient reserve capacity to take care of the entire 
system, 


: ie 


ae 


Se ee 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


COMMUTATING-POLE DIRECT-CURRENT RAILWAY 
MOTORS 


BY E. H. ANDERSON 


General. In order to appreciate the development and reasons 
for the existence of a commutating-pole railway motor, it is 
well to discuss in some degree some other developments. In 
the beginning, railway-motor designers had many difficulties to 
contend with. 

1. The question of gearing was possibly foremost, whether it 
should be single or double reduction or possibly gearless. All 
these were tried with more or less success. The pendulum swung 
back and forth from this point, but it has settled partly and is still 
settling. The small motor (automobile) is now more usually 
double reduction; however, in some cases, single reduction is 
used where weight is not of importance. The usual railway 
motor has settlec down to single reduction. In the larger railway 
motor, where the work approaches that of a locomotive, it is 
often questionable whether single reduction or gearless should be 
used. When powers are small, as in the case of single-car units, 
the motor is naturally provided with single-reduction gearing. 
Then again, for large locomotives and high speeds, obviously the 
motor should be of gearless construction, this being especially 
true in the light of what may be done with gearless bipolar motors 
of direct-current design. 

2. Possibly, insulation is next in order, various methods having 
been tried. The conductors havebeen covered with a variety of 
materials, but double or triple cotton-covered insulation has 
practically become standard. The slot insulation has been 
through various changes; for wire-wound machines it has 
settled down to a good varnished cambric with a protecting tape 

1407 


1408 ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS [June 2/ 


of cotton, although an all-asbestos insulation of armature coils 
is promising. 

Where bars are used as armature conductors, it is possible to 
insulate them entirely with mica. This type of insulation has 
been fully developed and may be considered as standard. 

The field insulation has long been in a state of evolution, but 
is pretty well standardized on a basis of mica in metallic shells 
for the larger ribbon-wound field-coils, and varnished cambric 
for the smaller fields wound with wire. Here also an all-asbestos 
insulation is promising. 

3. The present method of lubricating the bearings with oil has 
resulted from a process of elimination; many forms of grease-cups, 
oil-cups, wicks, etc., having been tried; in fact, the preferred 
lubrication at one time was grease. 

With the advent of interurban trolley roads came greater 
speeds, giving rise to many more car-miles per day, and com- 
plaints arose of short life of bearings, injury to armatures, etc. 
The methods of lubrication underwent many changes, but are 
now well established as wool-waste and oil; no doubt a good 
solution of a difficult and important problem. 

4. During this period of development, the armature was 
changed from a smooth to a slotted core, and much thought was 
given to the size of commutator, number of segments, turns per 
coil, etc., in the effort to produce successful operation of the 
commutator. 

With all forms of copper brushes there was most destructive 
sparking and enormous local currents in coils short-circuited by 
the brush during commutation. 

The carbon brush was tried and found to be the greatest im- 
provement yet discovered in producing successful commutation. 
The greater contact resistance decreased the local currents to 
reasonable values, yet the energy lost by the greater contact 
resistance in the main circuit was small. The carbon brush thus 
opened up possibilities in design not before thought of. 

The inductance of coils was reduced by placing two in one 
slot instead of one, thus saving insulation and reducing the 
diameter of the armature. Later came the three coils per slot 
armature, this being the standard for many motors to-day. 

As motors had to be built to fill a restricted space, not only for 
large power and small diameters, but with good commutation at 
higher potentials, it gave rise to the four and five coils per slot 
armature. Many coils per slot necessarily increased the slot- 


ee 


1907] ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS 1409 


width, and this in time called for a laminated-field pole structure 
in order to limit eddy-current losses. In the meantime the 
operator was demanding higher potentials, more work from the 
motors, and better commutation, and the commutation had not 
kept pace with other developments, in fact, was becoming more 
troublesome as compared with other difficulties, largely on ac- 
count of higher operating potentials. Some means had thus to 
be adopted for radically improving commutation, and the follow- 
ing pages deal more particularly with this subject. 


Fig.No/ D.C Serjes Drurn Arrmature 
33 Slats /Co// per Slat 


Zz. 
a 


mo eee rae 


a ASSES SS 


ages 


See errr a 
ZZ L, 
ass 
ZZ 
Sa as 


Ra 

AC SIS AY ASS 
WSLS ALY 
WAS 
ENON 


V LZ 
Ss 


ite oa BS) 


Armature forces. The armature in its simplest conception is 
a drum, divided into four sections for four poles; under a north 
pole is a broad distributed sheet of current running parallel to the 
shaft; under a south pole is also a broad distributed sheet of 
current, but in reverse direction. 

This distributed armature current produces a magnetizing 
force which changes the distribution of the main flux in the 
pole-faces, as shown in Fig. 2. It will be seen that in the 


1410 ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS [June 27 


center of the pole there is no distributing effect, but in the center 
between poles there is the maximum magnetizing effect from 
the armature. This is where the conductors are commutated 
by the brush and the direction of the current reversed in passing 
from the zone of one pole to the zone of the next. 

The magnetizing effect of the armature, being a maximum 


VIVTULCLALIFIG 


te) 


Fesu/tant 


ane 


midway between poles, produces a flux through the air-space to 
the frame. The conductors in motion cut this flux, producing 
a voltage in the coil to be commutated. 

The combined result of armature and field magnetizing effect 
is to cause a flux to leak from the pole-tip over into the arma- 
ture just where the conductors are being commutated, 


en) 


- 


ee ae 


1907] ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS 1411 


The two leakage fluxes are alike and add to produce voltage 
in the coil which is being commutated. Thus there is a potential 
between commutator-bars, and when these are short-circuited 
by the brush a local current is caused to flow in the coil under 
commutation. This local current adds to the line current 
already there. Any conductor carrying current has lines of 
force interlinked about itself caused by the current in the 
conductor. The conductors, imbedded in and surrounded on 
three sides by iron, have a good opportunity of surrounding 
themselves with a lot of leakage flux. The interlinkage of leak- 
age flux is similar to the inertia in mechanics. 

The combined current (line and local) has still greater inter- 
linkage of leakage lines and becomes more difficult to reverse. 
The reversing has been done heretofore by the increasing re- 
sistance of contact between the brush and the commutator-bar 
as the latter is passing out under the brush, the rate of change 
of current ever increasing. This causes the reactance or kick- 
ing voltage to become higher and higher. As the bar leaves 
the brush, the change in current in the coil becomes so rapid 
that an appreciable voltage is induced and arcs through the air 
from the bar to the brush, or vice versa, thus producing what 
is commonly known as sparking. 

The object is, then, to remove the sparking by counteracting 
one, or all, of its causes. Should we place midway between 
the main poles another coil, having the same magnetizing power 
as the armature, but so connected as to magnetize in the re- 
verse direction to the armature, there would be nothing to 
cause a leakage flux from the armature to the frame. Then, 
again, should we further excite this coil so as to overcome and 
balance the combined effect of armature and field forces, com- 
monly known as distortion and leakage of the main. flux from 
the pole-tip, we would annul this troublesome cause of sparking. 
After the above two effects are taken care of, there remains 
a force necessary to produce a potential sufficient to reverse 
the current in the armature coil. 

In order to produce this potential there must be such a 
density of flux as will generate this required voltage by the 
conductors cutting the flux in revolving. The width of such 
magnetic density should be sufficient to embrace the conductors 
commutated by the brush when running in either direction of 


rotation. 
The commutating voltage produced by the flux of the com- 


1412 ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS [June 27 


mutating pole is the accelerating force required to change the 
direction of current in the armature coils one by one as they 
come under the brush. It must be sufficient to accomplish 
this in the time that the coil, being connected to two adjacent 
commutator-bars, is under the brush. When the commutator- 
bar leaves the brush, the current is already reversed, flowing 
in proper direction, and is of the proper amount, so there is no 
tendency to spark. Commutation may then be said to be 
perfect. 

As stated before, an armature coil imbedded in iron is sur- 
rounded by a leakage flux, which is caused by the current in 
the coil, and may be said to have magnetic inertia or momen- 
tum. This is similar in mechanics to a revolving shaft bearing 
a mounted flywheel. The voltage induced in the coil by the 
flux from the commutating pole may be likened to a constant 
counter torque; this counter torque serving to slow down the 
revolutions, stop, and cause an increase in speed in the opposite 
direction. 

It is evident that there may be a particular armature current, 
speed of motor, and flux from commutating pole wherein the 
above described conditions will obtain. It will also be appre- 
ciated that the voltage induced by the commutating-pole flux 
will vary directly as the speed; furthermore, the time that the 
coil is under the brush is shorter as the speed is higher, and 
vice versa; also that the time required to reverse a current is 
inversely as the voltage. The conclusion is that the action is 
entirely automatic throughout the entire range of speed with 
the particular condition of current and commutating-pole 
density. 

The next question is: can the action be automatic for varying 
current as well as speed? The commutating pole may be 
excited by the main current of the motor, being connected 
permanently in series with the armature. The commutating- 
pole flux will then vary almost directly as the current, which 
is the desired result. When the current is half, the commu- 
tating-pole flux is half, and the commutating voltage corre- 
sponding thereto. Thus the action is entirely automatic for 
variation in current or speed, or both. 

Fig. 3 shows that the relation between commutating-pole 
density and current should be a straight line, rising and falling 
directly with the current. 

It is well understood that an absolutely straight line be- 


ee EE Eee 


1907] ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS 1413 


tween current and density cannot be obtained when a more or 
less saturated iron circuit carries the flux, but it can be ap- 
proached sufficiently close for all practical purposes by careful 
design and experience in these matters. In a series motor the 
density of the whole iron circuit increases as the load comes 
on, and there is an increasing stability in commutation which 
serves to offset, partly, if not entirely, the lack of commutating- 
pole density ona heavy load. The combined effect is to produce 
perfect commutation at all loads. 

Since the commutation is automatically taken care of for 
variations in speed and current, it is possible to change the 
voltage impressed on the motor through quite a range without 
sparking. This is thoroughly borne out by motors of 50 to 250 
h.p., recently constructed in this country. 


F179. No.3 


Flur or Density 


Commutatig Pole 


Current 


The only limitations in raising the voltage are: 


1. Armature speed and strength of binding wire. 
2. Volts between bars. 
3. Insulation. 


This brings us naturally to the question: what effect will 
this commutating pole have on designs for voltages higher 
than are now general for railway service? 

Railway-motor commutators before being connected to the 
armature winding are tested from bar to bar with 400 to 500 
volts, alternating current, which means a maximum of 40% 
more, so that actual jumping of current from bar to bar on a 
clean commutator would not occur at less than 500 volts per 
segment. An ordinary commutator of 111 segments and four 


1414 ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS [June 27 


poles would, under these conditions, be good for 13,000 volts 
between brushes. The actual jumping of current across side 
micas of a clean commutator is not the limiting condition. 

The limiting condition is the voltage per bar which wil, main- 
tain an arc already established. The allowable voltage per 
segment is largely dependent upon the condition of the com- 
mutator. The condition of the commutator depends upon the 
deteriorating tendencies, such as sparking and other causes, 

like poor carbon brushes, hard side micas, etc. 

If the sparking is eliminated, the etching of the commutator- 
bars is largely reduced. The carbon brushes are required to 
carry only the line current, instead of the line and a largeamount 
of local current; therefore the brushes are not disintegrated so 
rapidly. The carbon brush has less mica to wear off, because 
the bars are not burned away. The result is that the carbon 
brushes work better, and the commutator stays in a very much 
better condition. The conclusion from the above is that much 
higher average volts per segment may be used with commutating- 
pole motors than with motors not having commutating 
poles. 

The usual non-commutating pole railway motor, 40 to 50 h.p., 
has a commutator about 9.5 in. in diameter, with 111 to 125 
segments. The average potential between segments is approxi- 
mately 18 volts. Large motors, operating on 650 volts normal, 
have 155 to 165 segments, and the average potential between 
segments is approximately 17 volts. If the average volts 
between segments on commutating-pole motors be assumed 
as 24, and the number of commutator bars per inch of cir- 
cumference as 5, we have the following possible voltages on 
various sizes of motors and commutator diameters. 


Horse Diameter of Maximum 
power commutator volts motor 
AU Se aera tot noo acter i ACR Eee ) 850 
TL Ossiusica Boyt Aree cas, thine hee St a 1040 
LOO sh aitreicnn tae net: akc 13 1230 
LOOK roa Ros teks) tat, eaeteie tne tiee t 14.5 1370 
4 OT teres art caren eee a Se oe , 16 7 1510 
250 2 alte" eli aint boca Wiener de. Be areas 18 1700 


The above may be said to apply only as far as tendencies are 
concerned. Not all these various voltages would be practical. 
It would be better, for various reasons, to adopt 1200 volts as 
the higher standard. 


The propositions requiring higher potential than 600 volts, 


oe 


= -. 


~~ _— 


1907] ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS 1415 


are usually 30- to 50-ton cars with speeds of 40 to 60 miles per hr. 
These call for a motor of 75 h.p. or larger, so the sizes naturally 
fall where 1200 volts can be made with reasonable cost. 

The commutating-pole motor, on 600 volts, makes possible 
commutation and general operation in service many times better 
than that of the non-commutating pole motor. On 1200 volts, 
the commutation is decidely better than with a non-commutat- 


ing pole type motor on 600 volts. 


The 1200-volt motor requires proportionally more insulation 
than the present 600-volt motor. This extra insulation re- 
quires more diameter and more external dimension. 


Theoretical possibilities of voltage. We have the possibility 
of 1200 volts per motor, the motor having four poles. Should 
the motor be bipolar and the speeds high enough to make the 
design possible, we may have 2500 volts per motor. Then 
again, if there should be two windings on one core, a commutator 
on each, and these windings connected in series, we have the possi- 
bility of a 5000-volt motor. Then again, should we have a 
double-track railway and the rail neutral, we might have 10,000 
volts direct current between the two trolley wires. 

It will be appreciated that more voltage means more insula- 
tion, more space, and more cost. It will also be seen that the 
control, car lighting, and operation of auxiliary apparatus 
require special consideration. 


Service capacity. The non-commutating pole motor has in- 
herently a higher iron density, which serves as a compensating 
feature, improving commutation. The commutator-pole com- 
pensates for armature reaction and takes care of troubles due 
to lack of compensating features; a lower iron density may there- 
fore be utilized and lower iron losses obtained. 

The absence of sparking makes the commutating losses very 
much less. The rating on the hourly basis may not be much 
greater than with the non-commutating polemotor. Onaccount 
of core-loss and commutator loss being considerably less, and these 
prominent features in heating, the commutating-pole motor has 
naturally a higher continuous rating; it is not only capable of 
taking large fluctuations of voltage and current, but will have a 
greater all-day service capacity. This latter feature becomes 
more pronounced as the distance between stops is greater. 

There are several ways of making use of higher direct-current 
potentials. The most prominent of these are the following: 


1416 ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS [June 2% 


1. a. City service, 600-volt trolley. 
Maximum speed 25 to 30 miles per hr. 
Stops and schedules incident to city service. 


>. Interurban service, 1200-volt trolley- 
Maximum speed 50 to 60 miles per hr. 
Few stops and high schedules. 


The motors would be wound and insulated for 1200 volts. 
Two motors would be connected in multiple, and the two 
‘groups of a four-motor equipment handled in series and in 
parallel. 


2. a. City service, 600-volt trolley. 
Maximum speed 25 to 30 miles per hr. 
Stops and schedules incident to city service. 


b. Suburban service, 600-volt trolley, 
Maximum speed of 30 to 60 miles per hr. 
Stops and schedules incident to suburban business. 


c. Interurban service, 1200-volt trolley, 
Maximum speed 50 to 60 miles per hr. 
Few stops and high schedule speed. 


The motors would be wound for 600 volts with a relatively low 
armature speed and insulated for 1200 volts. 

On a 600-volt trolley two motors are connected in multiple. 
and the two groups handled in series and parallel. 

On a 1200-volt trolley, two motors are connected in series, 
and the two groups of four-motor equipment handled in series 
and parallel. 

The armature speed and commutating features should be 
so designed that if one wheel slips and one motor has 1200 volts 
or so across its terminal, its armature speed will be reasonable 
and the commutation good. 

Interurban cars with four axles and four motors usually 
accelerate at 1 to 1.5 miles per hr. per sec.; this requires about 
100 to 150 lb. per ton, which is 5 to 7.5% coefficient of traction. 
These are low coefficient values for interurban roads and are 
seldom met with; however, should slipping occur, the motor 
design should be such that no damage to equipment will result. 
In the city a dirty street may give a low condition of trac- 
tion, but under these conditions, the motors may be used in 
multiple or operated as any four-motor equipment is now 
overated. 


OO 


1907] | ANDERSON: COMMUTATING-POLE MOTORS i417 


ADVANTAGES OF COMMUTATING-PoLE Rattway Morors AS 
COMPARED witH NoN-ComMmutaTING PoLE Tyer 


1. Sparkless commutation even on heavy overloads. 
2. Flashing at commutator largely reduced and probably 
eliminated. 
3. Less wear on commutator. 
4. Cleaner and safer motor because of reduced carbon and 
= copper dust from brushes and commutator. 
2 5. Marked reduction in heating of commutator. 
6. Greater current density in brushes. 
Be 7. Increased life of brushes. 
8. Increased efficiency and free running capacity because of 
lower core and commutator losses. 
3 9. Possibility of successfully using higher voltages. 
- 10. Greater facility in design of large motors, especially as 


regards commutation. 
11. Possibility of increasing service capacity of motors by 


blowing. 


1418 DIRECT-CURRENT RAILWAY MOTORS (June 27 


Discussion ON ‘‘ COMMUTATING-POLE DIRECT-CURRENT RAIL- 
way Motors”, at Nracara Fats, N. Y., JUNE 27, 1907 


Gano Dunn: I see a tendency to hail the commutating-pole 
motor as the direct-current motor of the future. I heartily 
appreciate Mr. Anderson’s paper, and the facts it brings out 
with which I am in substantial agreement; but I think it illus- 
trates that we are liable to fads, and that the great success that 
has attended the introduction of the commutating pole so far 
has led some of us to attach to it too much importance. I 
regard the commutating-pole motor as applicable to certain 
classes of machines or conditions of design, such as low volt- 
age, very large size, very high speed. These are found in 
direct-current vurbo-generators, variable-speed motors, such as 
are known as field-weakening motors, railway motors where 
the space is crowded—in short, all machines where the com- 
mutating limit of capacity is reached before the heating limit. 
There still remain other classes of machines where none of these 
conditions applies. We have not yet exhausted our ingenuity 
in designing motors, so perhaps we may soon be able to equal 
in weight, cost, and efficiency, the commutating-pole motors, 
and without their complication. 

It should be borne in mind that the commutating pole adds 
considerable complication. One of the principal advantages of 
direct-current motors in the past has been their simplicity, and 
simplicity is of first importance in electrical design. 

It may be said that in a four-pole motor we need add only 
two commutating poles, and we may modify in one way or an- 
other the general type of the commutating-pole motor to make 
it more simple; but, when all has been said and done, we have 
a motor that has several more poles and considerable additional 
complication in its windings and connections. 

J. C. Lincoln: Have these 1200-volt motors ever been used 
in practice? 

E. H. Anderson: I do not know that there are any 1200-volt 
motors in this country in railway service. There are some 
contracts, however, which have been taken, and motors are 
building for 1200 volts. These motors have been tested on 
testing stands as high as 1800 volts for commutation. 

W.N. Smith: Does the commutator require any more room, 
any more air-space around it, than with the older type of 
motor in order to prevent flashing-over to the frame in actual 
service. . 

E. H. Anderson: On the 600-volt motor there is ustially 
about 1.25 in. flashing distance, and on some motors as low as 
0.5 in. Dirt, copper, and carbon dust affect the flashing dis- 
tance very materially. If we have a commutator which runs 
very much cleaner, does not have the copper and carbon dust, 
we do not need as much flashing distance. However, in order 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1419 


to improve in that direction, 1$ or 14 in. creeping distances 
are allowed on 600-volt motors and 2 to 24 in. on 1200 volts. 
The commutator does not need to be as long on 1200 volts as 
on 600 volts, because of less current to be carried. 


Ns, 


= 
» 
ne 5 
‘ = 
: : = 
‘ ~~ Y 
. 
. i 
- 4} 
? 
+ 7 
sf 
‘ 
vt Ap 
— ree 4 
2 os i 
sie . 
4 ‘ 
‘ 
: e 1 e 
ri 
a = tee! hi, 
| Rioe| 
- . 
ers > 
. U 
oy 
: ee — 
1 ioe J 
— 


A report presented at the 24th Annual Convention of 
the American Institute of lectrrcal Engineers, 
Niagara Falls, N. Y. June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A, I. E. E. 


PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS. 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
COMMITTEE ON CODE OF ETHICS. 


AMPERE, N. J., May 17, 1907. 


To the President and Board of Directors of the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers. 


Gentlemen: Your committee, appointed at the annual convention at 
Milwaukee in June, 1906, to consider the advisability of preparing a code 
of engineering ethics, and, if thought best, to prepare such a code, has to 
report as follows: 

While we do not consider it practicable at this time to formulate a code 
of ethics covering explicitly all the conditions which the electrical engi- 
neer may meet in his work, we do consider it both practicable and de- 
sirable to record some of the general principles of professional conduct 
that should be a guide for the electrical engineer, leaving it to him to 
make specific application to the cases which he may meet. We therefore 
subinit and recommend the following, to be printed and distributed to 
the membership, with a view to its discussion and adoption at the ap- 
proaching Annual Convention in June, 1907. 

Respectfully submitted, 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 
Haroitp W. Buck, 
SCHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER. 
Chairman. 


PRINCIPLES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR THE GUIDANCE 
OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER. 


A. General Principles. 

B. Relations of the electrical engineer to his employer, customer, or 
client. 

C. Relations of the electrical engineer to the ownership of the records 
of his work. 

D. Relations of the electrical engineer to the public. 

E. Relations of the electrical engineer to the engineering fraternity. 

F. Relations of the electrical engineer to the standards of his profession. 


1421 


1422 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS {June 27 


A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES. 


1. In both his professional and his business relations the electrical 
engineer should follow strictly the same ethical principles that are recog- 
nized in the social relations of every-day life. He should consider him- 
self personally responsible for the character of the enterprises and the 
persons with which he is associated professionally. 

2. Before entering into professional relations, it is therefore the duty 
of the electrical engineer to satisfy himself that the enterprises with which 
he connects himself are of a legitimate character. If, after becoming 
associated he finds them to be of a questionable nature he should sever 
his connection as soon as possible. It should not be considered an excuse 
that his connection extends only to legitimate engineering work. 

3. An electrical engineer permitting the use of his name in any enter- 
prise or exploitation becomes morally responsible for the character of 
the latter. He should therefore not allow the use of his name in connec- 
tion with anything upon which he is not qualified by training and ex- 
perience to exercise competent judgment. 

4. The electrical engineer should take care that credit for engineering 
work is attributed to those who, as far as his knowledge of the matter 
goes, are the real authors of such work. 

5. The electrical engineer should incline toward and not away from 
standards of all kinds, since standardization is peculiarly essential to the 
general progress of the profession. This applies to construction, meas- 
urement and expression, or nomenclature as well as to conduct, or ethics. 
Even the tendency to give individuality by providing special construc- 
tion may sometimes be avoided with advantage. 


B. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO HIS EMPLOYER, 
CUSTOMER, OR CLIENT. 


7. The electrical engineer should consider the protection of his client’s 
interests as his first obligation, and therefore should avoid every act that 
would be contrary to this duty; if any other consideration such as pro- 
fessional obligations or restrictions interfere with his so acting, in ac- 
cordance with the expectation of his client, he should inform him of the 
situation. 

8. He can honorably accept compensation, financially or otherwise, 
from one side or party only, interested in the same matter. The electrical 
engineer, whether consulting, designing, or operating, may therefore not 
accept commissions, either directly or indireculy, from other parties 
dealing with his principals. 

9. Electrical engineers in a position to decide on the use of inventions, 
apparatus, etc., should not be financially interested in their use, as by 
receiving a royalty, etc., unless the matter is clearly understood by the 
client. 

10. Electrical engineers should not accept employment while finan- 
cially interested in a rival concern except upon the express permission 
of both parties. An electrical engineer may be employed by more than 
one party, as in the case of a consulting engineer, when the interests of 
the parties do not conflict and it is understood, as is usual in such cases, 
that he is not expected to devote his entire time to the work of one party 


a 


1907] PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 1423 


but is free to enter into other engagements. A consulting engineer 
permanently retained by a party should notify other prospective employers 
of this affiliation before entering into relations with them. A consulting 
engineer when not exclusively retained by one side may advise rival 
concerns, with the full knowledge of all of them and upon taking care that 
the interests of the parties do not conflict in the particular matter handled. 

11. Operating engineers should consider themselves responsible for 
defects in apparatus or dangerous conditions of operation, should bring 
the same to the attention of their employers and urge remedial action. 
If the causes of the danger are not removed they should withdraw. 

12. An electrical engineer should in general be considered directly 
responsible to his employer or client for the successful fulfilment of the 
work upon which he has been engaged and for its satisfactory performance 
as a whole. It should therefore be clearly understood at the outset just 
what the extent or the limitations of responsibility of the engineer are to 
be. Whether he has been employed merely as designer or whether he is 
retained to design and to superintend construction; whether to design 
only the chief features or to pass as well upon all details of the apparatus 
that is to be installed. Attention should be directed to the fact that 
defects in the manufacture of material or apparatus is a matter distinct 
from the matters of design or installation. An engineer should not be 
held responsible for the unsatisfactory performance of a plant resulting 
from defective apparatus furnished, unless he has undertaken to include 
this subject. 


C. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE OWNERSHIP OF THE 
ReEcorpDs oF HIS WORK: 


15. The following general principles should be recognized: 

If in executing his work, the electrical engineer uses data or information 
which are not common and public property, but which he receives, 
directly or indirectly from his employer, or if the problem solved by the 
engineer is met in the pursuit of his work for his employer, and is not of 
such character that his attention would have been directed to it regardless 
of his relations to his employer, the products of his work, in the form of 
inventions, plans, designs, etc., are not his private property, but the 
property of his employer, though the engineer may be entitled to special 
remuneration for such inventions, etc. 

16. If in the execution of the work the engineer uses only his own 
knowledge or data or information which are public property by prior 
publication, etc., and receives no engineering data from his employer or 
customer, except performance specifications, the results of the work, 
such as inventions, plans, designs, etc., are the private property of the 
engineer, and his employer or customer is entitled to their use only in the 
specified case. 

17. All the work done by the engineer in the form of inventions, plans, 
designs, etc., which are outside of the field of engineering for which his 
employer has retained him, are the engineer’s private property. 

18. When an engineer or manufacturer builds apparatus from engi- 
neering designs supplied to him by his customer, the designs remain the 
property of the customer and should not be duplicated for other cus- 


1424 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS [June 27 


tomers without express permission. When the engineer or manufacturer 
and his customer are jointly to work out designs and plans or develop 
inventions, a clear understanding should be arrived at before the beginning 
of the work regarding the proportionate rights of ownership in any in- 
ventions, designs, etc., that may result, since in such case both parties 
should be considered to have rights therein. 

19. Any engineering data or information which an 1 electrical engineer 
obtains, directly or indirectly, from his employer or customer, or which he 
creates as a result of such information, must be considered by the engi- 
neer as confidential; and while the engineer is justified in using such 
data or experience in his own practice as going towards his education, the 
publication thereof without express permission is improper, as is also 
its use in producing for other parties, work that is characteristic of the 
original customer or employer. 

20. Designs, data, records and notes made during his engagement by 
an engineer employed under permanent engagement, and referring to his 
work, are his employer’s property. The same matter in the case of a 
consulting electrical engineer are the property of the consulting engineer. 

21. A customer, in buying apparatus, does not acquire any right in its 
design beyond the use in the apparatus purchased. A customer of a 
consulting engineer does not acquire any right to the plans made by the 
consulting engineer except for the specific case for which the apparatus 
was built or the plans made. 


D. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC. 


22. The electrical engineer should endeavor to assist the public to a 
fair and correct general understanding of engineering matters, spread the 
general knowledge of electrical engineering, and discourage wrong or 
exaggerated statements on engineering subjects published in the press or 
otherwise, especially if these statements are made for the purpose of, or 
may lead to inducing the public to participate in unworthy schemes. 

23. Controversies on engineering questions, however, should never be 
carried on in the public press, but should be confined to the technical 
press and the engineering societies. 

24. First publication of inventions or other engineering advances should 
not be made through the public press but rather through the technical 
press and the engineering societies. 

25. The publications which an electrical engineer is justified in making 
through the public press should therefore be of a historical, educational, 
instructive or similar character and should not relate to controversies 
between engineers or on engineering questions, to new inventions, etc., 
nor contain technical criticisms of fellow engineers, and it should be 
considered unprofessional to give opinions without being fully informed 
on all the facts relating to the question, and on the purpose for which the 
opinion is asked, with a full statement of the conditions under which the 
opinion applies. 

26. In giving expert testimony before judicial bodies, the electrical 
engineer should confine himself to brief and clear statements on engi- 
neering or historical facts. He should not give personal opinions without 
so expressly stating, and should avoid pleading on one side or the other. 


7 


eee 


1907] PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 1495 


E, RELATIONS oF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE ENGINEERING 
FRATERNITY. 


30. The electrical engineer should take interest in and show due regard 
for the electrical engineering societies and the technical press. 

31. He should assist his fellow engineers by exchange of general 
nformation, experience, instruction, etc. 

32. He should not take a position left by another electrical engineer 
without satisfying himself that the former has left voluntarily, or for 
proper reasons. 

33. Where engineering work is in charge of an electrical engineer, no 
other electrical engineer should undertake the work except on request of 
or in codperation with the electrical engineer who had charge of the work 
before, unless the latter’s connection with it has already terminated. 

34. An electrical engineer in responsible charge of work should not 
permit other engineers or non-technical persons to over-rule his electrical 
engineering decisions. If this is done and persisted in, he should as 
soon as is practicable withdraw. 

35. In engineering work in charge of a board of engineers, the respective 
limitations of the authority of each should be decided at the outset, and 
each electrical engineer should give full and complete information on his 
part to the other engineers and insist on this being reciprocated. 


F. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE STANDARDS OF 
HIS PROFESSION. 


40. The title “‘ electrician ’’ should be applied to those having practical 
training sufficient to enable them to carry on intelligently certain classes 
of electrical work, such as the installation of electric lights, signaling sys- 
tems, and the operation of small electric plants. 

41. The title ‘‘ electrical engineer ’’ should be applied only to graduates 
from the electrical engineering schools of universities of recognized stand- 
ing, and such men as possess an equivalent knowledge of electrical engi- 
neering. 

42. The title “‘ consulting electrical engineer’ should be applied only 
to those electrical engineers who possess such knowledge and experience 
in electrical engineering as would qualify them to full membership in 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 

Signed, 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 
Haroitp W. Buck, 
SCHUYLER SKAAaTS WHEELER. 
Chairman. 


1426 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS [June 2g 


Discussion on ‘‘ ProposED CopE or Eruics’’, AT NIAGARA 
Fats, N. Y., JUNE 28, 1907 


Schuyler S. Wheeler: The report I have to present repre- 
sents the work during the last year of a special committee of 
three consisting of Charles P. Steinmetz, Harold W. Buck, and 
myself. The committee was appointed at the last annual 
convention to take up questions that were raised by the presi- 
dential address of last year on the subject of engineering honor. 
This address brought up the subject of ethics and the pro- 
fessional conduct of engineers. A committee was appointed to 
look into the matter and see if any kind of a code should be 
prepared. 

I am happy to say that our committee has been most har- 
monious in all of its conclusions. We have-not disagreed over 
asingle feature in the entire report. Another matter that I want 
to mention is that we have no idea that the present report is 
right throughout. We look upon it as a mere starting point, 
and we think that it will be very useful to us all, because it will 
at least furnish us what engineers call a datum line; and 
taking this we can go on with it and make improvements, and 
constantly make our list of principles better as time goes on. 

The report was presented to the Board of Directors and ac- 
cepted and ordered to be printed and sent to all of the mem- 
bers of the Institute in order that they might examine it so as 
to pass upon it intelligently at this convention. 

William McClellan: I think that all of us at times have 
found the need of some such code as this. Questions come to 
us of more or less importance concerning which we should like 
to know just how other men of our profession would think. I 
believe that if this proposed code is examined carefully, it will 
be found that we are not limited or constrained by minor 
details but are given broad principles which may be interpreted 
according to the facts of the particular case. No doubt some 
of us would write such a code differently in details and would, 
perhaps, desire to have certain changes. This, however, 
should not prevent it from receiving favorable consideration 
from every member of the Institute. 

Henry G. Stott: I think that the committee has done very 
admirable work in bringing together for the first time a code 
of ethics for the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
but there are some individual rules with which I do not agree 
at all. Take, for example, No. 11, which reads as follows: 

11. Operating engineers should consider themselves responsible’ for 
defects in apparatus or dangerous conditions of operation, should bring 


the same to the attention of their employers and urge remedial action. 
If the causes of the danger are not removed they should withdraw. 


Now, that is purely academic. Is there in this room any 


operating engineer who would do a thing like that? I for one 
would not, because the conditions may be guch that it is abso- 


eT ee ee ee ee See \\ 4 Pe AL 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1427 


lutely impossible for the employer with all the resources at his 
command to overcome these defects. The operating engineer 
would not be doing his duty if he should withdraw; his duty 
is to stand by the apparatus and his employer until such time 
as the defects can be remedied. , 

I also take exception to the following rule, No. 12, which 
states among other things that, 


12. It should therefore be clearly understood at the outset just what 
the extent or the limitations of responsibility of the engineer are to be. 


Personally, I would not have a man work for me who started 
out with such a conception of his duties. I would want a man 
who would agree to accept responsibilities beyond what I ask 


-him to accept at first, and I think every employer would feel 


the same way. I would not want to have it understood that 
an engineer is responsible up to that particular bolt or this 
particular plate and not any further, and the next man who 
comes along is responsible for what follows. If there is some- 
thing wrong, is it not our duty, as engineers, to report it ? 

I think the rules are altogether too specific, and I would like 
to see them recast so as to make them broader. 

Rule 20, states that designs, data, records, and notes obtained 
by an engineer employed on salary, are his employers’ prop- 
erty; while the same matter in the case of a consulting electrical 
engineer paid by fee or by commission, are the property of the 
consulting engineer. I do not see the fine point in that dis- 
tinction. 

Then, again, Rule 26 as follows: 

26. In giving expert testimony before judicial bodies, the electrical 
engineer should confine himself to brief and clear statements on engi- 


neering or historical facts. He should not give personal opinions without 
so expressly stating, and should avoid pleading on one side or the other. 


The man who is on the stand giving expert testimony does 
not get a chance to express himself. It is entirely up to the 
lawyers as to what the man says. He usually says “ Yes” 
or ‘“‘ No”’, and he does not get a chance to express his opinion. 

Rule 32 provides: 

32. He should not take a position left by another eiectrical engineer 
without satisfying himself that the former has left it voluntarily, or for 
proper reasons. 


That is a perfectly correct attitude, but it may be there 
would be such a condition as that a man has been ill, or has 
absented himself from duty for some reason or other, and he 
cannot be reached. Under these conditions should we say 
that the employer has not the right to ask some one else to 
take up his duties if the man has,absented himself? I think not. 

H. W. Buck: Mr. Stott thinks that some of the rules are 
too specific. It was with the full knowledge of the committee 
that some of the rules were made very specific, and it was the 
belief of the committee that by only making them so radical 


1428 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS {June 28 


and specific could general criticism be brought forth, by at- 
tracting attention to the various questions at issue. The com- 
mittee realizes that many changes will have to be made, but 1 
personally feel that if it is the sentiment of the meeting to 
have such a code at all, the best way is to recommend its adoption 
as offered by the committee. Ifitisallowed to lapse and further 
criticism is called for by correspondence or vote, I think it will 
simply result in the gradual disintegration of the proposed code 
through excessive criticism. 

Charles F. Scott: I think that we should accept the report 
and have it published to the membership, with the strong 
endorsement it has in the names of the committee; that our 
Board of Directors should be asked by this meeting to con- 
tinue a committee of this kind for consideration of suggestions 
which may be made to the committee and that the committee 
be asked to present a redraft of the report. 


At the beginning of the next session, on Friday morning, 
June 28, 1907, President Sheldon said: The Chair will enter- 
tain a motion to the effect that the report of the Code of 
Ethics Committee be referred to the Board of Directors for 
their consideration. 

[The motion was made by Henry G. Stott, seconded by Lewis 
B. Stillwell, and adopted by the convention™] 


* For revised Proposed Code of Ethics as considered by the Board of 
Directors and submitted to the membership for suggestions, see Appendix, 
page 1789. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A I.E. E. 


THE ATTITUDE OF THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL TOWARD 
THE PROFESSION OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. 


BY HENRY H. NORRIS 


Introductory. The technical school is primarily an educational 
institution. The purpose is not to teach trades of any order, 
nor is it directly to produce business or professional men. The 
technical school sustains a vital relation to the profession of 
electrical engineering, and it cannot succeed without an under- 
standing of that relation. On the other hand, the profession 
cannot use technical graduates efficiently without a knowledge 
of the purpose underlying their training. That both school 
and profession are coming to understand their relation is made 
evident by many signs. Among these may be mentioned the 
development of graduate-apprentice courses by manufacturing 
and operating companies, the reduction of manual training 
and the increase of scientific training in the schools, the 
formation of employment committees by both companies and 
schools, and the cordial relations existing between practi- 
tioners and teachers. From the first the technical school has 
stood for the encouragement of useful studies with a scientific 
foundation. At first undoubtedly too much emphasis was 
laid upon the practical features of the curriculum, and the 
attempt was made to do in the laboratory what can only be 
done in the factory. This and other faults are being cor- 
rected by the study of industrial conditions, and the work of 
the school is being increasingly appreciated by the profession 
generally. 

The purpose of the present paper is to examine the methods 
of instruction in technical schools in order to ascertain how the 
requirements are being met, and to note the progress made and 

1429 


1430 NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL {June 27 


the prospects for improvement. Instructors in engineering 
realize that they are engaged in a most important business, 
that of preparing men for practical usefulness. In any in- 
dustrial undertaking men are more necessary than money or 
machines, therefore the technical school works upon the most 
important element in commercial success. In many ways such 
a school is like a manufacturing establishment. It secures 
its raw material from the preparatory schools in the form of 
boys with crude ideas of practical life, with little conception of 
the purpose of a technical education, and with a fair preparation 
in several lines of study. During four years it endeavors by 
means of separate and assembling processes to produce men 
who can “ do things.’’ Thus the finished product of the technical 
school forms a most important part of the raw material of 
manufacture, construction, operation, and commerce. 

Resumé of 1903 convention papers on education. At the 
Niagara Falls Convention of the Institute held in 1903 a profitable 
session was devoted to the discussion of technical education. 
Messrs. White, Gherardi, Osborne, and Jackson presented papers 
dealing with various aspects of the subject. The consensus of 
opinion expressed in these papers is that the personality of the 
technical graduate is of more importance than any information 
which he may have acquired. Professor Jackson emphasized 
that the function of a technical school is to produce a capacity 
on the part of the students for becoming engineers. It is the 
duty of a college to learn how to do this, the inference being 
that the teaching of special subjects is a means rather than an 
end. Professor Jackson’s synopsis of the ideal engineer states 
that he is one who is competent to conceive, organize, and 
direct extended industrial enterprises. Mr. White selected a 
number of elements of a young man’s personality which are im- 
portant in business, and he summarized the results of a successful 
education as: (a), the satisfaction which results from possession ; 
(b), the ability to enjoy good society; (c), the practical use which 
may be made of the training; (d), the ability properly to know 
any subject; and (e), the higher rank which will be taken as a 
result of this training. The employer inquires as to the 
business judgment, the mental capacity, and other similar 
characteristics of an applicant for a position. Mr. Gherardi 
separated the natural ability of a student from his school training. 
He does not believe that the training of a telephone engineer 
should be especially different from that of other electrical engi- 


SS 


1907] NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 1431’ 


neers, the training of any engineer properly consisting of such 
studies as will convince him of the necessity of getting facts, 
teaching him the best method of doing so. Further, these 
studies should train in the interpretation of engineering data and 
in reasoning from them. Mr. Osborne dwelt particularly upon 
the function of shop work in a technical training and pointed out 
that the training, as then conducted, tended to emphasize the 
importance of business rather than manufacturing. He argued 
for a knowledge of accounting, contracts, and other matters of 
direct importance in engineering. 

Magnetic analogy of technical training. The effect of a 
technical training on a student may be considered as analogous 
to that of a magnetomotive force upon a piece of steel The 
latter possesses the ability to be magnetized on account of the 

inherent magnetism of its molecules. Before being subjected 
to the influence of a directive magnetomotive force, these 
molecules are grouped in such a way that no external effect is 
produced. When brought into a magnetic field the molecular 
magnets tend to arrange themselves in the direction of the 
applied force. The steel then becomes a magnet ready for any 
one of a number of practical uses. The external magnetomotive 
force has put nothing into the steel, but has merely supplied 
the incentive necessary to render available its inherent quali- 
ties. In a similar manner the young men entering technical 
schools possess certain elements and qualities of personality. 
The young men differ even more than do various samples of steel. 
The studies and the personality of the teachers supply what is 
needed to bring out and develop the natural aptitude of the 
students, and they can do no more. ‘The student gets little that 
is new from his college course, and if the attempt is made to 
impart more information to him than is necessary to stimulate 
him to his best endeavors, his training will be to that extent a 
failure. Excess training produces saturation in the mind as does 
excess magnetomotive force in magnetic material. Like 
most analogies this one cannot be pushed too far. It em- 
phasizes the fact, however, that the efficient training will be 
the one which aims most carefully at the development of 
the students’ intrinsic qualities. 

Problems of technical instruction. The difficulties encountered 
in technical education are not met in the delivery of certain 
courses. They result from the attempt so to codrdinate these 
courses as to develop accuracy, quickness of perception, common 


1432 NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL [June 27 


sense, and such qualities. Leading engineers who are employers 
of technical graduates place greater value upon the personal 
qualities of the young men than upon their mere ability to 
produce designs and superintend construction. They expect 
‘the schools to turn out men of character as well as attainments. 
To meet these demands successfully requires attention to the 
following items: (1), the attraction and retention of desirable 
students and the exclusion of those not qualified for technical 
work; (2), the selection of such studies as will stimulate and 
direct mental activity; (3), the conducting of all courses in such 
ways as will tend to bring ott the desirable personal qualities 
in the students; and (4), the recommendation to the students of 
those lines of engineering practice for which they are best suited. 

Not a little of the success of all schools depends upon the 
quality of men who enter and upon the requirement of severe 
and continuous application. The results of the training depend 
very largely upon the personality of the student before he enters 
the institution. They are affected also by influences not 
directly resulting from study; for example, athletics and social 
activities. The direct mental effect of the studies is, therefore, 
not the only result, and possibly not the most important result 
of the training. 

TECHNICAL SCHOOLS. 

Historical notes—general. Technical education in this coun- 
try may be said to have begun with the founding of the United 
States Military Academy in 1802, although no technical courses, 
in the modern sense, were given there. After its reorganization 
in 1817, an excellent system of mathematical and scientific in- 
struction was given, forming a basis for practical army work. 
The first technical school, Renssaler Polytechnic Institute, 
began instruction in 1825. A course in civil engineering was 
gradually established to meet the demand of that time. The 
object of this school was to teach the application of science to 
industry, especially to agriculture, domestic economy, the arts, 
and manufacture. It is evident that the desire of the founder was 
to elevate the practical arts by a study of the principles under- 
lying them. In 1845 the United States Naval Academy was 
founded, and another institution was added to the short list of 
those in which scientific and mathematical instruction was given 
with a practical end in view. The far-reaching effect of this 
discipline was noticeable in the early development of electrical 
engineering by the number of Annapolis and West Point men 


Ne ao —— aor. 


1907] NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 1433 


who were attracted to it. This occurred when the technical 
courses in electrical engineering were in the formative period. 
The demand of the time was for soundly trained and practical 
men, and these soon learned enough of electrical applications to 
enable them to take leading positions. Among these may be 
mentioned F. J. Sprague, (Annapolis, 1878), Louis Duncan, 
(Annapolis, 1880), W. D. Weaver, (Annapolis, 1880), S. Dana 
Greene, (Annapolis, 1883), and O. T. Crosby, (West Point, 1882). 

As the demand for scientific and practical instruction in- 
creased, schools were established in connection with universities 
and upon private foundations, but it was not until after the 
passage of the Morrill Act of 1862 that a great impetus was given 
to them. The object of this act was particularly to encourage 
scientific and technical instruction. The results have been far 
reaching. Previously established schools were strengthened and 
many new ones were established, each having for its object the 
training of young people in practical arts. These schools are 
accomplishing and have accomplished a great work because their 
instruction has a definite end in view, that of producing in- 
dependent, useful, and intelligent citizens. 

The practical development of the telephone, the generator, 
the motor, and the electric light between 1870 and 1880 created 
a demand for technical instruction in electricity. By this 
time there were at least twenty-five institutions giving practical 
and scientific work, some like the Worcester Polytechnic In- 
stitute giving especial prominence to shop work, others combining 
the practical and scientific. The best example of the latter 
class was the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In 1871 
the Stevens Institute of Technology was organized and at once 
took a leading place through the prominence given by it to 
experimental engineering. A third class of schools was more 
purely scientific, being affiliated with the older classical colleges 
such as Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, and Union. All of these 
schools became interested in the applications of electricity and 
the beginnings of electrical engineering study were made about 
1880. The technical instruction in electricity lagged only a few 
years behind the industrial beginnings. 

Historical notes—Sibley College. Among the land-grant 
colleges one of the most radical and least trammelled by tradition 
was that of New York State. Founded in spite of the opposition 
of every college in the state except Columbia, Cornell University 
was always ready to undertake anything that appeared promising, 


1434 NORRIS: THE TECHM1I@AL SCHOOL [June 27 


The mechanic arts formed an important part of the curriculum 
from the start in the fall of 1868. In 1870 the Honorable Hiram 
Sibley of Rochester, N. Y., provided means for erecting a suitable 
building for the department and for purchasing the necessary 
equipment. The first degree of bachelor of mechanical engi- 
neering was conferred in 1873. The work in mechanic arts 
was administered by the late Professor John L. Morris from the 
beginning until his retirement in 1904. When early in the seven- 
ties William A. Anthony, then professor of physics, began experi- 
menting with the ‘“‘dynamo”’, the arc-light, and other novelties 
he received encouragement from President Andrew D. White. 
Professor Anthony, assisted by Professor G. S. Moler, designed 
and built in 1875 a Gramme machine and instruments for experi- 
menting with it. Still earlier he had a telegraph line about the 
campus; this was transformed into a telephone line as soon as 
the telephone appeared. An arc-light system with underground 
cable was also operated. All of these electrical applications 
impelled him to give instruction in physics with special reference 
to electricity. In the spring of 1883, while visiting the physical 
laboratory, President White was impressed with the interest in 
electrical matters manifested by the students. From his 
association with Ezra Cornell he was familiar with the develop- 
ment of the telegraph and he had also noted the work done with 
the electric motor in Germany. Among the experiences 
which he remembered with pleasure were the rides taken in 1879 
upon the Siemens train at the Berlin Exposition of that year 
and upon the Lichterfelde road. He was also pleased with the 
Jablochkoff candle in Paris. While talking with Professor 
Anthony about the rapidly developing art, he suggested that 
there might be occasion for a new course of study, that of elec- 
trical engineering. Professor Anthony agreeing with this sugges- 
tion, immediately prepared a plan for a course and presented it 
to the trustees on March 22, 1883. The trustees referred the 
matter to the faculty and on March 26 authorized the announce- 
ment of a course in electrical engineering.* The announcement 


was made and several students were attracted by it. The register — 


for the following year states: 
The rapid development of the application of electricity has created a 
demand for thoroughly trained engineers conversant with electrical 


Eee ere ie 

* An electrical course had been begun during the previous year at the 
Massachusetts Institute, but President White had not heard of it, nor had 
he received any applications for electrical instruction. 


1907] NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 1435 


science, especially by companies carrying on telegraphy, electrical lighting, 
electrical supply and transmission of power, electroplating or the manu- 
facture of electrical machinery and apparatus. Recognizing this demand, 
at the beginning of the past academic year the trustees of Cornell Uni- 
versity began to receive students desiring to fit themselves to enter this 
new and constantly extending field. While the general studies of the 
new course are mainly those of the departments of Civil Engineering and 
Mechanical Engineering, the special studies of the course embrace the 
theory of electricity, the construction and testing of telegraph lines, 
cables, and instruments, and of dynamo-machines, and the methods of 
electrical measurements, electrical lighting, and the electrical transmission 
of power. 


The electrical course proved popular and developed rapidly. 
Upon the transfer of the late Robert H. Thurston from Stevens 
Institute to the directorship of Sibley College in 1885, the electrical 
course was transferred to Sibley College and became a division 
of the mechanical engineering course, as itis to-day. The change 
was based upon the necessity for a thorough foundation of 
mechanics in the study of electrical engineering. As the major 
part of the work was given in Sibley College it was natural 
that the students should come under the jurisdiction of that 
faculty. The test of time has amply demonstrated the wisdom 
of this arrangement. 

Present curriculum at Sibley College. The present curriculum 
of Sibley College is the result of a continuous attempt to give a 
practical education upon a scientific foundation. At first 
much attention was devoted to manual training, but this has given 
way to the principles of manufacturing. Experimental engi- 
neering has had an increasingly large place. The “backbone” of 
the course in mechanical engineering is mechanics, theoretical 
and applied. Analytical geometry and the calculus in the first 
year lead to the mechanics of engineering in the second. The 
physics and chemistry of the first and second years give a scien- 
tific basis for their practical applications. The descriptive 
geometry of the first year prepares the way for mechanical 
drawing. Inthe second year this takes the form of elementary 
machine design and kinematics, followed by the more advanced 
machine design in the third year. A limited amount of shop 
work is given in the first, second, and third years with ac- 
companying lectures on shop administration and kindred topics. 
Engineering work begins in the third year with the principles 
and practical applications of steam and electrical machinery. 
Experimental work in the electrical and mechanical laboratories 
continues throughout the third and fourth years. During the 


1436 NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL [June 27 


first three years the instruction in mechanical and electrical 
engineering is identical, Considerable specialization is allowed 
during the fourth year, the student taking, as a division of general 
mechanical engineering, electrical, railway, marine or power 
engineering, machine design, or naval architecture. 

Electrical engineering is taught as an application of me- 
chanics, the only difference from other branches of mechanical 
engineering being in the source of the forces and the methods of 
transferring and transforming energy. The alternating current 
is studied from the start upon the ground that it gives a simple, 
general, and logical application of the laws of mechanics. The 
students appear to grasp the applications most readily in the 
following order: transmission lines, transformers, induction 
motors, alternators, synchronous motors, synchronous convert- 
ters, continuous-current generators and motors, and special 
machines and devices. In connection with each of these topics 
the auxiliaries are discussed in their logical places; for example, 
with transmission lines; switches, fuses, and lightning protection. 

The electrical instruction is three-sided; experimental, ana- 
lytical, and graphical. In the laboratory numerous experiments 


are conducted upon various types of machines, and data (facts) 


are collected. In the class room the performance of the same 
machines is predicted from the physical laws underlying their 
operation. In the computing room the theory and the facts are 
brought together in graphical form and are thus compared and 
verified. No designing of electrical machinery forms part of the 
required course, as this is largely empirical, depending upon 
the judgment and trained instinct of the practical engineer. 
Instead, the student is taught to predetermine the characteristics 
of machines from the dimensions and arrangement of their 
electric and magnetic circuits, each machine being reduced to an 
equivalent electric circuit. The computing room is a useful 
adjunct in this work. While it is not possible to have all of the 
laboratory reports prepared and problems solved under in- 
struction, a beginning is made, the reports being completed at 
home. The work of the fourth year is not wholly electrical, 
but a course in power engineering is taken by all. The 
mechanical laboratory also tends to prevent undue concentra- 
tion upon the one subject. A course in political economy also 
draws attention to important phases of business and social 
activities. 


In addition to the required courses, a considerable part of the 


1907] NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 1437 


senior year is available for elective work in engineering subjects. 
The electrical elective studies comprise electric railways, tele- 
phone engineering, electrical machinery design, and power 
generation and distribution. These are given in the second 
half of the senior year, after the major part of the routine 
work is complete Thesis work may be taken as an elective 
when a suitable subject presents itself for investigation. 

The course described is essentially that given in all technical 
schools, although details and arrangement differ with environ- 
ment. Sibley College is fortunate in being connected with a 


INDUSTRY 
PROMPTNESS 


PERSONALITY 


ABILITY TO MAKE THINGS GO . 


INTEGRITY 


YEARS IN SIBLEY 
AVERAGE MARK: 
MATHEMATICS 


PHYSICS AND CHEM. 


SCHOLARSHIP 


ENGINEERING 


large university which undoubtedly tends to interest the 
technical students in matters outside their specialties and thus 
broadens their horizons. On the other hand, the university 
acknowledges the stimulus received from the technical school 
through the energy displayed and the practical nature of the 
studies. 

Results of technical education. It requires no further argu- 
ment to prove that in importance personality precedes scholar- 
ship in the makeup of the technical graduate. Some years ago 
Professor Harris J. Ryan devised the foregoing form to be filled 
in when an estimate of a student’s characteristics was requested. 


1438 NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL [June 27 


This form is still in use by the Employment Committee and it 
is of great service in making recommendations. The words 
“excellent,” ‘‘ good,” “‘ fair’ and ‘‘ poor’”’ are used in grading 
the students for the purpose. Proceeding upon the assumption 
that the personality is of prime importance, the writer, for the 
purposes of this paper, requested a large number of Sibley 
alumni of from four to twenty years’ standing to state whether 
or not the training affected honesty, thoroughness, initiative, 
perseverance, accuracy, conciseness, energy, self-confidence, 
address, alertness, and loyalty. Practically all testified that 
these items are affected and as a rule favorably. Further the 
alumni were asked to arrange these elements in order of im- 
portance. The combined result of the recommendations placed 
them in the following order: 1, honesty; 2, perseverance; 
3, accuracy; 4, thoroughness; 5, energy; 6, initiative; 7, address; 
8, loyalty; 9, self-confidence; 10, conciseness; and 11, alertness. 
It is unnecessary to discuss the ways in which these elements are 
affected by a technical training. Employers are justified in 
expecting them in the technical graduates and the schools must 
and do recognize their importance. 

Incidentally, the alumni were asked to state which part of 
their courses, classical, scientific, or technical, was most benefi- 
cial. The majority think that the technical studies benefit 
them most but there is a recognition of the necessity for a scien- 
tific basis for the applications. In response to a query as to im- 
provements needed in technical courses, the impression seems 
to be that the attention of the students should be directed to the 
purposes to which the principles are to be applied. A few 
advocate the introduction of cost-accounting, contracts and allied 
subjects, which are undoubtedly desirable when time permits. 
A fourth question asked was, ‘‘ In what particulars have you 
found your technical training useful?” This elicited many 
interesting opinions. Practically none referred to any technical 
information which had been received in college. Instead the 
opinion was that the greatest gain was the habit of scientifically 
and practically attacking and solving problems as they arise. 
General adaptability and the faculty of securing information when 
needed along any line were also mentioned as important. 

After all, the best test of a training of any kind is the use made 
of it. To determine what the Sibley alumni are doing a canvass 
of the entire number was recently made. From partial returns 
the following table has been compiled. 


eo 


1907) NORRIS: THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 1439 


TABLE OF PRESENT OccupaTIONs oF ALUMNI OF 
SIBLEY COLLEGE, 


(Includes over 80% of the alumni up to 1904) 


Occupation. Number. Per cent. 
ie Mechatticall enoinecr mantis deterlec: as c2s.cs os cis 298 23.20 
on alectrical CN Gineet oe. .c nei oa odes os ile ne 170 13.23 
or OSIONe FOL GPAitsMamn, 6, e- aeca< koa. osc. 140 10.90 
4. President, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, 
or member of firm, manufacturing......... 127 9.88 
Bot URS El eYere ys A aladar Lar i nity Currys eee nee ee ae 114 8.88 
GE ISHII Wenb eer yt ane Coens Gane ae eee 107 8.33 
Sep CONSUITING ENGINCET ee oc b= dee aces, 43 3.35 
8. Manager or superintendent, operating....... 41 3.19 
9. Non-engineering occupations*............... 39 3.03 
10. Manager or superintendent, manufacturing... oo 2e4s 
EPH OLENA TIE ere MAE cu ee othe ee tee te hee ichacs 31 G8 
12. Manager or superintendent, constructing....... 25 1.94 
HSM INSUtANCeseN PINE es clo oe cole as sss soo oo 19 1.48 
RMA ALC Yin Oooh Bete yan ing WAS sh ci signe 4 ste vse 18 1.40 
MMT Of SAVY OLICOT 0. 5. diaries Sate ae Ales 1.32 
POM CICOTGN PUDHSINETE 2.243 aie hou ae od net wea 15 a pales 
17. Assayer, geologist, or mining engineer . ae 15 1.17 
18. President, vice-president, secretary, ees 
Otspartner, constructing? /.)....5.- + ste ei 13 LOY 
OMe Rarenige Rammer: 00h 5 ce snaicm ele ots fs cia auenae 8 0.62 
20. President, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, 
OTR LEME Tan O PETA CLS 7 a copetjelshai eka s/o! shenste) oat 7 0.54 
ee OL vA MCTIOIMCCED Webete ao coer Aol cele kowatore tenth Key 1 wits 4 0.31 
Pail alt SH CL CUM Ce Have vat te oy ousiates fev aleus <eia) Seyerar 1 0.08 
SPEC TL met) ONT CC Lae tepersegaiaite isk ol ar ermccnctsy« 6), <P ensereha 1 0.08 
SIROTA ES os Pho ce CN nT NOE eee 1285 100.00 


Comments. The first three items may require some explanation. By 
the term ‘‘ mechanical engineer ”’ is meant those who are rated as such or 
who are doing general mechanical engineering work. Designers, drafts- 
men and those engaged in administrative work are classed separately. 
The same remark applies to electrical engineer. The word ‘ designer ”’ 
covers those engineers, however prominent, who are primarily engaged 
in preparing or superintending the preparation of drawings and designs. 
It is interesting to note the large number engaged in actual engineering 
work. There is, however, a great tendency on the part of young engi- 
neers to enter sales departments. 


*The non-engineering occupations are as follows: Bankers 4, car agent 
1, chemist 1, dairy farmer 1, dentist 1, druggist 1, flour miller 1, healer 2, 
hotel manager 1, jeweler 1, librarian 1, mechanics 4, merchants 7, 
paper hanger 1, photographer 1, physician 1, postal clerk 1, real-estate 
agents 3, secretary department of public charities 1, stock broker 1, 
sugar planter 1, time-keeper 1, tobacco dealer 1, tobacco planter 1. 


tine wig 


7 
ees 


avis 
wane Cay 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Niagara Falls, N. V., June 27, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E. E. 


ON THE CONCENTRIC METHOD OF TEACHING 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 


BY V. KARAPETOFF 


Introduction. The aims in teaching electrical engineering 
must be in accord with the demands of the electrical industry, 
and with the needs of the country, broadly understood. The 
details of electrotechnical pedagogics should properly be dis- 
cussed among the teachers themselves, but the principles and the 
aims should be established through close codperation with na- 
tional technical bodies, such as the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers. 

The manufacturer of machinery learns from the user in how 
far his product has been successful; so the teachers of electrical 
engineering turn to the representatives of the electrical industry 
at large for advice and direction. The teacher of engineering 
wants to know what product is desired, and what faults are 
found in present technical graduates. 

The concentric method of education outlined below is one 
which it is thought will supply the needs of industry better than 
the present method. from theory to practice is the present motto; 
from practice to theory 1s the new principle proposed. 


SomMmE REMARKS ON THE PRESENT METHOD 


The established educational custom is to begin the teaching 
of every technical subject with theory, gradually turning to 
practice, as based on theory. That this method is the only 
logical one has seemed to be almost self-evident, it being gen- 
erally understood that practice cannot be taught without theory. 
But the question is, can theory be successfully taught without 

1441 


: x 
1443 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD [June 27 


previous practice? Is teaching engineering merely the filling 
of a man’s mind with detached facts, or does it mean developing 
his ability, to the end that he may think logically in his 
profession, getting correct results by correct processes? If 
the latter, the codperation of the student must be secured 
at the very start and maintained throughout the course. The 
immature mind of eighteen years is entirely blank so far as the 
theory and practice of engineering are concerned. Can this 
codperation be secured more easily by teaching him abstract 
auxiliary sciences, like mathematics, mechanics, and physics, 
as is now done, or by hurrying him into his profession at the 
very outset? 

The writer’s principal objection to the present method of 
teaching engineering is that student is burdened with abstract 
auxiliary sciences during the first two years of his college course, 
before he has had even a taste of his profession. The conscious co- 
operation of the student is not assured. Rather, he follows the 
prescribed courses blindly on the supposition that he is being 
properly cared for. It alwaysreminds me of going to a dentist 
or to a barber, where we pay a specialist and passively submit 
to an unpleasant but inevitable operation. 

It is perfectly evident to us that mathematics and mechanics, 
physics and chemistry, constitute necessary correlatives for 
engineering courses, just as history and economics are necessary 
for the study of the law. But this is not obvious to the beginner ; 
he is all at sea in studying subjects without knowing their 
application. All auxiliary subjects of study must follow the 
principal study and not precede it, as is the case with the present 
system. I know this would mean to reverse entirely all the 
present plans of instruction, but what is right ought to be done 
at any cost. , 

No subject should be taught in which an interest can not be 
aroused. This means, do not begin with the elements, because 
they are not interesting; ‘‘ begin fromtheend.” Inteaching Latin 
do not give in the freshman year dry grammar and other dead 
stuff. Begin by reading the best examples of Roman literature 
in English translations. Then let the boys decide whether it 
is worth while for them to spend several years in studying the 
language in order to enjoy these same monuments of human 
genius in their original form. Is not a great mistake com- 
mitted continually in making our young people study dead lan- 
guages for years, only to find in the end that ninety-nine per cent, 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1443 


of them cannot then read Latin and Greek authors well enough 
to enjoy them. 

The same mistake is made in mechanic arts, by beginning the 

course with elementary operations, forging, filing, etc., which 
arouse very little interest. Let the freshman begin his work 
by making a simple but complete piece of apparatus, wherein 
all the essential operations enter in their simplest form; let him 
discover himself the necessity of all these operations, then 
begin to study them in detail. If a student cannot be interested 
in making a piece of machinery where he has to perform 
all shop operations, this student is not fitted for the engineer- 
ing course,and should be advised to change his specialty. 
But if he is interested, then his cooperation is assured and 
it becomes an easy task to teach him the details of his profes- 
sion. 
__ A great problem before technical educators is the evil of early 
specialization. But teaching mathematics and physics is no 
remedy; a true broadening effect is exerted only by a study of 
actual life, of practical economic conditions. Explain to the 
freshman the significance that various branches of engineering 
possess for the welfare of the country; this will have a much 
more broadening effect than studying the equation of an ellipse 
or the properties of barium. This is exactly what the proposed 
concentric method has in view, as may be gathered by reference 
to the schedules in the appendix to this paper. 

In colleges of applied science all courses of instruction should 
consist,in the freshman year,in explaining the practical side of 
the profession and the social standing and opportunities of men 
in them. The engineering colleges should demonstrate the 
operation and application of all kinds of machinery; the prac- 
tical side of building bridges and constructing railroads, etc. 
The college of law should have popular lectures on the practical 
work of lawyers, judges, and other men engaged in preserving 
justice among men. The college of medicine should give 
practical demonstrations in different specialties of medical work, 
and so on. A freshman should be offered an opportunity to go 
to all these lectures and to see what specialty he likes best. Let 
him even lose (?) a year if he has not selected any profession ; for 
this is much better than to study three years under the present 
system, and, after coming to his senior year, to the practical side 
of his profession, to find himself sadly mistaken in his expecta- 


tions, 


1444 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD [June 27 


Let us begin from the end, then, let us exchange the freshman 
and the senior years; let us first give the student the fruits of 
knowledge; then, if he likes them, he will be interested to learn 
of their theories and foundations. Of course, freshmen cannot be 
taught engineering or lawin the same way that these subjects 
are taught to juniors and seniors; but who would venture to say 
that these subjects could not be taught in a more popular and 
interesting manner than at present? 


Wuat THE Concentric Metuop Is 


' The method of instruction for which the author stands may 
properly be called the ‘‘ concentric method,”’ and is represented 


Fic. 1—Concentrically widening the student’s mental horizon 


graphically (Fig. 1) by a series of concentric circles; each zone 
comprises as far as possible the whole scope of a given 
specialty. The knowledge represented by different zones differs 
only in the degree of specialization. 

During the freshman year (inner circle) the student is intro- _ 
duced to the whole scope of his profession, though in a very 
elementary, popular manner. The next year (second zone) 
he studies the same subjects from a somewhat more special 
point of view. The third zone represents the same subjects 
still more advanced, etc. For example, in applying this method 
to the study of history, the first zone would represent a broad 


‘evans PP eae e 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1445 


sketch of the destinies of different nations; the next zone would 
be a more detailed treatment of the most important historical 
periods; the third zone might include a critical study of original 
sources and actual remains: and the fourth, the philosophy of 
history. Or, in studying the steam engine, the first circle 
corresponds to a purely descriptive sketch of the operation— 
handling and troubles—the second a more detailed study of the 
parts and an experimental investigation of the accompanying 
phenomena; the third year would comprise the theory of these 
phenomena from the standpoint of thermodynamics, mechanics, 
strength of materials, etc. The outer zone would represent 
design and special investigations. The dotted circles on the 


O 


Fie malin 
an gn deli ager: 


FRESHMAN SOPHOMORE JUNIOR SENIOR POST GRADUATE , 
— 


Fic. 2—Lack of system in the present way of instruction 
(subject method) 


diagram represent advanced post-graduate work and symbolize 
infinity of knowledge. 

In contradistinction to this system, the method now in 
vogue, or the “subject method,” is represented in Fig. 2. 
Here the student begins his freshman year by studying several 
subjects of an abstract character, subjects having no relation 
whatever to each other. They are in part auxiliaries for con- 
secutive studies, in part are supposed to develop logical thinking 
and imagination. The subjects introduced the second year are 
based partly on the studies of the previous year, partly represent 
new departure; but again their relation to the principal subject 
of study is not sufficiently evident to the student, so that he 


1446 KARAPETOFF; CONCENTRIC METHOD [June 27 


blindly and reluctantly follows the program, instead of 
coéperating actively. 

In the third year, the professional studies begin, based on the 
sciences absorbed during the first two years. But these studies 
are again of too academic a character, too abstract, since the 
whole underlying idea with the present system is that practical 
applications must follow the general theory. Thus only in his 
senior year does the student come to the practical side of his 
profession. This method is probably the easiest for the teachers, 
because they also were educated in this way; but unfortunately 
it contradicts the very nature of man, and stands in con- 
tradiction to the educational aims of our times. The method 
has a distinct stamp of old scholastic culture based on the 
authority of precedent, rather than on free progressive think- 
ing. 

Some of the courses of study in the scheme shown in Fig. 2 
are indicated separately from any consecutive courses, or are 
connected only to advanced problems (dotted connecting lines), 
which hardly one student out of a hundred takes; and still all 
students are required to take these preparatory courses in the 
freshman or sophomore year. 

It is particularly sad that the, student does not realize the 
necessity for many of the studies during his college years, and the 
significance of some of them remains an enigma through his entire 
life. What a difference between the natural development of a 
farmer boy and the artificial cramming of a student with knowl- 
edge, The boy learns the surrounding world in a purely ‘ con- 
centric ’’ manner; the student is taught according to the ‘‘ subject 
method.’’ The farmer boy begins at once with botany, zoology, 
law, mechanic arts, and enlarges his knowledge gradually as he 
feels the need for it; and he is more and more interested in the 
results of such knowledge or experience. The student begins 
with the most abstract knowledge, or fragmentary practice, 
which he cannot connect with his life. The farmer boy lives 
to-day; constantly he applies his knowledge or at least realizes 
its use; the student lives with the expectation that some day he 
will understand the use of the dry stuff he is forced to imbibe, 
or perhaps be. allowed to forget it. How can any great success 
be expected under such circumstances? 

We are beginning to understand that true preparation for an 
activity consists not in mechanical ability to perform simple 
operations, or in knowing abstract elements. The mind of the 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1447 


man must be made receptive by impressing him with the im- 
portant or interesting side of his subject; this can be done 
only by showing him the result before he begins an extensive 
study. 

It seems that with our present system we are preparing students, 
not for ordinary commercial work which ninety-nine per cent. of 
them take up, but for special research work, which hardly one 
per cent. ever follow. In doing so we are involuntarily tempted 
to make of the students what we ourselves to some extent are— 
men pursuing more or less original research rather than regular 
commercial work. Let us remember that we are supposed to pre- 
pare, not future professors, but men for industrial work, and that 
our first aim should be to comply with the needs of the industry. 

Our democratic and industrial times call for infinite stages 
-of knowledge and ability. A man who thoroughly assimilates, 
say, two concentric circles of study is of more use to himself 
and to the nation than a man filled with useless undigested 
knowledge, though in his pocket he have a diploma from our 
greatest university. 


Courses oF Stupy AccoRDING To THE CONCENTRIC METHOD. 


We will suppose now that the reader agrees with the above con- 
tention, that the best method of education is that in which the stu- 
dent gets first a bird’s-eye view of his profession, and then improves 
and specializes in it. This method is in accord with our nature, 
permits everybody to go just as far as he can or wishes; an 
element of interest is introduced into the study; a hastily selected 
vocation may be easily changed, etc. The question arises: 
is this method practicable? Can courses of study be arranged 
according to the above principles? As an answer the writer 
gives below an outline of a complete four- or five-year course 
of study of electrical engineering according to the concentric 
method. It seems to him that any other subject could be 
arranged just as well, since electrical engineering is no excep- 
tion. 

The present course in mechanical and electrical engineering. 
may be called ‘ from abstract to concrete’’; that is to say, the 
course begins with mathematics, mechanics, and physics, then 
passes through an intermediate stage of machine elements, 
strength of materials, drawing, etc., and finally advances to 
the electrical and mechanical engineering proper. The courses 
in engineering proper are also arranged somewhat from abstract 


1448 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD {June 27 


to concrete, so that general theory precedes the experimental 
and empirical side of study. The proposed courses, arranged ac- 
cording to the concentric method, follow the opposite way, 
‘from concrete to abstract’, the idea of each year being 
characterized as follows: 


Freshman. Introduction into electrical engineering (bird’s-eye 
view). 

Sophomore. Experimental electrical engineering. 

Junior. Elementary theory of electrical engineering. 

Senior. Advanced theory of electrical engineering. 

Freshman year. The fundamental course of this year should 
be ‘‘ Electricity in modern life,’ or ‘‘ Cyclopedia of electrical 
engineering.”’ This course should comprise the following 
divisions: 

1. A popular outline of applying electricity to lighting, rail- 
ways, telephones, signaling, metallurgy, chemistry, medicine, 
etc.; popular experiments must make it perfectly plain and 
intelligible to everyone, so that students of all departments 
could easily and with interest follow the course. This is in 
accordance with the idea that during the freshman year the stu- 
dent is not supposed to have definitely selected his specialty. 

2. Talks on the general character of engineering work, on 
opportunities and social standing of engineers, on necessary 
qualifications for different kinds of work, etc. 

3. A historical sketch of the development of the electrical 
industry, and its present state in this country and abroad. 

4. Explanation of the concentric method pursued during the 
four years, and an outline of the consequent work during this 
course. This is desirable in order to insure the conscious co- 
operation of the student in his future work. 


A similar course should be given in mechanical and possibly in 
civil engineering; these three courses constituting the most im- 
portant part of the freshman year. If the student feels that he 
cannot yet decide to become an engineer, or what kind of engi- 
neer he wants to become, let him spend the rest of his time in 
going to similar popular lectures in other departments of the 
university. But if he has already decided that he is going to 
become an electrical engineer, he may be given some work 
in the shops and the laboratory. This should be not the so- 
called elementary work, consisting of filing, or measuring specific 
heat and resistances, but practical work, consisting of assembling 


See, 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1449 


and dismantling of apparatus, handling machinery, electric 
wiring and connections, etc., so that he may feel that he is 
already started in his profession. This consciousness would give 
him pride and satisfaction, and arouse his interest for further 
studies. This purely psychological element of technical education 
is almost entirely lost sight of with the present system. 

Freshmen should not have more than, say, 12 hours a week of 
engineering work, and should be induced to take a few courses of 
a general character in other departments, rather than allowed 
to specialize in one kind of work. Experience may show 
that there will be some demand for mathematics and physics 
on the part of the students themselves; should such be the case, 
the corresponding courses could be easily provided. 

The writer wishes to emphasize the fact that he by no means 
belongs to that class of “‘ practical men ’ who sneer at any 
theory, and do not consider physics and mathematics as a part 
of engineering education. He himself is very fond of these 
sciences and preferably spends his hours of leisure in studying 
them. Yet he firmly believes that for engineering purposes 
physics and mathematics are of an auxiliary character and 
should be given the students only as such Moreover, these 
sciences should be taught so that the student may clearly see 
their importance and necessity in his profession. Later on, dur- 
ing his senior year, or after graduation, a student who feels an 
academic interest in these sciences may specialize in them; but 
his first duty during the freshman and sophomore years is to study 
engineering, and not physics and mathematics. 

Sophomore year. Electrical engineering should be treated 
during this year purely experimentally, keeping in mind that 
while the underlying phenomena are unchangeable, all our 
theories and explanations are rather poor excuses for our ab- 
solute ignorance of the true nature of electricity and magnetism. 
Thus the electrical engineering courses during this year should 
comprise construction and operation of electric machinery, 
lamps, street-car equipments, telegraph and telephone apparatus, 
etc., going more into detail than was possible during the freshman 
year, where it was necessary to establish in the first place the 
very possibility and scope of applications of electricity. 

Hand in hand with this course should go electrical laboratory 
work, not in the sense usually applied now, that is to say for 
the purpose of getting some numerical results, but simply for the 
purpose of handling all kinds of elcctrical apparatus. This 


1450 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD [June 27 


should impress the student that the apparatus studied is some- 
thing real and substantial and not mere fiction or schemes drawn 
on the blackboard. Lectures in mechanical engineering and 
mechanical laboratory should be of about the same character; 
it is not at all necessary or important for an electrical engineer 
to know much about thermodynamic calculations, but he must 
be sure that, if necessary, he can take care of boilers, steam, 
and gas engines, pumps, etc. 

Shop-work must again consist in making pieces of simple 
apparatus comprising as many different operations as possible; 
no ‘‘single’’ operations should be allowed at this stage, because 
it would immediately lower the interest in the work. As a 
novel feature, some electrical work might be introduced, such as 
making blade-switches, simple measuring instruments, and 
spark-coils. In building such apparatus the student will meet 
with most of the shop operations and will get the necessary prepa- 
ration for taking up regular shop theory and practice during the 
next year. 

The study of mathematics, physics, and mechanics can be 
profitably begun during the sophomore year, provided they be 
taught by an engineer and from the standpoint of engineering 
applications, rather than abstract theory. Moreover, in order 
to link this course with engineering and with the mathe- 
matical knowledge required at the entrance examinations, 
this course should begin with applications of elementary mathe- 
matics to engineering problems, the students being tactfully 
brought to seemingly elementary problems, where analytics 
and thecalculus become necessary. In this way the mind of the 
student is brought to an understanding of the practical impor- 
tance of considering infinitesimal parts of time, length, 
volume, etc.; and thus partly by intuition, partly by application, 
he is introduced to analytics and the calculus. 

Drawing, both freehand and mechanical, must be taught, 
not as an art by itself (unless the student desires it), but simply 
as a matter of necessity in shop work and in laboratory reports; 
the same holds true of descriptive geometry. The laboratory 
work, the shop practice, and possibly some class exercises should 
be so arranged that the students may naturally come to use 
drawings, both those given them and those made by them- 
selves. Thus they will gradually recognize the necessity of 
plan, elevation, cross-section, perspective, schematic representa- 
tion, and other technicalities. In the opinion of the writer, 


1907} KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1451 


drawing should be taught in engineering colleges just as 
writing is taught in good primary schools. There'the child is 
skillfully brought to an understanding of the advantages of 
putting down its needs on paper, and of reading the ideas of 
other people. 

Junior year. Now comes the third year. With the present 
system the student begins dimly to realize at this time the very 
first principles of his specialty. With the system here proposed 
the student begins his third year with a more or less definite 
idea of the whole scope of his specialty; he knows that he is 
going to study the details of the work of the previous years and 
that he was lacking last year such auxiliary sciences as mathe- 
matics, physics, and chemistry. Now he is prepared to ap- 
preciate their significance; even more, he is already absolutely 


_sure of their necessity, and is willing to accept the teacher’s word 


even though he does not see its immediate application. Thus 
the work of the junior year should include a study of mathematics, 
physics, mechanics, chemistry (auxiliary sciences) with par- 
ticular reference to electrical and mechanical engineering; at 
the same time a deeper insight into the specialty is made pos- 
sible, assisted by these sciences. 

The study of engineering may now be taken up with numerical 
relations. It is not necessary to go at once into higher mathe- 
matics, but merely to establish such relations as may be deduced 
from experiments, and which may immediately be applied to 
the solution of practical problems. With the training of the two 
previous years, the educator need not fear to go into de- 
tails, since the student is already able to understand the sig- 
nificance and the place of a particular problem in the general 
field of electrical engineering. 

To expect a student to investigate numerically this or that 
property of an electric machine the first time he sees the ma- 
chine in the laboratory, as is the case under the present system, 
does not seem very rational. The purely qualitative and 
constructive side is of much more importance than any precise 
measurements. But if he has already had electric machines 
before him for two years, as with the proposed concentric method, 
he certainly can be made interested in numerical relations dur- 
ing the third year; and these measurements will be of a much 
better quality because he already knows how to handte ma- 
chinery, apparatus, and measuring instruments. 

Shop-work at this stage should consist in a systematic study of 


1452 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD [June 27 


different operations: machining, forging, making castings, 
wood-work, etc. The work of the two previous years has shown 
the student the necessity of all these operations, and the 
relative positions they occupy in the processes of manufacturing. 
Now he will find interest in going into the details of each 
operation. Of course, it should be understood that the final 
purpose is to know how to direct and specify shop-work, rather 
than merely to acquire manual skill. This work should be 
supplemented by lectures on the subject, which would unify 
the methods taught in the shops, extend them beyond the 
possibilities of college shops, and also treat of cost of production 
and of methods of accounting. 

Senior year. With the present system a senior hears for the 
first time the most elementary things in practical engineering; 
at the same time he knows (or is supposed to know) all about 
many theoretical laws and abstract relations studied during his 
junior and sophomore years. With the proposed concentric 
system he would already know a good deal about construc- 
tion and operation of machinery from his three previous 
college years, but would lack the theoretical knowledge necessary 
for independent original work and design. The senior year is 
supposed to give him this, on the basis of the practical knowledge 
acquired during the previous years. Let us begin from the 
end. 

The senior year should be devoted mostly to the theory of 
electrical and magnetic phenomena on the firm basis of pre- 
viously established experimental relations. The educator may 
now boldly go into the very depths of mathematical analyses, for a 
senior understands their significance, whereas our present 
freshmen and sophomores merely get a chronic mental in- 
digestion from the sight of mathematical formulas—an in- 
digestion that often lasts a lifetime. It is a truism that the 
average technical graduate instinctively dodges differential 
coefficients and the symbol of integration. 

In addition to pure theory, special elective courses should be 
given, such as electrical design, electric railways, telephony, etc. 
Such electives are given with the present system, but they are 
more of an elementary character, because the student is intro- 
duced into his profession too late. 

For those theoretically inclined, an opportunity should. be 
offered for studying mathematics, physics, and chemistry beyond 
the scope necessary for ordinary engineering practice. 


a 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1453 


Tue CoNcENTRIC AND THE PresENT Metnops DIAGRAMMATIC. 
ALLY COMPARED 


The following two diagrams show the difference between the 
present schedules of instruction and the schedules arranged 
according to the concentric method. Lighter portions signify 
the practical side of the subjects, the darker portions refer to the 
theoretical side. 

With the concentric method (Fig. 3) the student begins with 
the practical side of electrical engineering and with an elementary 
description of other branches of engineering activity. A con- 
siderable portion of time is allotted to general subjects, but 


GENERAL CULTURE 


} SPECIAL 
Ln ENGINEERING ELECTIVE 


Lear 
| | STUDIES 
FRESHMAN - =, SOPHOMORE JUNIOR SENIOR. 


SD )- ea 


Fic. 3—Arrangement of subjects of study with the concentric 
method (from practice to theory) 


practically no time to auxiliary sciences, such as matnematics, 
mechanics, and physics. As the course progresses, more and 
more time is devoted to electrical engineering, and less time to 
other branches of engineering and general culture. The studies 
themselves gradually become more rigid and theoretical. This 
naturally requires more and more time to be devoted to the 
auxiliary sciences. The small light portion in the senior year 
refers to practical elective studies (specialization). ; 

In contradistinction to this scheme, the method now generally 
adopted is represented in Fig. 4. Here the first two years are 
practically filled with dry auxiliary studies, and the student does 


1454 KARAPETOFF; CONCENTRIC METHOD (June 27 


not get even a glimpse of his future profession until his junior 
year. And when he gets to his profession, the studies have 
again a theoretical character and only gradually become more 
and more practical. 

A comparison of the two diagrams will clearly indicate the 
points of difference, and they do not require any further explana- 
tion. Those particularly interested in the subject will find these 
principles incorporated in the schedules printed below. 


CoNCLUSION 


1. The study of engineering should begin in the freshman 
year and be carried throughout four years. 


FRESHMAN - SOPHOMORE JUNIOR SENIOR 
I> 


Fic. 4—Arrangement of subjects of study with the present 
method (from theory to practice) 


2. Engineering instruction should be taken up with first 
giving a bird’s-eye view of actual practice, and not with 
theory. 

3. Auxiliary sciences, such as mathematics, mechanics, 
physics, and chemistry, should not be required further than is 
necessary for the understanding of engineering, and should be 
given later in the course. 

4. Each year of study should be as much as possible self-con- 
tained, the mental horizon of the student being gradually and 
concentrically widened (Fig. 1). 


1907] KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 1455 


APPENDIX 


Proposed schedules of study according to the Concentric Method. 
The numbers signify the number of hours per week for first and second 
term. 


Freshman Year 


(Suitable for all engineering students) 


Hours 
Cyclopedia of electrical engineering. ... 0.0. ..26.20++ceer enna 2 
“ mechanical EER tea Oh RAS NC ce Ne 2 
“ “civil cl Ms A es Seca ook roe 2 
wi “ mining Yr lp Sra RA ew anes 2 
{aval Wiayee Sava OP NAKSS Ek... 2 (eee, CIS EIia O ea HER te Ee 2 2 
Maeiigeciaipletap paral tSoaete enue reer ne ole co: ies ecckee tacuetenn:< 2 2 
Plivsicaluculrtire — One ROUne Very Gay, .\aysss ee ea oe cies: 
Electives. 
_ Law, medicine, history, economics, philosophy, languages, paint- 
TAMER, PBK Ae1N ee AAS hc 5 eee MLA Br eee ec 6 6 
Recitations in at least three subjects.............2:50.+.-.-- 3 3 
Et ad Rosie Maram se Nes eins akO we 6 gee. Ses Vdtedve's 3 2 Dieta 7, 
Sophomore year 
(For mechanical engineers and electrical engineers) 
Hours 
Descriptive course in electrical engineering........ BS) 
* ‘ steam PE in| pete tah 3 
ICH PleSLO Letina (aC GUITUM Orme err mngre te ioe yates ea 4 eee ee 3 
WechiatcCaswla Dorel OL Vigra totwe aes tte -oneve Pie sacha ua jrt a aie e > 2 2 
Elected lala DORE Omen ee en ae tare ace (aitsue cists ats 2 atcleeesine esa cy 2 
SHO oe owes Sachs ole ic COM BIOTS. 6 CaP ee ane Ce ene ee 2 2 
MatiematiesiOl eM OAMeeiiG a walt retirartac cin eareds nc a Supls ses exe 3 & 
Drawing in connection with laboratory and shop............... 2 2 
Blectives (NON-engineering) ..... 6.2. ccc eects eee sect e eres 3 
Physical culture—one hour every day. 
Avo  deleeersoed on 6 pos BN OO MOG OP So OU BE OO c 17 | 17 
Jumor year 
(Electrical engineers only) 
Hours 
Eo ea OPES imei OOO SIE Ste QO Cee aan eae 2 
Generatorsvand motors... .¢2 seine me oe Rhiais CEE OC 2 
Electrical transmission ........-- 2+. eee eee eee eee cee ee 2 
Blechncalitneastrenienls weit ilies iene cielo sie eisisicia wees «6 2 
PSecuhioalisi@ PoWOLlGs pre. sreiern sie elke er lele (ola ee elensleclee/tyelcilenere «1 2 
Electrical laboratory ........+-+----++. Eee RRO Oana ioe 2 2 
POWerlenemleena ge aes. vec cco cose ee teetics ie Peegy cere ee 4 
Wiseman GES. de soa Se ROB OOo 600 G0 Oso nu om Oma 4 


Mechanical laboratory........-- eS iereiays # fits Rais cies © Wee 


1456 KARAPETOFF: CONCENTRIC METHOD 


Mathematics!) >, oc ie save ote eet aoe eaeere bee er ae 
Méchanies é¢ s,ccdeaiels oe be ctl aes eas: adnan se a ee ne 
Physics: 3 wks Resithaed potted bisa B tyateatioeiten oh kee eee 
Chemistny 3. teen sare eee PCIe ito A662. ; 


Total: hourtsiectaen aad eee oe eee eres 


Senior Year 
(Electrical engineers only) 


Electric and mmaygnetic.circutbs 0.5.5 ieee RRS 
Alternating. ctirrents. 2s. san aot een a ote arsine kee ee 
‘Eheorysotrelectrical#machinery: cps cia ele eee ee eee 
La Dorator yr aa iso eiset oe ch ee  ae ee a = eee ee Oe ‘ 
Electrical calculations tai. ete ote eke aetna ree ere te ° 


Theoretical electives: 
Mathematics 
Physics 
Mechanics 
Chemistry J 


tworsubjects to: bestaken =... eer 


Practical electives: 


Electric railways 
Telephony 

Design three subjects to be taken.......... 
Power plants 
Hydraulics, etc. 


NN wh w 


iv a) 


‘Total hoursss occurs oe Cn ee rere ae ee es 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1457 


Discussion on ‘‘ Tue ATTITUDE OF THE TECHNICAL SCHOOL 
TOWARD THE PROFESSION OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING ”’ 
AND “ON THE ConcEenTRIC METHOD or TEACHING ELEC- 
TRICAL ENGINEERING ’”’, AT NIAGARA Fats, N-Y., JUNE 
2, L907 


V. Karapetoff gave an abstract of his paper and said in 
conclusion: I appear with this paper before the Institute, be- 
Cause of my conviction that the Institute is competent, as a 
body, to dictate to the technical schools. the requirements 
which their graduates ought to possess. I hope to see the 
day when the management of the Institute will appoint a 
committee on technical education. We now have thirteen 
committees—not a very lucky number—I wish this number 
could be increased to fourteen and the committee I have sug- 
gested be appointed.* 


F. B. Crocker: Professor Norris says: 


Electrical engineering is taught as an application of mechanics, the 
-only difference from other branches of mechanical engineering being in 
the source of the forces and the methods of transferring and transforming 
energy. 

I object to that expression, because it is not true. Mechan- 
ical engineering is a fine profession, no one has greater respect 
for it than myself, but electrical engineering won its indepen- 
dence some years ago, and I think it is a little late to speak 
of electrical engineering as being a branch of mechanical engi- 
neering. Another reason why I object to it is that it leads to 
unpleasant feelings. Taking another step backward, we find that 
the civil engineer considers that every engineer who is not a mili- 
tary engineer isacivilengineer. I presume that Professor Norris 
used that expression in a general way, meaning that we are 
dealing with mechanical problems; but in the Engineers’ Build- 
ing in New York the mining engineers, mechanical engineers, 
and electrical engineers are certainly on terms of equality, and 
I cannot see any reason for subordinating one to the other. 
It has usually been the custom in the education of electrical 
engineers in this country to consider electrical engineering as 
part of mechanical engineering or physics. Nearly all courses 
of electrical engineering were grafted on, or formed parts of a 
course in mechanical engineering, or a course in physics. Co- 
lumbia University, with which I am connected, started a course 
of electrical engineering in 1889 which was not part of mechan- 
ical engineering or of physics. It was as distinct as any other 
course in the university. We took that stand 18 years ago and 
have had no occasion to recede from it. I think there is a 
strong tendency for others to take the same position. 

Professor Norris, in his history of the development of elec- 
trical engineering education in this country, overlooked the fact 
that we have courses which are specifically electrical engineer- 
ing and not appendages to mechanical engineering or physics. 


* Such an Educational Committee has since been appointed. 


1458 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


In Professor Karapetofi’s paper, what he advocates is not 
only very radical, but opposed to the whole history of educa- 
tion, which from the very beginning has dealt first with the 
simple and later with the complex. When I say “simple ”’, I 
do not mean necessarily the most easily understood, but the 
idea involving the fewest things to think of at one time; that 
is, principles should precede practice. I think this is natural 
in education. It certainly is the historical method. Further- 
more, we have experience bearing upon that point. Take an 
institution like the Troy Polytechnic, which for many years 
taught theory almost exclusively with very little laboratory or 
other practical work, that institution has been successful and 
has turned out a number of eminent engineers. While it may 
have modified its course somewhat recently, this experience 
shows that it is possible to turn out successful engineers on 
this plan. Perhaps that is going a little too far, but it shows it 
is possible to do that. On the other hand, the trade-school, 
which deals with practical matters almost entirely, is very 
well in its way, but it does not produce the highest intellectual 
results. 

Furthermore, we must have some sort of a pons asinorum 
for weeding out the incompetent men. I think that we should 
not make it too easy, or too pleasant, to get into the electrical 
engineering profession. At West Point, for example, the 
cadets are made to do exactly what they don’t want to do. 
That is what a man should be taught to do. This leading a 
man by the hand to pleasant places does not meet my approval; 
in professional education a student cannot learn electrical en- 
gineering by sitting in the park and looking at beautiful scenery. 
That is too easy. A student must be capable of abstractica; 
he must be capable of self sarcifice; he must do the very thing 
he does not like to do, and do it well. I consider West Point 
the best technical school in the world, and in itself a very 
strong argument in favor of technical education. 

I do not agree with the contention that subjects like chemistry, 
physics, mathematics, and mechanics, should be taught by 
engineers, especially electrical engineers. I do not object to a 
teacher having an engineering interest, a man with a high 
opinion of engineering, but if he is an electrical engineer and 
teaches chemistry, mechanics, or physics, he will teach those 
portions which he thinks are important. He may be right at 
the time, but perhaps five years from then the whole situation 
changes. I believe in teaching chemistry, physics, mechanics, 
and mathematics for themselves, and not picking and choosing ; 
if properly taught these subjects, the student will be well equipped 
and can talk on equal terms with other men who have been 
taught these general subjects. 

Gano Dunn: I wish to express satisfaction with the policy 
of the Institute, developed in recent years, of devoting so much 
attention to the subject of engineering education. It has been 


a. 
Ww 


tik ea celled 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1459 


said that the civilization of a nation may be measured by the 
height of the plane upon which it places its women; it is equally 
true that the proficiency and accomplishment of a profession 
is in direct proportion to the attention it gives and the respect 
it has for its educational influence; to the importance it attaches 
to its universities and colleges. It was a refreshing address 
that President Hadley of Yale delivered at the dedication of 
the Engineers’ Building in New York. He said if there was 
any thing that made the nineteenth century different from all 
the centuries that had preceded it, it was the accomplishment 
of the engineer—never before in the history of the world had 
human beings had so much control over the materials and forces 
of nature, and the result of that control was transforming all 
human activities. He went so far as to imply that before long 
the most successful merchant would be the merchant-engineer ; 
the most successful mayor of a town the mayor-engineer; the 
most successful statesman, if you will, the statesman-engineer. 
There is something in the method of an engineer’s mind that 


‘is direct, that goes straight to the truth, and, although we have 


been discussing a code of ethics to-day which implies that 
engineers are not honest, I believe that they are naturally 
honest because their contact with nature has led them to 
expect the truth and, when they do not find it, to put the blame 
on their own methods of investigation. They proceed further 
with confidence that what they are dealing with is absolute 
truth, and that if they persist the truth will be revealed. The 
influence of the engineer is extending to all other callings, and 
the engineer in the future will exert an influence that he has 
never dreamed of exerting in the past. Consequently, if we are 
to grasp the glorious future which has been outlined for us, 
many of us believe we cannot give too much attention to the 
methods by which we educate our engineers. 

Professor Karapetoft’s paper interested me extremely because 
of his concentric method of instruction. I have little cause for 
complaining of the methods under which I was instructed, but I 
feel with Professor Crocker that the plan Professor Karapetoff out- 
lines is too radical. I think, however, that our existing methods 
could be profitably modified to include many of his ideas. For in- 
stance, it would have helped me enormously while I was a student 
if I had had some person in the capacity of a kind friend at 
college to give me the relations which the studies I was pursuing 
bore to other studies and to the activities of the world. In- 
structors are supposed to do that, but, because each man is de- 
voted to his specialty, very often he does not do it. I really 
think we could profitably establish in our universities a course 
on the correlation of the student studies, to which might be 
given a very small portion of time, but that portion of time 
would be highly efficient. A student could then know it would 
be worth while for him to study calculus, for the good it would 
do him. He could have a promise given, on the strength of 
which he would work hard. 


1460 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


I believe in America we are ahead of Great Britain in tech- 
nical education. Conversation with the manager of a corre- 
spondence school over there revealed that many of his students 
were obliged to keep secret the fact that they were studying 
technical subjects. Many of the industrial managers, I have 
been told, have not had theoretical educations, and they prefer 
to employ men who have grown up in the ranks of their busi- 
ness, rather than men who have received a technical training. 
I even know of one Oxford man who wanted to go to Cam- 
bridge to take a technical course, and the superintendent pre- 
ferred he should go straight from Oxford into the factory, 
feeling that he would do better than if he took a technical train- 
ing. I can hardly believe it, but it is true. 


I should like to expose my ignorance of the law bv giving 
it a dig in passing. I believe that engineers have set the pace 
for progressive training, and, as a result the engineering mind, 
as President Hadley described it, has a great future. We come 
into contact a great deal with the law in the direction of patents, 
and in many other directions. It seems to me that progress 
in medicine, in the arts generally, in all commercial industries, 
in engineering, and in science has been very great, but that 
progress has not been as great in the law. The law to-day is 
more complicated and less satisfactory than it was many years 
ago, and, while it is perhaps idle to discuss the question here, J 
feel if the engineer uses his influence, whenever he has a chance, 
to urge the simplifying of legal processes, and expresses his dis- 
approval to lawyers of the complicated processes which they 
now pursue, and which many of them advocate, some good 
may be done. 


As between a broad general training in a technical schooland 
a specific training which, of course, must be limited to a few 
subjects, I prefer the former, and this supports Professor Kara- 
petoff’s ideas. A man is better equipped for life if he knows 
the scope of his field, even though he does not know many spe- 
cialties in it, than if he is made an extreme specialist in a par- 
ticular portion of the field which he may not have occasion to 
use. Not only is he better equipped, because he can realize 
on his time spent at college, but because his general training 
has broadened him as a man in a way that the special training 
would not do. I hope every convention will have some educa- 
tional papers, and that we will all take pleasure and pride in 
supporting our universities in every way we can. 


William Esty: A number of the subjects brought out at 
this session seem to me to warrant the adding of some papers 
on technical education to our convention programs. I agree 
with Professor Karapetoff that in dealing with young men, say 
at the college age of eighteen, there is necessity for giving them 
something concrete to take hold of on which to build up the 


theory. I think that is the natural order of development in 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1461 


the child; and with college students some attention must be 
paid to the natural order of their development. Professor 
Crocker, in discussing this matter, spoke of beginning with prin- 
ciples because they were simpler than the concrete cases. It 
seems to me that his idea contradicts the view of Herbert 
Spencer, who speaks of principles as being a conglomeration of 
concrete things and of a principle or-law being essentially 
more complex therefore than any one of the concrete facts on 
which it is based. It seems to me that that is a valid definition 
of a principle—an aggregation of concrete facts which have 
finally been formulated into principles from experience. Prin- 
ciples then are more difficult to teach to a freshman than iso- 
lated concrete facts: so I think we should have something of 
the concrete to give him also. 

I am going to outline briefly how at Lehigh University we 
try to accomplish the object of giving the students an idea of 
some of the concrete facts on which engineering is based, and 
at the same time give them some theory also. At the end of 
the freshman year the mechanical and electrical engineers take 
what we call our ‘‘ summer school in constructive elements of 
mechanical and electrical apparatus’’. The summer school 
lasts only four weeks, and the students are at work for three 
hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. In 
that rather brief time we attempt to acquaint them with the 
elements of mechanical and electrical engineering. For instance, 
in the electrical end of it, in which I am especially interested, 
we have them dissect circuit-breakers, rheostats of different 
types, disassemble motors and generators, lightning-arresters 
and transformers, and sketch the circuits. We do notattempt 
at first to teach them the complete theory on which all this 
apparatus is based, but rapid progress results by having them 
acquainted with the actual things. We find this plan very 
advantageous. We have tried it now for six years, and if there 
is anything in the old adage that, “the proof of the pudding 
is in the eating’, we can show that this pudding has proved 
good with us. We find, as a matter of fact, that the mechanical 
and electrical engineers who have taken this supplemental 
course in concrete facts, with a little theory mixed in on the 
side, are much better able to grasp the theory of the dynamo 
and of the transformer later on in their course than are, for ex- 
ample, the civil engineers who do not have this summer school 
work. We find it saves time in the long run. Our object is 
to concentrate in that four weeks an experience with the things 
themselves that these young men might take a year or more to 
acquire without it. I am not sure whether we are unique in 
this respect among colleges and universities, but if there are 
any others that have had similar experience I should like to 
hear from them. : 

In summing up this controversy of theory versus practice, 
it strikes me that it is after all another phase of the old 


1462 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


question as to whether we should have classical education or 
technical education and as to which does the most for the young 
man. We have heard this thing wrangled over now for twenty 
or thirty years, and the end is not in sight. I think both sides 
of the controversy can certainly come to a common ground if 
we conclude that what after all is the object of education is the 
training of a young man to think for himself, and that implies, 
of course, a knowledge of how to solve problems when they 
arise. We cannot passibly teach all problems to a young man 
in college, but we must ground him in fundamental principles, 
giving him theory even at the expense of practice, so that 
when he leaves college he will have training which will enable 
him to solve almost any problem. That, I think, is the aim 
of technical education. 

G. W. Patterson: As a member of the committee of the 
University of Michigan on reorganizing our course, I have 
taken part in a great many consultations as to what a technical 
school course should include. I must admit that the trend of 
the work by our committee has been entirely away from what 
Professor Karapetoff has given us to understand is his notion 
of the proper thing. We feel that a man who goes to a tech- 
nical school is a crude product, and that there are many things 
which he ought to study to make him an educated man before 
he takes up engineering as a specialty. Without modern lan- 
guages, without drafting, without a thorough grounding in 
mathematics, physics and chemistry we feel no man is competent 
to understand the elements of any kind of engineering, to say 
nothing of electrical engineering. I am of the opinion that 
there are some germs of truth in what Professor Karapetoft 
has told us, but if we examine his paper closer we find that if 
we adopted his ideas we would in my opinion make a sort of 
plaything of engineering. Instead of a real training, which 
should be given to men who are to occupy these important 
positions, the actual training would fall far short. The engi- 
neer should be an educated man; he cannot be educated in a 
specialty that ignores the elements which go to make a broad 
education. With us the trend is rather toward a six-year 
course than to cut off the things which we find necessary to 
teach in the first year or two under the present plan. In the 
University of Michigan we have six-year combined courses in 
which a man registers in the department of literature, science, 
and the arts, and also in a professional department. At the 
end of four years he receives the degree of bachelor of arts, and 
at the end of two years more either that of doctor of medicine, 
or bachelor of laws. In the engineering department the trend 
is toward the same thing; that is, a longer course in which we 
do not cut out the modern languages, or reduce the amount 
of physics and chemistry in the period of training, but put 
them in earlier and put in other things. There should be no 
opportunity for a man to learn engineering without a proper 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1463 


foundation. Omitting the foundation, is like trying to build 
a mansard roof first and put on the foundation the last thing. 

If Professor Karapetoff’s paper be taken seriously, it would, 
I think, tend to destructive rather than to constructive teaching. 

Lester W. Gill: I am interested in this subject, because I 
have been endeavoring for the past few years to develop a course 
in electrical engineering in one of the Canadian universities. 
I am in sympathy with a number of the opinions expressed, 
but I do not think that it is practicable to introduce the radical 
changes suggested by Professor Karapetoff. Referring to his 
proposed schedule, it is noted that mathematics is omitted en- 
tirely from the work of the first year, and very little is set down 
for the second year. My experience has been, not only in my 
own case but in the case of students in my classes, that if math- 
ematics is dropped even for one year before the student is ac- 
quainted with its practical applications, he loses his grasp and 
consequently his interest in the subject. To most students 

mathematics is a dry subject unless it is presented in an inter- 
esting way; but even admitting that many findit uninteresting, 
it involves a certain amount of discipline which is quite neces- 
sary. 

I quite agree with President Sheldon that the greatest diffi- 
culty lies in the presentation of the subject, and in my own 
work I have endeavored to make the elementary subjects prac- 
tical as well as theoretical. This results in a compromise be- 
tween the standard college schedule and that proposed by 
Professor Karapetoff. In this way the elementary subjects— 
mathematics, physics, and chemistry—can be made as inter- 
esting as the purely engineering subjects. Asa student I found 
mathematics the most interesting subject of the whole course, 
because the teacher knew how to make it interesting. To 
make these subjects interesting the student should be given 
examples of the practical applications of the subject as he 
proceeds, and these examples should deal with things with 
which he is familiar. This arouses his interest in the theoretical 
side of the subject and he at once realizes its value. As an 
illustration, take the case of a student in physics trying to master 
Ohm’s law. If this is.presented to him merely as an abstract 
natural law, he will not find it very interesting, and will conse- 
quently get only a superficial conception of it; but give him an 
illustration of its application; ask him to calculate the voltage 
at the end of a given trolley line, given the distribution of 
current, and it will be found that after solving this problem 
he will look upon this law from an entirely different standpoint. 

The above illustrates what I mean by making the elementary 
subjects of a practical nature. My own opinion is that the 
weakness in our engineering schools lies in the method of teach- 
ing rather than in the arrangement of the schedules. The aim 
of the teacher should be to develop the student’s ability to 
reason for himself, to think logically rather than to memorize 


1464 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


rules. When a student can take the initiative and reason 
things out for himself, the technical school has done all it can 
to make him efficient from a technical standpoint. 

L. D. Nordstrum: Referring to Professor Karapetoff’s paper 
—this proposed method is in a sense radical, but I cannot help 
but agree with him in part. I do not think that the students 
should have mathematics and physics and kindred sciences 
taught by engineers. It is well if we can have mathematicians in- 
troduce as far as possible the engineering subjects, so as to make 
them interesting to the student, but for the teaching of these 
subjects thoroughly we must have a professor of mathematics 
and a professor of physics, etc., who are, so to speak, specialists 
in that line. The time is here when the trend is towards spe- 
cialization, and no man can hope to have the strength of a thor- 
ough mathematician, a thorough physicist, a thorough engineer, 
etc., all in one. The student must get these from individual 
instructors who devote their entire time to their particular sub- 
ject. 

I believe that we can not expect to turn out a finished engi- 
neer from our universities. I think all that we can hope to do 
is to take our student as he enters the college and direct and 
train his mind properly in the fundamental principles, giving 
him a good foundation upon which to build. I think it is too 
much to expect a student in a four years’ course to gain all 
that is gained and can only be gained in the practical pursuits 
of his profession. It is my opinion that a man has never finished 
his education; his entire life is that of a student. His university 
years are merely the starting or foundation years. 

V. Karapetoff: In reply to Professor Crocker’s remarks, I 
would say that, of course, the instruction should proceed from 
simple to complex; the point at issue is what to consider as 
simple and what as complex. This to my understanding varies 
with time. Twenty years ago it would not have been simple 
to begin the freshman year with instruction in street-car pro- 
pulsion and incandescent lamps; but now this is much simpler 
for the student than an instruction regarding the properties of 
magnetic poles. We now see street cars and electric lights 
much more than magnetic poles. Professor Crocker mentioned 
trade-schools, and I understand him to favor the opposite, or 
the theoretical courses. I am not in favor of the trade-school 
idea, or of a theoretical-school idea. I am in favor of the 
psychological idea. Our president and some other speakers 
compared the student with raw material; there is however a 
great difference between raw material in a manufacturing 
sense, and a man. A man is a thinking being, and if you try 
to make a machine out of him, he kicks at first, and then withers 
intellectually. The analogy to a machine should not therefore 
be carried too far. 

Mr. Dunn said that my method is very radical. Perhaps 
it seems radical for electrical engineers, but it is not considered 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1465 


radical at all among our best educators. It is an already ac- 
knowledged fact among our primary and secondary schools. 
I simply transplanted the psychological ideas that are in use in 
the primary and secondary schools in this country, schools of 
which we have good reasons to be proud. With me it is pri- 
marily the question of assuring a codperation of the student. 
If you do not agree with teaching electrical engineering in the 
freshman year, there still remains this point—that the co- 
operation of the student is not secured with the present method 
of instruction. Hence, you must change your method so as to 
secure his codperation. He is a thinking being, he is supposed 
to enjoy his life while in school, and not simply live in expecta- 
tion of the things which may come after he has left the school. 
Professor Crocker thinks that unpleasant things must be con- 
nected with the education of young men. I agree with him, 
and wish to assure him, that even. with the concentric method 
there will be enough left to make the life of a student more or 
or less unpleasant. Professor Crocker objects to mechanics, 
physics, mathematics, and chemistry being taught by engineers 
from the engineering standpoint. Surely they should not be, 
at the advanced stage, but at the elementary stage, in order to 
connect them with the engineering profession. In the courses 
of studies which I give in my paper, I propose that mathema- 
tics and mechanics should be taught in the second year by an 
engineer. 

Expository ability and the raising of salaries of professors 
have been said to be more needed at present than a change in 
methods of instruction. I.do not quite see how the concentric 
method could prevent a raising of salaries, or affect the neces- 
sity for expository ability on the part of the teachers. 

Professor Patterson thinks that I am opposed to general 
culture. On the contrary, if you will kindly look into my 
courses of instruction you will find a considerable amount of 
time devoted to general culture in the first two years. 1 do 
this not only for the sake of general culture in itself, but also 
in order to give the student an opportunity to seiect intelligently 
his profession, before he goes into the details of it. This is 
more important than the general culture, as now understood. 
It is time to stop calling a study of mathematics and mechanics 
or even languages in their dry, abstract form, as “ general” 
culture. 

In presenting this paper I had in mind two purposes: to 
criticize the present system of instruction, and to give a new, 
improved method. Even if the concentric method is no good, there 
still remains for you to answer the criticisms against the present 
system, and to develop a better system. 

Charles F. Scott: There are some dozen points which I had 
in mind to bring up, but I will forego doing so at the present 
time. I will refer to one point, however, the statement made a 
little while ago that the method proposed by Professor Kara- 


1466 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


petoff would be opposed to the whole history of education. Is 
not that one of the best recommendations it has? Has not the 
history of education for the last fifty vears been one of ad- 
vance’? Not long ago new sciences were proposed instead of 
old languages. Then science was degraded by being applied 
to engineering. Then engineering ceased to be theoretical, and 
laboratories and machine shops found their way into colleges. 
Educational ideals and methods have been changing. We 
have not reached perfection. Engineering methods must be 
applied to the teaching of engineering, and that means de- 
velopment. Possibly, therefore, one of the best recommenda- 
tions of this proposed system is that it is radical and is opposed 
to old ideas. If it is not quite the right thing it is getting 
closer to it and it merits careful consideration. 

I wrote down two words on this slip of paper a moment before 
Professor Karapetoff mentioned the same words ‘‘educational 
committee.” Accepting the suggestion of Professor Karapetoff 
as a motive, I am very pleased to second that motion; namely, 
that the Board of Directors of the Institute be requested to 
consider the advisability of the appointment of an educational 
committee. 

V. Karapetoff: I shall be very glad to make such a motion. 
(The motion was put and carried.) 

J. J. Carty: A few years ago I would have been quite ready 
to submit a number of criticisms on our technical schools. But 
the more information I get upon the subject and the more 
attention I pay to it, the more difficult it seems to be and the 
less ready am I to criticize. During the past twenty years I 
have received-into my office a very large number of graduates 
from the principle technical schools in America, and from this 
experience I am able to make two generalizations. They are 
these: 

1. That the best men do not all come from one school. The 
personal equation is so overwhelming that so far as my experi- 
ence goes, the efficiency of the school from which the men grad- 
uate cannot be determined by the relative efficiency of the men 
themselves after graduation. 

2. As a rule, the men are well trained technically but are 
very often defective in respect to that broad and liberal training 
which should underlie the technical education of every pro- 
fessional man. This defect is a serious one and very difficult 
to overcome. I have almost come to the conclusion that it is 
hopeless to attempt to give in the technical school the necessary 
broad and liberal foundation studies, and at the same time 
keep up the arduous work required of the student in connection 
with the strictly engineering studies. I am coming to the 
state of mind where it seems to me that the introduction of 
these so-called broadening studies into the curriculum of the 
technical school might fairly be likened to the introduction of 
such studies into a medical school. 


a 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1467 


As the general scheme of education in this country stands 
at present, I think that the electrical engineer, for the founda- 
tion of his liberal education, must depend solely upon the 
scientific studies themselves, or pursue his broad studies either 
before or after his technical course. Helpful as the scientific 
course is in the development of the student when forming part 
of a liberal education, it alone is not sufficient if the engineer 
is to take his place in the world, as he should, with cultivated 
men of affairs, whether they be physicians, lawyers, or men of 
business. The engineer should be so equipped that he may 
attain those ideals so well set forth by President Hadley in his 
recent address at the dedication of the Engineers’ Building, 
in which he says: 


We have outgrown the day when a little commor sense was sufficient 
for managing the affairs of the nation. They are become too complex, 
and this complexity gives the engineer—if he will add to his training in 
mathematics a training in ethics and political economy and the funda- 
mental principles of the law—an opportunity such as never before ex- 
~isted to claim and receive the position which rightfully belongs to him. 
Further on in his address, President Hadley says: 


We celebrate to-day and we are justified in celebrating the recognition 
of science as a necessary guide in the conduct of the material affairs of 
each man’s business. Half a century hence, when our descendants shall 
meet in this building, or some yet greater building, I am confident that 
they will celebrate a yet greater thing—the recognition of the right of 
men of science to take the lead in enlightening the thought of the people 
on public affairs and the responsibility of filling the higher positions in 
the service of the commonwealth 

President Hadley says elsewhere in his address that the course 
of our technical schools tends to have a narrowing effect upon 
the student, instead of a broadening one. This is in my judg- 
ment often the case. The narrowing effect of this technical 
training, it seems to me, is a negative one, not due to the 
technical course per se, but due to the fact that technical train- 
ing is given, to the exclusion of liberal studies. I am hopeful 
that ultimately our entire scheme of school, college and uni- 
versity training will be modified so as to permit the student 
to graduate from his professional school at a sufficiently early 
age, and at the same time have received the necessary liberal 
education. At present I do not see how this can be done. 

How to provide this broad and liberal education and at 
the same time not encroach upon the legitimate work of the 
professional school is what I consider to be the problem of en- 
gineering education to-day. Until this is settled, I have very 
little heart in any discussion, such as that pertaining to the 
relative number of hours which the engineering student should 
spend in the laboratory, at shop work, or at lectures. Once the 
engineering student has a proper educational foundation to 
build upon, his professional studies can no longer be said to 
be narrowing, for these studies would, in the light of a proper 
philosophy, take on a new meaning. They would become an 
absorbing, intellectual pursuit rather than a hard and dis- 


1468 ENGINEERING EDUCATION [June 27 


agreeable task. They would become toa high degree broadening. 

With this large question out of the way, I am satisfied that 
the problem of the make-up of the curriculum of the engi- 
neering school could be satisfactorily solved. If these views 
which I have expressed should prove to be correct, we would 
still have before us the most difficult question as to what broad- 
ening studies should be specified, and that perhaps equally 
difficult question as to where and when these studies should be 
pursued. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conveii. 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E. E. 


REGENERATION OF POWER WITH SINGLE-PHASE 
ELECTRIC RAILWAY MOTORS. 


BY WILLIAM COOPER 


The conditions necessary in order that an electric motor may 
operate successfully in regenerating or restoring power to the 
supply circuit are: 

1. The counter pressure generated by the motor must 
be greater than the impressed pressure of the supply circuit. 

2. The value of this excess counter pressure must be 
under control and maintained in suitable relation to the im- 
pressed pressure. 

3. There must be at the time other power-consuming 
devices connected to the supply circuit. 

There is no difficulty in producing the first condition the 
second is the one that is difficult to fulfil. There are two methods 
of regulating the counter to the impressed pressure; one is to 
increase the counter pressure and the other to reduce the im- 
pressed. The third condition, except in isolated cases, 
will be taken care of by the operating load. 

Practically all variable-speed railway motors are of the so- 
called series type, and as this type of motor is the only 
one having the proper characteristics for general railway 
work it alone will be considered. The operation of a series 
dynamo electric machine as a series generator on a constant- 
potential circuit is a problem which many have grappled 
with, but none has solved. The machine must be given a 
shunt characteristic of a greater or less degree in order to 
make such operation possible. A machine having the shunt 
characteristic predominant is unfit for use as a railway motor, 
and as this characteristic must be predominant to operate 


1469 


1470 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


successfully as a generator it is at once evident that the motor 
must be changed in some manner before it can be used as a gen- 
erator. But this is not the only condition which the motor must 
fulfil in order to operate successfully as a generator in restoring 
power to the supply circuit; the motor must operate satisfactor- 
ily while the armature current is varied through a wide range 
with a constant field. This is evident from a very casual ob- 
servation of the conditions. 

Assume that the car or locomotive being driven by the motor 
under consideration has attained a balanced or free running 
speed under the conditions. The motor is then developing only 
sufficient torque to overcome the train resistances. The motor, 
being a series machine, has the same current in the field and 
armature. Under these conditions a very slight increase in the 
field current would increase the counter electromotive force of 
the armature to a value greater than the impressed electro- 
motive force of the supply circuit. 

Now assume an ordinary series motor in which the armature 
current cannot be increased materially above the corresponding 
field strength without disturbing the commutating conditions; 
it follows that the motor acting as a generator can only give a 
retarding force approximately equal to the train resistances. 
This added to the train resistance would give a total retardation 
so small that it could not be called a braking effect. From this 
it is obvious that the armature current must exceed the field 
current at times in order to produce a retarding effect which can 
be utilized in bringing the train to rest, or in holding the train on 
a grade. This, then, is another condition which the ordinary 
series railway motor does not readily fulfil. 

From the foregoing it would seem that a motor to operate suc- 
cessfully as a regenerator of power must have the following 
characteristics: 

1. It must be capable of operating through a wide range of 
variation between field and armature current, and 

2. It must be provided with some means of producing a shunt 
characteristic. 

The first characteristic exists to the fullest extent in a motor 
having some means of compensating for armature reaction, as 
well as a means of maintaining a constant commutating condi- 
tion. This characteristic also exists to a limited extent in a 
motor having either one of these functions. 


_O EEE EEE 


1907]. COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER 1471 


The second characteristic is not so easily provided. In the 
direct-current motor it can be obtained by providing the motor 
with both a shunt and series winding, either of which has suffi- 
cient capacity to operate the machine either as a shunt-wound 
generator or as a series motor. 

Another method of furnishing the shunt characteristic is to 
provide a means of separately exciting the motor field in- 
dependent of the line or motor voltage. There are several ways 
of doing this. In the case of four-motor equipments, one 
method is to use one motor as a generator to excite the other 
three motors which will operate as generators, being connected 
to the supply circuit. 

Storage-batteries may also be used to excite the fields, but this 
arrangement has its disadvantages in being complicated. 

The great difficulty encountered in operating direct-current 
~- motors as regenerators of power is that the impressed pressure 
is a constant, and the means at hand for meeting it are very 
limited. As the ordinary series motor will not permit of any 
very great variation of armature current with a constant field, 
and as only a very limited number of combinations of the motors 
is possible, the range through which an equipment can be oper- 
ated regeneratively is, under the most favorable conditions, 
very limited. 

In the single-phase, alternating-current motor of the series 
type these necessary characteristics are inherent. Without 
entering into a description of this motor, the design of which is 
well known, it is sufficient to say that the machine is providea 
with a compensating winding to neutralize the armature 
reaction, and also has preventive leads between commutator 
and armature windings which assist in commutation. This 
construction yields the first characteristic; the second is easily 
obtained in connection with the transformer used in the voltage 
control of the motor. 

The method of producing this result is to use one of the motors 
of the equipment as an exciter for the others. By providing the 
transformer with suitable voltage taps, the value of the field 
current of the exciter may be varied through a wide range, as 
well as the generated voltage of the restored power. In this 
respect the conditions are very much more favorable than in 
the case of the direct-current motor, in which the only variations 
that can possibly be made are in the series-parallel combinations 
of the motors that are being used as generators, 


1472 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


The exact arrangement of the motors and their connections are 
shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1. 

Assume the car or locomotive upon which the motors are 
mounted to be in motion, the armatures turning at a correspond- 
ing speed. If the field of the first machine be connected to the 
transformer, an alternating electromotive force will be generated 
by its armature, the value of which will be directly proportional 
to the speed. If the field of the other motor be connected to the 
exciter armature, an alternating current will pass through it, 
and the second armature will in turn generate an alternating 
electromotive force the value of which varies about as the square 
of the speed—the excitation of the first machine remaining 
constant. 

The electromotive force generated by the second armature will 
bear a very close phase-relation with the electromotive force 


Fic. 1 


of the transformer, for the reason that the current in the field 
circuit connected to the transformer lags approximately 90°, 
as does the current in the field-circuit of the second machine. 
This combination throws the generated electromotive force of 
the second machine approximately 180° back of the transformer 
electromotive force, or, by reversing the connections, in the same 
phase-rclation. 

The phase-relation between the generated and transformer 
voltages is shown in Fig. 2. 

This record shows that the two electromotive forces are in 
exactly opposite phase. Under these conditions the current 
flowing after the circuit is closed with the connections re- 
versed, will be displaced from the electromotive force, due to 
the impedance of the armature circuit. Fig. 3 shows this 
displacement when the armature is carrying about 100% cur- 
rent overload. 


1907] COOPER: REGENERA1ION OF POWER 1473 


This is at a power-factor of 80%. The power-factor varies 
between this and 100% as the load decreases to zero. The 
obvious method to improve the power-factor is to shift the 
phase-relation of the generated to the line electromotive force 
The result of this is shown in Figs. 4, 5, and 6. ae 

Fig. 4 shows approximately the relation of the generated to 
the transformer electromotive force as it would be on open 
circuit, as the current in this case is small. 

From these records it is evident that there is no difficulty in 
restoring power with a single-phase, commutator-type motor at 
practically 100% power-factor, the machine operating as a 
non-synchronous, alternating-current generator. 


Fic. 2—Oscillogram of generated and transformer electromotive forces. 
The generated electromotive, force is the curve with the irregular top 


This condition being established, the next step is to see how it 
applies to actual operating conditions. From the foregoing it 
is evident that one of the motors of the equipment must be set 
aside for use as an exciter for the others, or a separate motor- 
generator set must be provided. If a separate source of excita- 
tion is provided, all the motors can be used to the fullest extent 
for regeneration of. power, in which case the total capacity for 
regeneration will be increased over the capacity of the ma- 
chines as motors by the increase in the power-factor. If the 
regenerative function is to be used for braking in making fre- 
quent stops, it might be desirable to supply the separate excita- 


1474 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


tion; but if it is to be used in holding the train on grades it is 
unnecessary, as the remaining motors, if the equipment consists 
of three or more motors, will have ample capacity to do the work. 
Assume a 2% grade of considerable length. The motors, 
all working, have sufficient capacity to haul the train up the 
grade. Assume the equipment to consist of four motors. 
Assume train resistances at six pounds per ton. The total 
tractive effort will then be 46 pounds per ton in ascending. 
To hold the train at the same speed in descending, a retarding 
force of 34 pounds per ton must be supplied. The retarding 


quit 3—Oscillogram of current and electromotive force of generator. 
e lower curve js the current. Power-factor 80% lagging current 


force necessary is then approximately 75% of the force necessary 
to haul the train up the grade. It is evident from this that 
three of the four motors have ample capacity to exert the 
necessary retarding force, even if the power-factor of the ma- 
chines as generators is no better than when they are operating 
as motors. It has been shown that the power-factor when operat- 
ng as generators can be made better than when operating as 
motors; therefore, there is a surplus of capacity in four-motor 
equipment, and in three-motor equipment about an equal 
capacity. 

The characteristics and capacity of the machines being 


1907] COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER 


Fic 4—Oscillogram of current and electromotive force under light load. 
The lower curve is the current. Power-factor 98% leading current. 


Fre. 5—Oscillogram of current and electromotive force under normal 
load. Conditions same as Fig. 4_ The lower curve is the current. 
Power-factor 99.5% lagging current 


1476 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


correct for the work, it only remains to provide suitable means 
for manipulating the circuits to adapt the apparatus to the con- 
ditions. This is accomplished by providing switching apparatus 
to connect the motors in the proper relation and for furnishing 
and controiling the field current of the machine used as an exciter. 

Fig. 7 shows diagrammatically the main circuits and con- 
nections for a four-motor equipment. From this it is evident 
that the switches used must have a current capacity the same as 
the motors, for there are four in parallel on the transformer and 
the switches used for reversing carry the current for one motor 


Fic. 6—Oscillogram of current and electromotive force under 100% 
overload. Conditions same as Figs. 4 and 5 .Power-factor 
97% lagging current. The current is the upper curve. 


only. As shown, 36 switches are required for the entire control of 
the motor equipment. 

Fig. 8 shows diagrammatically the same motor equipment 
arranged for regeneration in addition to the regular motor con- 
trol. As shown, 54 switches are required of the motor-current 
capacity, and 16 of one fourth that capacity. Of the added 
switches of the motor-current capacity, 10 have been added to 
the transformer to enable slow speeds on regeneration to be ob- 
tained, and 8 are required to change the combinations of the 
motors. Besides the added switches, three small preventive coils 
and a few additional transformer taps are required. From this 


1907] COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER 1477 


it is seen that the amount of additional apparatus required is 
insignificant compared with the result accomplished. 


The curves shown in Fig. 9 give the relative tractive and re- 


Fic. 7 


tarding effort, both continuous and maximum, of a four-motor 
equipment. 


As shown by the curves in Fig. 9 the three motors of a four- 
motor equipment acting as generators restoring energy to the 


1478 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


line will let a train down a 2% grade at any speed from 9 miles 
per hr. to 30 miles per hr., that the motors have capacity to haul 
up the same grade at any speed up to 18.5 miles per hr. This is 
for continuous duty. At maximum duty for short periods the 


/ 


OOOO 


0 
OOD 


v 
COX 


¢ 
i 
OO00 


QYQQQOQO VQQDQOQ02000 20000000002000000000000000000000GI00d0GOd0000 ” 


<LS, 


Fic. 8 


capacity is increased about 60%. Between 9 miles per hr. and 
30 miles per hr. there are 40 operating speeds, the gradations 
from one to the other being such that at no time will there be 
‘any variation exceeding 10% in torque. This necessitates, of 


1907] COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER 1479 


course, a rather large number of switches being used, but it seems 
to be a very desirable condition to fulfil in heavy freight traffic. 

Efficiency of this system of regeneration. The efficiency of 
the system when the motors are operating as generators and 
restoring energy to the supply circuit is about the same as the 
efficiency when operating as motors, there being perhaps a slight 
advantage in the case of the generator, due to the improved 
power-factor conditions. This, of course, assumes about the 
same load conditions on the machines in either case. However, 
the actual saving in power-house output can never be a very 
large percentage. If the entire road consisted of 2% grades and 
there wereno switching to be done, the saving in power con- 
sumption might be as high as 50%; under ordinary condi- 


35000 


POUNDS TRACTIVE EFFORT. 


POUNDS TRACTIVE EFFORT. 


RETARDATION & ACCELERATION, 


5000 FOUR MOTORS, 


0 2 4 6 8 10° 12 «(14 16 18 20. 22 24 6D 
MILES PER HOUR. 


tions it could not be made to exceed one half of this, while under 
unfavorable conditions or with a level track and long runs, 
using the regenerative function only for braking, the saving 
could not be more than a few per cent. 

_ The value of this system of regeneration is not to be found 
so much in the saving of power as in the saving in wear and tear 
and the ability to operate over a wide range of speed, as well as 
the comparative safety of operation. In the case of running 
heavy trains down long grades, the braking apparatus of all cars 
in the train can be held in reserve, it being necessary to use 
it only in emergency or in making the finalstop. Under these 
conditions the number of accidents due to the failure of the 


brakes would be very much reduced. 


1480 COOPER: REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


This is the only system of regeneration yet developed which, 
can be operated at maximum efficiency over a wide range of 
speed. In the case illustrated, forty speeds between 9 miles 
per hr. and 30 miles per hr. are obtained. This number can be 
increased if desired simply by the addition of a few switches. 

The three-phase system is the only other one in which the 
regenerative function has been developed to any extent, but at 
most there are only a few widely separated speeds at which it can 
be operated efficiently. Generally there is but one. 

A system of electric traction in which the trains must go up- 
grade and down-grade at one fixed speed in order to operate 
efficiently is certainly at a disadvantage when compared with 
one in which the trains can be operated at any speed below a 
certain maximum speed up-grade and at any speed within safe 
limits down-grade, at all times, whether taking energy from the 
line or restoring it to the line, the apparatus operating with 
maximum efficiency. 

It will be noted that in this system the impressed voltage is 
changed to adapt it to the generated voltage, while in the direct- 
current or the three-phase system there is but one impressed 
voltage available. 

This wide range of working voltage, with the ability to 
vary the armature current with respect to the field through a 
wide range, gives to the single-phase series motor the extreme 
flexibility as a regenerator of power that it has as a motor. 

One other point that is worthy of note in connection with the 
operation of this system is the absolute safety and stability of 
the combination. While the machines being operated as 
generators are normally series machines, it will be noted that no 
one of the armatures is connected in series with its own field, 
and under no condition can there be any surging or building up 
of load. In case of momentary interruption of the supply 
circuit, the circuit again being restored the system will again 
operate exactly as before the interruption, there being no surging 
or violent action of the machines. 

The system of regenerating power here described has been 
used in testing locomotives to give a dead-load condition under 
a wide range of speed. 

Numerous stand-tests have also been made, so that the 
operation of the motors under the conditions is well established 
and there is no doubt about the scheme doing all that is claimed 
for it. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1481 


Discussion on ‘‘ REGENERATION OF PowER WITH SINGLE-PHASE 
Evecrric Rairway Motors”, at Niacara Fa ts, N. Y., 
JUNE 28, 1907. 


_W. I. Slichter: The possibility of regenerating. power with 
single-phase motors is one of the valuable features of the single- 
phase system and one which will be of great assistance in bring- 
ing the motor into the field of heavy railway work. The possi- 
bility of regenerating at various speeds is well illustrated in Mr. 
Cooper’s paper, but it is interesting to note that there are two 
points in the system at which the speed can be varied; first, by 
changing the tap on the transformer from which the exciting 
motor obtains its excitation; secondly, by changing the tap on 


tes 


Pic. 1 


the transformer to which the generating motors are connected. 
These two actions may be independent, giving twice as many 
steps as there are taps. With this arrangement a very large 
number of taps on the transformer is not necessary. 

With regard to the phase of the current which is returned to 
the line, there is liable to be a low power-factor, due to the in- 
ductance in the motor, the line, and the steel rails. This can 
be improved by a compounding effect in the motor which is 
acting as a generator, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. 

E, represents the electromotive force of the line, or at the 
secondary of the transformer, which is impressed on the field 
winding of the motor that is acting as an exciter. The flux 
which is set up in these fields will be displaced approximately 


1482 REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


90° behind E, as at 6,. The armature of the motor used as an 
exciter revolves in this flux and produces a voltage in phase with 
d,, as shown by £,. 

This voltage being impressed on the separately excited fields 
of the power motors, produces a flux in their fields displaced 90° 
behind £,, as shown by ¢,. a 

The electromotive force generated by these armatures is in 
phase with ¢, as E,, which is nearly in opposition to the line 
voltage /,, giving a resultant electromotive force E,. 

This resultant forces the current 7, through the windings of 
the motor and transformer, in which there is a considerable 
amount of inductance, and the current will lag behind F, an 
amount depending upon the inductance of these circuits. 

If, however, in addition to the magnetizing current caused by 
FE, we force through the fields of the power motors a certain 
portion of the current from the field of the exciting motor having | 
the phase of ¢,, then will ¢, and E, be advanced in phase con- 


Ey 


Fig. 2. 


siderably, as in Fig. 2, and the resultant E, will lead E, and the 
current /, flowing may lag considerably behind F,, and still be 
nearly in phase with &, or Ey, assuming a position between the 
two giving a good condition for returning power instead of volt- 
amperes to the line. 

L. B. Stillwell: The importance of recuperation has not been 
recognized adequately by American railway engineers. Its im- 
portance, as Mr. Cooper states, is primarily due to the fact that 
it assists powerfully in reducing wear and tear of rolling stock 
equipment. The average cost of renewals of rolling stock of the 
railways of the United States to-day exceeds $250,000,000 per 
annum. Of that total, a large proportion, probably at least one- 
half, is due to the destruction of rolling stock by loss of control 
on heavy grades and by excessive wear and tear of wheels and 
brakes and strain of draft-gear. A number of years ago when 
the late Judge Cowan was president of the Baltimore & Ohio, 
this wear and tear of rolling stock loomed up in the road’s cost cf 


tt": *-_- = 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1483 


operation as so formidable an item that he and some of his assist- 
ants very seriously considered the problem of utilizing electricity 
to operate the heaviest of their mountain grade divisions. 
Messrs. Duncan & Hutchinson made an investigation and report 
at that time, and I recall that subsequently Judge Cowan ex- 
pressed to me the opinion that the saving in cost of maintenance 
which could be effected by using the three-phase system on this 
division was of the greatest importance. 

In this connection, the work that Mr. de Kando and his asso- 
ciates of the Ganz company have done is of great interest. The 
argument which Mr. de Kando uses in meeting the opposition of 
the railway operator, who is of the opinion that it would be quite 
impossible to operate up grade and down grade at uniform speed, 
is interesting. Mr. de Kando takes the position that the true 
limitation of speed, either in climbing or descending a mountain 
grade, is the curvature of the road, the limiting curves properly 
fixing the maximum speed. He argues that instead of climbing 
a grade at a speed of 20 miles an hour and descending it at 40 
miles an hour the same result is attained in crossing the mountain 
if the locomotive be run at the average speed of 30 miles an hour. 
If 30 miles an hour be the permissible speed with reference to 
limiting curves nothing is lost, so far as schedule is concerned, 
and much is gained in assuring the safety of the train in going 
down grade by adopting a system that absolutely holds the 
train to the speed that is predetermined as a safe limit. 

Anyone who travels over mountain-grade divisions in this 
country and looks out of a car window usually sees the remains 
of at least one freight wreck, and the argument which Mr. de 
Kando makes is not fully met, in my judgment, by saying that 
it is necessary to operate at widely varying speeds in going down 
grades in order to attain the necessary average speeds. Un- 
doubtedly this is the practice. The engineer will “ let her out”, 
as he says, when he has a short tangent and will go downgrade 
at what he considers a safe speed, but the results are shown by 
the wrecks. It would be far safer, as far as the maintenance of 
rolling stock is concerned, to fix the limit speed for him in the 
office of the superintendent and provide a system which does not 
permit him to exceed the limit established. 

As regards the interesting system of recuperation of power 
which Mr. Cooper has presented, I would suggest that the attempt 
has been made to go too far in obtaining variation of speed at 
the price of complication of switching apparatus. In my 
judgment it would be better to establish a narrower range of 


Ispeeds for operation on mountain grades, and eliminate a con- 


siderable proportion of the switches illustrated in the diagrams. 
A tendency of single-phase equipment is toward an inordinate 
use of switching gear. ; 
Recuperation involves, in general, an increase in the output 
of motors, since they are worked down grade as well as up grade. 
Probably in practical operation the difference would not be 


1484 REGENERATION OF POWER [June 28 


very material in respect to this point. It is customary now to 
add a second engine when a train reaches the foot of a mountain 
grade, and in general it would not greatly handicap mountain 
operation if the second locomotive were to accompany the train 
over the entire grade, being used to assist in holding back the 
train and restoring energy to the line in descent. Substantial 
compensation for the additional locomotive mileage involved 
would be obtained in the saving of power. 

J.C. Lincoln: Has Mr. Cooper made experiments to determine 
how much more wear there is on the gears of this regeneration 
system than with the ordinary method now used in operating 
railroad motors, where the motors are used as motors only and 
never as generators? 

William Cooper: As to the wear on the gears—of course 
that is purely a mechanical matter and it is self-evident that if 
the gears do work they will wear. The best example of that, I 
think, would be the traction brake on street cars, where the 
electric brake is used for traction purposes. In that case, of 
course, we find that the gears wear out faster than they would 
if only used as motors. They are bound to do that from the 
nature of the case. The amount of wear would be proportional 
to the amount they are used for regenerating purposes. 

Mr. Stillwell’s comment about the number of switches in- 
volved as shown in the diagrams needs a reply. Of course there 
are some other considerations which will determine how many 
switches are necessary, but from the standpoint of making 
assurance double sure, and having a system to operate without 
a hitch of any kind from a designer’s standpoint, I incorporate 
a sufficient number of switches to cover any condition. Prob- 
ably a case would arise where a very much smaller number 
would answer the purpose. 

In regard to Mr. Slichter’s point about shifting the phase 
relation of the generated electromotive force, I ask how he 
would produce the displacement of the electromotive force on 
the exciter field? It is simpler to displace the current in the 
exciter armature circuit than it is to displace the current in the 
field circuit of the exciter. That can be done by methods well 
known to the art of shifting the current in an alternating current 
system, by increasing resistances or inductance to get any pre- 
determined relation. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I, E. E. 


FRACTIONAL PITCH WINDINGS FOR INDUCTION 
MOTORS 


BY C. A. ADAMS, W. K. CABOT, AND G. &. IRVING, JR. 


For several years past some of our large manufacturers have 
used fractional pitch windings, for induction motors to a con- 
siderable extent, and for alternators to a lesser extent. 

It was the original purpose of this investigation to develop by 
theory and experiment a method by means of which the effects 
of such windings may be calculated ; and although this purpose has 
been successfully carried out as far as time allowed, there is still a 
very interesting part of the subject which must be left for another 
time ; namely, the relation of fractional pitch windings to squirre!- 
cage motors. 

THEORY 

The theoretically ideal induction motor would have.a very 
large number of symmetrically placed phase windings of full 
pitch on both primary and secondary structures, the primary 
windings being supplied with the same number of equal, sym- 
metrical, simple harmonic electromotive forces. In this case the 
flux density across the air-gap, the primary current, and the 
secondary current would be distributed sinusoidally around the 
gap periphery at any instant, and these distributions would re- 
volve smoothly around the periphery at synchronous velocity. 

The chief difference between this ideal machine and the 
actual is that the number of phases in the latter is small and there 
must, therefore, be several adjacent conductors or slots carrying 
the same current at the same instant, thus forming what may 
be termed a belt of conductors in which the current increases and 
decreases as a unit. On either side of this belt is another, the 
current in which differs in phase from that in the first by a - 
considerable angle, 60° in a three-phase and 90° in a two-phase 


1485 


1400 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


motor. Thus the current varies from point to point around the 
periphery by jumps or steps rather than gradually, asin the ideal 
motor. 

It is a well known fact which has been demonstrated both 
theoretically and experimentally that even an ordinary induction 
motor, if it have a low-resistance squirrel-cage secondary, and be 
supplied with simple harmonic electromotive forces, will have 
a gap flux whose peripheral distribution is approximately 
sinusoidal at each instant, the effect of the slot openings being 
neglected. 

Even in the case of a phase-wound secondary, the most 
satisfactory common ground for calculation is the assumption of 
a sinusoidal peripheral flux distribution, for although it may be 
claimed that such a distribution does not exist in fact, the results 
of calculations based upon this assumption are sufficiently close 
to the observed facts to render its use quite warrantable. 


Differential factor. When an harmonically distributed flux 
sweeps round the gap periphery it causes to be induced in 
the conductors of any given slot a simple harmonic electro- 
motive force. If this slot is one of three per pole per phase of a 
three-phase motor, there will be induced in the conductors of 
these three slots of the same phase, three harmonic electromotive 
forces differing in phase by 20°, and these three electromotive 
forces will add together vectorially to form a resultant whose 
magnitude is about 0.96 of their numerical sum. This slight 
loss of effectiveness in electromotive force generation, which is 
due to the fact that different conductors of the same phase belt 
are at certain periods experiencing electromotive forces of 
opposite sign, may be termed differential action, since it consists 
in the differential cutting of flux by conductors of the same phase 
belt. Similarly the factor (0.96 in this case) by which the total 
numerical electromotive force must be multiplied to obtain the 
actual resultant electromotive force, may be called the differen- 
tial factor. But differential action in these phase belts is not con- 
fined to electromotive force generation; it also appears in a 
similar manner in the production of an harmonically distributed 
magnetomotive force by currents in these belts. This means 
that a larger current per phase is required to produce a given 
magnetomotive force than in the ideal motor. If the secondary 
is supplied with an ordinary phase winding, the belts of this 
winding will be subject to the same differential action, both in 
the generation of electromotive force and in the production of 


——E 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1487 


torque by the reaction of the current belts on the gap flux. 
Moreover, in this latter case the overlapping of a secondary 
phase belt by parts of two primary phase belts, (or vice versa), 
results in local fluxes crossing the gap, which have components 
in phase with both primary and secondary currents and thus 
give rise to quadrature electromotive forces* which may be 


considered as another aspect of the belt effect or differential 
action. 
The phenomena introduced by fractional pitch windings are 
largely of this same type, and may in most cases be treated as an 
*This subject has been treated by one of the writers under the head of 
Belt leakage. Proceedings International Electrical Congress, St. Louis, 
1904, Vol. I, page 706, 


1488 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


extension of differential action. Thus if coils having a pztch or 
throw of less than 180° (electrical) be used for the winding of an 
induction motor, the effect will be to shift one of the layers of the 
winding around through a certain angle from its full pitch posi- 
tion, see Fig. 1, where a four-pole, three-phase winding with a 
two-thirds pitch is shown diagrammatically. The positive or 
backward connected belts are shown in heavy lines, and the 
negative or outward connected belts in light lines; the two 
sides of each phase coil are similarly lettered and numbered. 
The overlapping of currents of different phase in the same slots 
is here quite apparent. 


Slot leakage. The reactance due to that part of the leakage 
flux which crosses a slot, linking with more or less of the con- 
ductors in that slot, may be expressed as follows: 

Nt 
rey 


x,= 22nd; N*,; 1 > 10° (1) 


where is the frequency, ¢; the flux per ampere per unit length 
of slot, N-; the conductors per slot, / the length of the core, 
N, the total number of slots, and p’ the number of phases. None 
of these quantities is affected by a change of coil-pitch, except 
gs. This change will therefore be a measure of the effect 
produced upon the slot leakage by the fractional pitch. 
Designate by @ the pitch of the coils in electrical degrees, and 
by @ the angle of pitch deficiency = 180°-0. Then if the ma- 
chine in question has a very large number of phases, the two 
coil-sides located in any given slot will in general carry currents 
which differ in phase by @ degrees, and the component of one of 
these currents in phase with the other will be proportional to 
cos £. If the product of the inductances of these two coil-sides 
is equal to the square of their mutual inductance, i.e. if there be 
no relative leakage flux between them, the ratio of the average 
leakage flux linked with one, to what it would be with full pitch 
winding and no phase difference between the two currents, is 


i+ ’ : 


pitch factor, under the two above mentioned conditions. But 
neither of these conditions exists in practice. 

Consider first the relative leakage between the two coil-sides 
in the same slot. Referring to Fig. 2, the flux linked with coil b 
per inch length of slot for one ampere in b is 


“—: 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1489 
Bo di d, 
be = (Gt +4) 


The flux linked with b per inch of slot for one ampere in a is 


Sah rack: 
bu = = (+4) 


But the current in a differs in phase from that in b by an angle 
8, and the component of ¢,, in phase with ¢y, is fay cos 8. 
Then the total in-phase flux linked with b per slot inch and for one 


ampere distributed uniformly over the whole copper section of 
the slot, is, 


Po = ae oo ee [Ge 2) + cos a(3+ =) | 


Similarly 


1490 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: {June 28 
+ dpa COS 2.2/5 d, d, yy) 
and $a = aa as p == (sah + 3) +eos{Z +5 


Then since each coil has one side in the bottom and the other in 
the top of a slot, the average flux linkage per ampere inch of 
slot will be 


p, fete 27/449 +4,)(45")] 


d, , 3.2[d ert 
or $e = 2672 += E +4, | sin’ a 


d 
There is thus a small portion (0.267 21) of the slot leakage 


which is independent of the coil-pitch; it is obviously that part 
which lies between the two coils, and would disappear if the 
latter were placed side by side in the slot rather than one on top 
of the other. 

With this correction, the slot pitch-factor becomes 


a fay ) (+) 
at +d, Sars 


Rp = — J oe 
d d 
pales +4,) (3) 


If the slot is partly closed, the resulting increase in ¢; is 
common to both coils and would involve a change in only that 
part of formula (2) which is affected by the coil-pitch. 


In Fig. 3, curve A gives the values oft coe corresponding 


to different values of the coil-pitch, and curve B gives the 
corresponding values of k», from equation (3), for a motor with 
open slots, in which the coils occupy about 80% of the slot depth. 
If the slots be partly or wholly closed, the constant part of 
equation (2) decreases relatively and the corresponding k» curve 
will drop down, approaching more nearly to curve A. 

In all this a very large number of phases has been assumed. 
Consider now the effect of a small number of phases. Take 
for example a two-phase motor with % pitch. £ = 45° and 
k, taken from curve B, Fig. 3, is 0.88. The two layers of the 
winding will be as in Fig. 4, where the relative phases of the 
currents in the several belts are indicated. Consider the 0° belt 


ae cals 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1491 


in the upper layer; half of it overlaps a 0° belt in the lower 
layer and the pitch-factor for this half is therefore 1; the other 
half overlaps a 90° belt in the lower layer, with aes tania 
pitch-factor of 0.585. Thus the average pitch-factor for the 
belt is 0.792 in place of 0.88 as given by curve B or equation (3). 

If the coil-pitch is deficient by one or more whole belts, the 
conditions will be exactly the same as those for which the curve 
B Fig. 3, was calculated. Therefore that curve will give the correct 
pitch-factor of a three-phase motor for a 4 and for a 3 pitch, and 
of a two-phase motor for a 4 pitch winding. 

A little consideration will show that between these points the 
actual eas factor will follow a ey line law. 


S| 


: 
ARE 


SNe! 
c NG 
rE 
‘aia 
tet 


SH A 
het SA A | 


eee ae 1009 | 


sd 6S ow Ww WM 

In FE ty es ee " a oo show the variation in k, for two 
and three-phase motors respectively. A, and A, show the same 
factors when the relative leakage between the two coil-sides in 
the same slot is neglected. 

Tooth-tip or ‘‘ zigzag’’ leakage. The expression for the tooth- 
tip leakage reactance is of the same form as that for the 
slot leakage; 


Xi = 271 pit Ween oi 10° (4) 


where ¢;; is the tooth-tip flux per ampere inch of slot, for both 
primary and secondary. 


1492 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


As far as the fractional pitch effect is concerned, this element 
is exactly on a par with that part of the slot leakage which 
crosses the slot above the conductors, since it is wholly common 
to both coil-sides. The tooth-tip pitch-factor will therefore be 
that shown by lines A, and A, Fig. 3. 


Coil-end leakage. The coil-end reactance may be expressed 
as follows: 


N \? 2x N? 
xj =2rn dj p (5) los Paget tie (5) 


where ¢j is the flux per ampere inch of the whole phase belt 
bundle of coil ends, » the number of pairs of poles, N the con- 


Two Phase %4 Pitch. . 
i O° MT 30° jit 180° j 
= ween ae - S| 
ri gi0° ty “= J 270 
weet ' a7) Ae | abet hbiaky SResultant 
1-707 ++ 1.707 +" Mag nitude. 
tig-4- 


Three Phase % Pitch. 
0° 60° 120° 


ho 60° ; | 120°! | 180° 
ot—430" +60+-— so —bred— Phase: 
-1-+—0.866 —+ 1 +—0,866—+-1-+-Magnitude. 
Fig: 4a- 


resultant 


ductors per phase and 7, the length of the two ends of one coil, 
usually about three times the coil-pitch. There are two terms 
in equation (5) which vary with the coil-pitch, /, in a compara- 
tively simple manner, and ¢; in a manner not so obvious. 

For a circular coil in air, f;, the flux linked with one inch of 
the coil as a whole, per ampere distributed uniformly throughout 
the section of the coil, is proportional to the logarithm of the 
ratio of coil diameter to the diagonal of its cross-section, pro- 
vided this ratio islarge. For coils such as are used on induction 
motors this relation holds only in a general way, especially 
when the mutual inductive effect of neighboring coils is taken 
account of, and when the pitch is fractional. However, within 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1493 


practical limits 6; would increase in approximate logarithmic 
relation to the coil-pitch, were it not for the mutual inductive 
effect of adjacent phases, and the curve representing this rela- 
tion would tend toward a zero which is not that of the pitch. 

Consider now the mutual inductive effect of adjacent phases. 
For pitches less than unity, this decreases in about the same 
ratio as the self-inductive effect and thus does not much change 
the general shape of the curve. But for values of the pitch 
greater than unity, the mutual inductive effect of opposing phases 
begins to count and to reduce considerably the otherwise value 
of ¢j. Thus the curve showing the relation between ¢; and the 
coil-pitch should be logarithmic in its general character, tending 
toward zero at some small (not zero) pitch, and falling in- 
creasingly below the logarithmic curve for pitches greater 
than unity. This, in fact, is approximately the shape found by 
experiment. 

Belt leakage. The belt reactance may be expressed: 


2 
my = 2angy 2p (5°) 110% = xm gyal (6) 


where ¢», the flux per ampere inch of the belt, is inversely as 
the reluctance of the belt magnetic circuit, and proportional to 
the sin? of 4 the angle of phase difference between the currents in 
the two opposing belts. ¢, is thus proportional to the belt- 
pitch and inversely to the air-gap.* 

In the analysis of the effect of fractional pitch upon belt 
leakage, each case is a law unto itself, and requires a special © 
quantitative analysis, which is not always short. The results, 
however, are in some cases most interesting, and can best be 
considered in conjunction with the experimental data. 

Exciting reactance. In the case of fractional pitch, a higher 
flux density is required in the gap in order to produce the same 
resultant electromotive force, because the electromotive forces 
in the two sides of any given coil differ in phase by @ degrees. 


B 


P ma, 
The electromotive force differential-factor is then cos gor sin-5 


where @ is the coil-pitch angle. 

Not only is the exciting current higher bece use of the increased 
gap density, but it is still further increased because of the overlap- 
ping of currents of differing phase and the consequent reduction 


*See the paper referred to in note at bottem of third page of this 
paper. 


1494 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


in effectiveness for magnetomotive force production. The mag- 
netomotive force differential factor is cos 8/2 only when the coil- 
pitch is an exact multiple of the belt-pitch. For example, take 


the two-phase motor with 0.75 coil-pitch, Fig. 4, the average of 
a = 0.853, but cos uw = 0.96. 
In Fig. 5, curve E shows the electromotive force differential- 
factor, M, the three-phase and M, the two-phase magnetomotive 
force differential-factor. The pitch-factor for the exciting 
reactance is then the product of E and M, or of E and M,and is 
shown in curves B, and B, of Fig. 6. 


Fd SP 
Cees seer 
SES amEeeesy an 
CCAR ga 
aan meet et 


fl mrbrcrs 


the resultant currents is 


ars ey ARF = 
5 
fet ees ee ape 


ieee eld 
Cail Pitch in terms of Full Pitch: ae 
9 -O t 


Oo 3 a6 %. 65, Bien® ro bl 5 6 7 8 


RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS 
The motor tested had 48 slots, (see Fig. 7) on stator and rotor 
and several sets of coils were used in the same core. Short-cir- 
cuit tests were made at 300 and at 60 cycles, and open-circuit 
tests at 60 cycles. The latter were made with rotor stationary. 
Each set of coils had the same number of conductors per slot, 
as had the rotor and stator coils. 


Cotl-end reactance. The core was removed except for 
two plates, just sufficient to support a set of short coils. 
Short-circuit tests with this arrangement were practically 
useless owing to the relatively large exciting current; so the 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1495 


primary and secondary were connected in series, phase for 
phase, and the opposing belts set opposite each other. Then, 
since there were the same number of turns in primary and second- 
ary, no flux crossed the gap, and the total impedance was 
accurately determined. Moreover, by measuring the drop 
across primary and secondary, the two impedances were separ- 
ated. The very small slot reactance due to the two core discs 
was then computed and subtracted from the total, leaving the 
coil-end reactance alone. 

Two sets of coils were employed in these tests. One set with 
a pitch of twelve slots was connected for three phases; two poles 
and four poles; half and full pitch respectively; both primary 
and secondary being connected in exactly the same manner 


Rotor —48 Slots 


Stator —48 Slots 


The other set with a pitch of nine slots was connected for 
three phases; two poles, four poles, six poles, and eight poles; 
3 pitch, } pitch, 14 pitch, and 14 pitch respectively ; making in 
all six combinations with the short coils. 

From the reactances obtained from these tests, the correspond- 
ing values of d; were computed by means of equation (5), in 
which J, was taken as the total length for both primary and 
secondary. The results were plotted in the curves of Fig. 8. 
The difference between ¢$; for the twelve-slot coils and the nine- 
slot coils is due to the fact that in the latter case the primary 
and secondary coil ends were bent farther back, thus leaving 
more room for leakage between them. 

The upper curve of Fig. 8, shows both sets brought together 


1496 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


by plotting each set in terms of its full pitch value. The curve 
of Fig. 9 shows the total coil-end pitch-factor for a special case 
where /, is taken equal to 5 in. +2.8A, A, being the coil-pitch in 
inches. The pole-pitch was taken as 10 in. 

The coil-end pitch-factor is then: 

54+2.8A, 
B+2.8.; 


If all the coil-end leakage be charged to the primary, the 
corresponding full pitch value of ¢; for the first set of tests is 
1.14, and 1.35 for the second set. The first of these corresponds 
more nearly to a normal induction motor. 


SE Erase ate 
eee Li eee ee 


Roc = (pf in terms of that for full pitch) x 


Lo 


il 
oa 


Three Phase 


Coil End Leakage. 


axwells per ampere inch of 
phase belt bundle =D, 


ei 


Sacee 
Bic poe in Lisi of Full Pitch : [ees ania 


11 Le cso bt 2, 


For a squirrel-cage motor with bars extending well out from 
the core, the value of 5 (all charged to primary) is known to 
be about one ora little more, which is very close to the value 
given above for a wound rotor. No experiments of this sort 
were made in the present investigation; but many instances are 
at hand where a considerable change has been made in the 
reactance of a squirrel-cage motor by altering the disposition of 
the end-rings. The writer hopes to investigate this matter in the 
not distant future. 

Slot reactance. Following the above described coreless tests, 


the normal core of length / = 3,2 in, was replaced and tests were 


ot mage 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1497 


made with two different sets of coils; one set having a coil pitch 
of twelve slots and the other nine slots. The first set was 
connected in four combinations, two-phase two-poles; two- 
phase four-poles; three-phase two-poles; and three-phase four- 
poles; the second set was connected in five combinations, 
two-phase four-poles; three-phase, two-poles, four-poles, six- 
poles, and eight-poles. In the second set the wires were placed 
in the slots without taping and were depressed as much as 
possible, see Fig. 10. 

Series tests were first made with the secondary belts directly 
opposite the corresponding primary belts, thus eliminating both 
tooth-tip and belt reactance. 


e. Coetiree Ge 17210 A 
isc De A a 
i/o ZA ce ee ee 
ly 2 i as i ed i a 


ri ees 
ples Cou Pitch in ae of of Pitch: 


Ov Taide 22237 4A IS 9 Ww 


Ordinary short-circuit tests were then made, (a) with belt 
opposite belt as in the series test, (b), one half of the tooth-pitch 
beyond position ‘‘a’’, where the tooth-tip leakage is a maximum, 
and (c) one half belt beyond position ‘‘a”’ where the belt 
leakage is a maximum. 

Tests were then made with the secondary open circuited to 
determine the exciting ae 

The short-circuit tests “‘a’’ gave reactances uniformly two or 
three per cent. lower than fie series tests, as was to be expected, 


1498 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


From the reactances obtained from the series tests, the coil-end 
reactances, (as calculated with the aid of the coreless tests) 
were then subtracted. The remainders are the slot reactances. 
The full pitch values of pf used in calculating x; were 0.66 for the 
first set, (the twelve-slot pitch coils), and 0.70 for the second set, 
(the nine slot pitch coils). In both these cases, the coil-ends 
were bent well back in order to make room for the temporary 
between-coil connections which had to be changed several times. 
At first 0.70 was chosen for both sets, but it was found that 
0.66 gave more consistent results for the slot leakage in the 
first set. This is also what might have been expected since, in 


[Observed Points for Az 


i cease 
ag Sasha 

27 4a 
| TT XT 

Bere Cr 


ISK 


k 
i 
i 
Cant. ee 
[| Joo etch tn terme of rat Push| | |) | le deo] 
4 64 0S) 26 KT 86 59)? 1D Ol te 8 EA Ls 


2 


ESS 
tas 


the second set, the primary and secondary coil-ends are farther 
apart where they come out of the slots. 

From the slot reactances obtained above, ¢; was calculated 
from equation (1). The slot pitch-factor is then ky, = ds;+¢s 
where ¢s, is the value of #; for full pitch. 

The values of kp; thus determined are plotted in Fig. 10 where 
the calculated curves from Fig. 3 are also shown. It will be noted 
that the deviations of the observed points from the calculated 
curves to which they belong, are within the reasonable errors of 
observation and calculation, particularly when it is remembered 
that owing to the comparatively large values of x;, which were 


1907} INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1499 


ieee from the series test reactance x to get x, the slot 

‘ 2 

fa Ea oi eg change in ¢; will shift the relative values 
ps SO that when plotted they appear to have li i 

the theoretical curves. Seca Saat 


3 ROY or MUS leakage. The difference between the 
6” and the a” reactances gives the maximum tooth-ti 
reactance %4, but it gives in addition a small ti : 
belt reactance. Pees ew: 
From this difference, ¢:, may be calculated by equation (4) 
and thence the tooth-tip pitch-factor. The results are plotted 
in Fig. 11, together with the theoretical curves A, and A, for 
two- and three-phase respectively, taken from Fig. 3. é; 


1 i al E a ic 


These results may seem rather wild, but there are 
several reasons therefor. First, the tooth-tip leakage is, 
in this case, a comparatively small part of the total re- 
actance, and a small error in either the ‘‘a’’ or the “ b”’ re- 
actance makes a large percentage error in their Aedes. 
secondly, it is not likely that the rotor was set each time in exactly 
the position of maximum tooth-tip reactance, since the maximum 
is a narrow one owing to the open slots on both sides of the gap; 
thirdly, because of the inevitable presence of the uncertain and 
variable amount of belt leakage mentioned above. Taking these 
things into account, the results are in very fair accord wita the 


1500 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


theory. There is every reason to believe that this element of 
the leakage follows the theory outlined, quite as closely as does 
the slot leakage. 

Belt leakage. The maximum belt reactance was obtained 
from the short-circuit tests by subtracting the “‘a” reactance 
from the ‘‘c’’ reactance. The experimental results are given 
in Table I, and a few typical cases will be considered. In 
column x,,; the two-phase belt reactances are reduced to two- 
thirds of their actual values for comparison with the three- 
phase reactances. 


TABLE I 


2 phase | |__| 


12-slot pitch 


2 poles 3 | 0.5 1.38 1.38 


4 poles | 4 | 1. 0.846 | 0.846 


9-slot pitch 5 | 0.535 | 0.535 


2 poles | 6 fj 
7 5. | 0.24 0.24 
? 


' 4 poles 
6 poles 


| 

| 

2 phase jcpeke 5 | 0.75 | 0.81 | 0.54 
| 8 

8 poles | 9 


L | 


Sr) Se ee ee ee Se 


First compare the two-phase and three-phase belt reactances; 
No. 1 and No. 8 are alike in all other respects, but the two-phase 
is nearly 5.5 times the three-phase value; similarly with No. 2 
and No. 4. The theoretical ratio of two to three phase is 5.1 
for the same number of slots per belt; when the above results 
are corrected on this latter score, they compare still more favor- 
ably with the theoretical ratio. 

Compare No. 1 and No. 2, the only difference between which 
is the number of poles and the fractional pitch. In No. 1 ¢,* 
is twice as great because of the increased belt pitch and p is one 
half; therefore x, should be four times as great were it not for the 
pitch-factor which is thus, 0.53, about the same as for the slots. 


*See equation (6.) 


ee 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1501 


Compare No. 2 with No. 5, the only difference being in the 
coil-pitch. The reason for the great reduction will appear from 
an inspection of Fig. 4, which represents the two layers of the ? 
pitch winding of No. 5. The effect of the overlapping of the 
two layers is to double the number of resultant belts and to 
decrease the phase difference between them to one-half. There 
is still an unbalancing of the magnetomotive forces due to the 
different magnitudes of the resultants, but this cannot be 
analyzed by means of equation (6). 

Comparing No. 5 and No. 7, which differ only in phase, we 
find no such contrast as between No. 1 and No. 3. The reason 


ttt 
Se 

aS 
ACHE 
\ 

ra 
re a 
Alm 
IED Z4 an 
EGE 


Sey 4 ©) 
TS VA eae 
CH enter] | 
9400S oe 
aa ah 


Faiball 
es 
alt | 
ceed 
rola 
ee 
|e 
Le 
ie 

aemet SU 

Eavaeted 

asa 

a on 


Coil Pitch in terms of Full Pitch. | 
oO eS ball i ae GG wR 1S nem Oued) 1 Bi ABS 4 ALS, 


for this will appear from the belt diagram of No. 7 shown in 
Fig. 4a; namely, that the maximum belt width is here reduced 
to only 2of its original value, whereas in No. 5 it was reduced 
to one-half. In fact, the maximum belt width is the same in 
No. 5 and No. 7, although they are two and three-phase re- 
spectively. 

The result of this analysis is to show that the fractional pitch 
effect on belt leakage is largely’ dependent upon the relation be- 
tween the coil-pitch deficiency*and the belt-pitch, and that a 
proper choice of this relation makes a relatively very large re- 
duction in the belt leakage, especially in a two-phase motor, 


1502 ADAMS, CABOT, AND IRVING: [June 28 


Such a choice also smoothes out the large kinks of the current 
distribution, and has much the effect of doubling the number of 
phases. 


Exciting reactance. The exciting reactance was determined 
from the open-circuit tests made with rotor standing in the 
position of maximum reactance, namely, with the rotor teeth 
opposite the stator teeth. 

In order to make the results comparable and thus be able to 
determine the pitch-factor, the exciting reactances were all 
reduced to a three-phase two-pole basis by multiplying by 
p’ p? 


. In addition to this, the two-phase reactances were 


multiplied by 1.10 in order to eliminate the difference between 


Poaeeee A 
‘Ga 74 


eee 


| Fig: 15-| ° 


the differential-factors of the two and the three-phase motors at 
full pitch. 

In Fig. 13, the observed values of the pitch-factor for the 
exciting reactance are plotted together with the theoretical 
curves. No satisfactory explanation has been offered for the 
considerable deviation of the two high points on the right of the 
figure. 


1907] INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS 1503 


SUMMARY 


All the principal pitch-factor curves for the three-phase 
motor are assembled in Fig. 14, and those for the two-phase 
motor in Fig. 15. 

To sum up, the effects of a fractional pitch winding are: 

a. A reduction of the several components of the leakage 
reactance. 

b. A reduction of over-all length of the motor. 

c. In some cases, a considerable gain in the convenience of 
winding as well as a saving of space. 

d. A decrease in the exciting reactance; that is, higher den- 
sities in all parts of the magnetic circuit and a higher exciting 
current for the same voltage. 

It will be observed that except for the reduction in endwise 
length over windings, the effect of fractional pitch is the same as 
that produced by reducing the number of active conductors, but 
although the latter method is in many cases the more efficient 
from the standpoint of operation, the former is frequently more 
convenient from the standpoint of the manufacturer, even when 
the saving in endwise length is not a controlling factor. 

There are, however, cases of high-speed motors where the 
fractional pitch winding is more efficient from every standpoint 
than the full pitch winding of fewer turns. 

As an example of a fractional-pitch problem, consider a three- 
speed, three-phase induction motor. The comparative constants 
for the three speeds are given in the following table: 


Relative | Relative 


a re a eet artes nate cunpatl’ factor 
ee igen || 8077 a| 118 | 59 95 103 0.93 
6 | 1200 100 100 | 100 100 100 0.90 
8 900 154 11S ly 237 75 84 0.76 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.J]. E. E. 


ZIGZAG LEAKAGE OF INDUCTION MOTORS 


BY R. E. HELLMUND 


Various formulas have been given heretofore for the pre- 
determination of the leakage coefficient of induction motors, 
but the results derived from these formulas are so divergent 
that the formulas themselves are rather discredited. It seems 
to the writer that the following study about the values of the 
zigzag leakage may help to clear this somewhat unsettled ques- 
tion. 

In the study of induction motors the leakage coefficient is 
one of the most important factors, and therefore this value will 
be chiefly discussed in what follows. Unfortunately the defini- 
tion of this value is very unsettled in practice. Some writers 
when deriving the induction motor theory introduce the leakage 
coefficient as a ratio of magnetic reluctances in the motor, and 
others introduce it as a ratio of fluxes which exists while no 
secondary reactance takes place. These two different defini- 
tions may be represented by the two following equations: 


& oir! (1) 
where R, = the reluctance of the flux being interlinked with 
the secondary windings, Rp = the reluctance of the flux being 
interlinked with the primary winding, and t, = the primary 
leakage coefficient. 


ES aie} (2) 


where Fp = the flux being interlinked with the primary wind- 
; 1505 


1506 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


ing, F, = the flux being interlinked with the secondary winding, 
and t, = the primary leakage coefficient. 
Two other definitions which are frequently used are as follows: 


Ferd (3) 


where Rp is again equal to the reluctance of the total flux inter- 
linked with the primary winding, R, = the reluctance of that 
part of the flux which is interlinked with the primary winding 
but not with the secondary winding, and t,;=the primary leakage 
coefficient. 


[Pa u%; (4) 


where Fy = the total flux interlinked with the primary 
winding, F, = that part of the flux which is interlinked with 
the primary winding but not with the secondary winding, and 
t, = the primary leakage coefficient. 
Since 
Fp = F;+F, 


we may easily find 


1-7, 


Similarly, a relation between t, and t, may be established. 

It is, therefore, always possible to find the values t, and t, 
if t, and t, are known, so it will be sufficient to deal in the fol- 
lowing with the two latter values only. For instance, a three- 
phase motor with one slot per pole per phase in both members 
has been chosen. Fig. 1 shows the arrangements of the slots 
and windings, and the rotor in such position that the stator 
and rotor teeth do not coincide. It is simple to trace all the 
possible paths of the magnetic fluxes as shown by dotted lines. 
Moreover, in order to find the values of all the existing fluxes, 
it is simplest to treat the magnetic circuits as electric circuits. 
Fig. 2 gives the magnetic circuits reproduced from Fig. 1 as 
electric circuits. In all places where a flux passes through air 
a resistance has been introduced, while the practically very 


1907] HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE if 
507 


small reluctance of the magnetic paths in the iron has been 
neglected. The magnetomotive force which the primary mag- 
netizing current impresses upon the primary teeth has been re- 
placed by electromotive forces, E,, E,, and E,;. It can be easily 
shown that the magnetomotive forces in opposite teeth must 
be equal in value and in direction, and therefore that all cur- 
rent fluxes in directly opposite parts of the system must cor- 


eel 


Fig. 1 


respondingly be equal in value and opposite in direction. This 
has been taken into account in numbering the circuits and in 
assuming the current direction as indicated by arrows. 

It would now be possible to find all the values of the various 
fluxes and then to determine the value of the zigzag and slot 
leakage together. The zigzag leakage alone may be found 
simply by omitting the slot leakage fluxes in the further caleu- 
lation, although thereby a small error in the values of the pri- 


1508 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


mary fluxes is introduced the same are of no practical importance 
at all, the slot leakage being mostly less than 1% of the total 
primary field. It is obvious from the figures that the resist- 
ances of the circuit 4, 5, and 6 are equal, and that also the re- 
sistances of the circuits 8 and 9 are equal. If, therefore, we put 


i Pom oe Ie, 


Yf,=1,=7, = 


and 


we find from Fig. 2 
E,—F,b+F,a—E, =0 
E,—F,6+F,a— EF, =0 
E,—F,b+F,a—E, =0 
and 
F,b-—F,a=0 
F,b-—F,a=0 
F,b-—F,a=0 


1907] HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1509 


From this we find 


ied | | 
P.-E, (7 +5) | 


ee 
Ff, = £, ({+3) (5) 
ere 
Fy = E, (5+5) 
and 
Lae Ee 
Fea 4 
ome 
(ore ma eos (6) 


Now we know that the currents flowing in the primary wind- 
ings are 120°, shifted against each other, and may, with open 
secondary circuits, be assumed to be sinusoidal. 

It may be 

1p, = cos (x + 240) 
tof a COS 
4c, = cos (x + 120) 


We find, therefore, the magnetomotive forces 


E, = cosx+-cos (x +240) = — cos (+120) 
E, = cos % (7) 
E, = cos *+cos (+120) = — cos (x+ 240) 
It follows now from 5 and 7 
Let 
F, =— cos (x +120) (+3) 
ye ail 
F, = cos % (+5) (8) 


One ae cos (x + 240) (+5) 


1510 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


and from 6 and 7 


cos (v+120) cosx 
240 
ig oe cos -_ ) (9) 
cos (x + 240) cos (x + 120) 
Fis sae Sey b i Tits.) 


0 


VALUE OF FLUXES FOR B 


30 6o 


Fic. 3 


It is now obvious that after the values a and b have been 
determined from Fig. 1 for a certain rotor position, the primary 
flux may be found for any time-angle, x, by simply adding 
arithmetically the values being found for F,, F,, and F, for 
this time-angle; in the same way the secondary flux may be 
found by adding the values of F,,, F,., and F,,. 

In Fig. 3 the primary and secondary flux as found in this 
way have been given as a function of the time for the rotor 
position for which the angle f, Fig. 1, is 0. 


1907] HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1511 


As will be seen, both fluxes change with the time,* but pri- 
mary and secondary fluxes are always equal; this means that 
for this rotor position no zigzag leakage flux exists, and the 
leakage coefficient t, = 0. 

In Fig. 4 the primary and secondary fluxes are given for a 
rotor position for which # = 15°; that is, for a position where 
the rotor slots are shifted about one-quarter tooth against the 
stator slots. It will be seen that both fluxes change again with 
the time, but their values are now different from each other. 
It is obvious that at any moment the difference between the 


VALUE OF FLUXES FOR B=15° 


posts tne onene 7 


Fie. 4 


120 


primary and secondary fluxes represent the leakage flux. Fig. 5 
gives the value of t, as a function of the time as found from 
Fig. 4. The maximum value of t, is for this rotor position 
about 0.177, and the average value may be found to be about 
0.097. 

Figs. 6 and 7 give the same curves as Figs. 4 and 5, but for 
a rotor position for which 2 = 30°; that is, for a position where 
the rotor slots are shifted about one-half tooth against the 
stator slots. 


a a ee ee 
* See study about the rotating field, Electrical Review, September 22, 
1906. 


512 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


30° 


a 
ig 
fe) 
re 
2} 
rw) 
x 
2 
I 
re 
° 
w 
2 
a 
< 
> 


1907] HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1513 


In this case the maximum value of t, = 0.25, while the 
average value may be found to be about t, = 0.134. 

It remains now to find what influence the magnetic leakage 
as found before has upon the value of the potentials being in- 
duced in the secondary circuits. 

The potential induced in coil A, will Be 


EA a aa 


IS cs d x 
or 
‘ee fe ey Tl 1) 
Ae a ernrssoeal bean (10) 
or 
Wy) 
ej sin x 


For the potential induced in coil A, we find in a similar way, 


1 ‘lane 
Caz = al (= 6, + £,4+8,)+ e (E,+ 2,443) 


or 
i 1g [2cos (x— 60), 1g (2 cos x) 
ie To d x a dx 
(11) 
Ci3 = ae sin (x— 60) — + sin x 


It is now simple to find the maximum value of the potential 
in coil A,, 
Cmax es 2 
and the effective potential in coil A, 
2 (12) 
Cat eft. = WE 


The maximum value of the potential in coil A, is obtained for 


2 
— COs % (13) 


2 i 
= +60) =— 
. cos (* ) b 


1514 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


It is now possible to find for any ratio of a to b; that is, for 
any rotor position from 13 the value of x for which the sec- 
ondary potential reaches its maximum, e¢,, maximum. Curve A 
in Fig. 8 gives the relation between the rotor position and the 
time-angle x, for which the secondary potential reaches the max- 
imum value. After this curve has been determined, it is pos- 


See ae 
PAmmea ied: 
MiCe Sia criee. 
Jervis EIN 


150 


Fig. 8 


VA 
ge 


ane 


vy, 


A 


Be 
y, 


ala) wey 
ZA 


CE ee 


° 
120 


Coes 


TIME ANGLE a 


VALUES OF B 
30 


0 + 2% oS a +5. TOOTH 
3 2 a 6 
ROTOR SLOTS SHIFTED AGAINST STATOR SLOTS 


Fic. 8 


sible to find from 11 the maximum and the effective potential 
induced in the secondary winding. Curve C gives the sec- 
ondary potential as found for different rotor positions. Curve B 
gives the primary potential as found from 12: the same is, of 
course, independent of the rotor position, on the assumption 
that the air-gap is uniform and that the influence of the slot 


ee he 


1907} HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1515 


openings may be neglected. Curve D represents the following 
value: 


Ca, eff— eg, eff 
Gapen 


where the value of éq, effective and e,, effective are taken from 
curves B and C. 

A comparison of the average values for t, as found from 
Figs. 3 to 7, with the values of y for the same rotor positions, 
shows that 


This shows for the case under consideration the correctness 


of the partly customary method for determining the leakage 


coefficient t, from tests, which consists in testing the primary 
and secondary potential of a motor and in assuming, 


_ a eft—e,,eff Fe 
Ay €q, eff ee ala 


As the average value for t, we find from curve D, 
tT, average = 0.081. 


The fact that curve D is not a straight line shows that it is 
not admissible to assume the leakage coefficient equal to the 
average of its maximum value and its minimum value, as has 
been done by various authors. The mistake which would 
thereby be introduced in the case under consideration is quite 
considerable. The average of the maximum value of t, and 
its minimum is 


0+0.134 _ 0.067: - 
2 

that is, about 20% different from the real average value 0.081. 

Fig. 9 shows the rotor in its position for 8 = 30°. A glance 

on this figure shows that t, according to its previously. given 

definition is 0.333 = 4, since the total primary flux of course 

passes through three teeth, while the leakage flux passes 


1516 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


through (2X4) tooth only. The ratio of the resistances of the 
two paths is therefore 


The value of t, for the same position was 0.134, and we see 
therefore that t, and zt, are two entirely different values; in the 
case under consideration their difference amounts to more 


than 100%. This shows that it is of the highest importance 
in any study of the induction motor to make a strict distinction 
between the two values. 

The explanation of the phenomena causing the difference 
between t, and t, is comparatively simple. It is obvious that 
if the magnetomotive force and therefore the density over one 
pole face should be uniform, the values t, and t, would be equal. 
Since, however, the magnetomotive forces, and therefore the 
densities near the pole limits, are considerably smaller than near. 


1907) HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1517 


the center of the pole, it is obvious that the flux near the pole 
limits which forms that part of the flux which does not thread 
the secondary windings (7.e., the leakage flux) must be much 
smaller than it would be in case of a uniformly distributed field. 

It seems to the writer that in deriving the diagram of the 
induction motor the value t, should be used, since for the field 
diagram the actual ratio of the various fields and not the 
reluctance of their paths is of interest. To introduce the value 
of t, as leakage coefficient, as has been done by Heyland, Behn- 
Eschenburg, and others, is not correct unless another coefficient 
giving some ratio between the magnetomotive force of the 
main field and that of the leakage fields be introduced. The 
previous considerations apply, of course, to the zigzag leakage 
only, but it 1s obvious that similar facts apply to the other 
kinds of leakages. 

The previous considerations were dealing with the leakage 
coefficient as determined on the assumption that no secondary 
reaction takes place. The coefficient t, as previously deter- 
mined would be the right value upon which the theories for the 
load conditions might be based, if the secondary reaction would 
be caused by sinusoidal secondary currents only for all load 
conditions. For the blocked rotor condition of the motor, 
that is, for the starting condition, this condition is fulfilled. 
Assuming that sinusoidal electromotive forces are impressed 
upon the motor we have found that all the fluxes in the motor 
are sinusoidal functions of the time, we also have found that 
the electromotive forces induced in the secondary circuits are 
sinusoidal. If, therefore, the secondary circuits are closed, the 
currents flowing will be sinusoidal and the reactions caused by 
secondary currents will be sinusoidal functions of the time. 

For all other load conditions the phenomena are not quite 
as simple. If the field set up by the primary windings had a 
sinusoidal space distribution over the poles, and if it were con- 
stant in value, and if it rotated with uniform speed, then all 
potentials induced in the secondary and, therefore, the currents 
in the secondary and the magnetic reactions, would be always 
sinusoidal, no matter what the speed of rotation of the rotor. 
This is, however, not the case. The curves given in Figs. 3, 
5, and 7, for the total value of the primary field show that the 
latter varies in its strength. 

We also may conclude from the previous considerations 
that the field does not rotate with uniform speed. If the 


1518 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


field rotated with uniform speed, curve A of Fig. 8 would have 
to be a straight line. The speed of the field as a function of the 
time may be easily found from Fig. 8, curve A, and is shown 
by curve A in Fig. 10. 

It also may be shown that not only the speed of the field 
as a whole varies, but that the speeds of the various parts of 
the field are different from each other, and vary with the time. 
If, therefore, the rotor rotates with a certain speed, the electro- 
motive forces induced in the rotor windings are not only due to the 
slip, but there are also certain electromotive forces induced by 
the fluctuations of the strength of the primary field and by the 
irregularities in the speed of rotation of said field. (There is, 
of course, a possibility that the irregularities of the strength of 
the field and those of the speed of the field eliminate each other 


in their effect upon the secondary windings; it may be shown, 
however, that this is not the case.) 

It seems almost impossible to determine the exact phenomena 
for all load conditions. It is possible, however, to find pretty 
exactly what happens while the motor is running under no load. 
It can be shown that, while the rotor is running synchronously 
with a uniform speed. the secondary reaction will cause the field 
distribution over the pole faces to have a step-form of such a 
shape that the area of each step is equal to the corresponding 
area of a sine wave. (See Fig. 11.) 

The above causes of the secondary reaction have been partly 
discussed by other writers. A detailed and pretty complete 
account of them as well as a derivation of the field shape for 
the no load condition have been given by the writer in a study 
given in the Electrical Review, September 22, 1906. 


HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1519 


1907] 


1520 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


The fact that the field has a distribution as outlined above 
gives a very simple way to determine the zigzag leakage co- 
efficient as defined under 4, but for the no-load condition. 

If we consider the teeth nea. the pole limit (Fig. 12), we see 
that the primary zigzag leakage flux at one pole limit can never 
be larger than the flux a going through the smallest air-gap A 


0.14 


0.12 


S 
— 
o 


© 
=) 
ao 


° 
ES 


LEAKAGE COEFFICIENT 7; 


0.04 


0.02 


0 + 4 + + + TOOTH 
ROTOR SLOTS SHIFTED AGAINST STATOR SLOTS 


Fic. 13 


to the rotor, while, except for the rotor position where A = B, 
part of the flux going through the air-gap B interlinks with the 
secondary conductors and only the remaining part A is leakage 
flux The flux through A is, however, proportional to the 
smallest step of the area representing the flux distribution (see 
Fig. 11). We may therefore define the zigzag leakage coefficient 
for the light running motor as follows: 


ee 


1907) HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1521 


2 Xarea of smallest step 
Total flux area per pole 


aS 


The coefficient 2 has to be introduced because each pole has two 
pole limits. 

Now we know that the area a equals always the corresponding 
area of a sine wave. If the angle of the area a is PB, we have 


B 
a - { sinvas = 1— cosP 
0 


The total flux per pole is 2, therefore, the leakage is 


U2 U1} cos' 2) 
Se eae 


Ts = 1— cosB 

For the case under consideration the maximum leakage is 
obtained again for position Fig. 9, that is, for B = 30°. 

Fig. 13 shows the leakage coefficient t, as a function of the 
rotor position. A comparison of this curve with curve D of 
Fig. 8 shows that the leakage for the light running motor is en- 
tirely different from what it is for the stationary rotor. 

The maximum value of t, is 0.134; that is, the same as that 
of t,, but the average value for the various rotor positions is 
for t, only 0.046, while that of t, is 0.081. 

It is simple to determine t, for any number of slots per pole. 
If ~ is the number of slots per pole, the maximum leakage co- 
efficient t; is always: 

: 

Tt, Maximum = 1— cos wa 
(equal number of slots for stator and rotor being assumed) 
and for the average value we find 


rd nu 


2n 2n 
tT; ave= 28 (cap = 28 fo. cos f) dB 


0 


The values as obtained from this last formula for different 
values of ” are given in Fig. 14. 


1522 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 
The fact that the leakage coefficient varies with the load 


condition makes it rather difficult to obtain an exact value for 
the various conditions between the no-load and blocked-rotor 


0.03 


lu 
z 
Oo 
u. 
e) 
o 
‘s 
= 
bal 
(3) 
ire 
ra 
Ww 
° 
o) 
Ww 
o 
4 
<q 
Ww 
al 


NUMBER OF SLOTS PER POLE. 
Fic. 14 


conditions. The writer has shown, in an article published in 
the Electrical World, that the secondary reaction of the light 
running motor does change not only the field distribution but 
also the wave shape of the no-load magnetizing current. It 


as 


a 


1907] HELLMUND; ZIGZAG LEAKAGE 1523 


remains to be investigated how the load currents combining 
with the magnetizing currents for the running motor are in their 
general character, wave shape, etc., before any final conclusions 
can be made. It seems reasonable, however, to assume that 
the right value for the leakage coefficient for the load con- 
ditions will be somewhere between t, and't,. In fact, the writer 
observed quite frequently that the currents for low loads have 
a better power-factor than found from the diagram which is 
derived from the blocked-rotor condition. Of course it is neces- 
sary to be very careful in concluding from tests, since the 
change of the leakage coefficient, caused by the fact that the 
reluctance of the iron is not constant, may influence the results 
considerably. The writer has shown in an article in the Elec- 
trical Review, Jan. 29,07, that the change of the leakage coefficient 
caused by the changing reluctance of the iron may amount to as 
much as 50% between no-load and blocked-rotor condition in 
commercial motors. Since these changes tend, however, to change 
the leakage so as to decrease it when the motor decreases in 
speed, the tests showing a power-factor for low loads, which is 
better than derived from the blocked-rotor test, seem to con- 
firm the above theories. 

It may appear that the previous considerations being of a 
rather theoretical nature will be of little practical value, since 
no final formula for the zigzag leakage for the various load 
conditions has been given. The more surprising it will be if 
the writer states that this paper is the result of an attempt to 
give an exact and practical formula for the calculation of the 
leakage coefficient. This paper should, therefore, be con- 
sidered more as a preliminary work, which is merely intended 
to bring out certain facts which must be considered in connec- 
tion with any study about the leakage coefficient. 

It is obvious that in constructing a practical formula for 
the leakage coefficient it will be necessary on account of the 
rather complicated nature of the real phenomena to admit certain 
inexactnesses into the formula. Since this is the case it might 
seem advisable to use one of the existing formulas, as for instance, 
the one known as the Behrend formula. Although this latter 
formula gives for motors of standard design fairly exact values, 
the same seems to be to the writer objectionable for two reasons. 
A change of the slot dimensions will, for instance, according to 
this formula, change the value of the leakage considerably, 
while, in motors with a large number of slots per pole, a change 


1524 HELLMUND: ZIGZAG LEAKAGE [June 28 


of the slot dimensions does not affect the leakage very much. 
On the other hand, a change of the ratio of the pole-pitch to 
the width of core will, according to the formula, affect the 
leakage also considerably ; while, in a motor with a small number 
of slots per pole, said ratio has little influence on the total 
amount of the leakage. 

Since the various kinds of leakage are not dependent upon 
each other, a formula for the leakage should take them into 
consideration separately. A formula of this kind is the latest 
formula given by Behn-Eschenburg. This formula, however, 
gives, as mentioned before, the zigzag leakage coefficient as 
defined by formula 3 and the values for the zigzag leakage are, 
therefore, considerably too large. Moreover, the dimensions 
of the slot are not taken into consideration at all, and the 
so-called belt leakage discovered by Professor Adams* is also 
neglected. In spite of this, the latest Behn-Eschenburg formula 
gives also fairly exact values for the total leakage coefficient for 
standard motors, and the formula is fairly simple. 

During several years of designing practice, the writer has 
become more and more convinced that the simplest formula 
is not at all the most practical one. In order to obtain a well- 
designed machine in which the best results are obtained from 
a certain amount of material, it is absolutely necessary for the 
designer to have formulas which not only give a fairly exact 
total result, but which also indicate in a fairly exact way the 
results of any change made in the design. If, for instance, the 
change of the slot dimensions has a noticeable influence on the 
performance of the motor, the designer should be able to know 
how much this influence amounts to. On the other hand, 
it seems to the writer perfectly indifferent whether the de- 
signer requires one minute or five minutes to determine the 
leakage coefficient of an induction motor while he is laying out 
a new line of machines, as long as even a small advantage may 
be obtained by spending five minutes instead of one. For 
routine design work, which, of course, should be done as quickly 
as possible, formulas are used very little, because most factors 
are usually known from previous tests. 


* The writer does not want to fail to call attention to the very valu- 
able work about the determination of the induction motor leakage, done 


by Professor Adams. This paper is published in the Transactions of the 
International Congress of St. Louis. 


I 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA F.iLLS 1525 


Discussion on “ Fractionat Prtcu Winpincs ror INDUCTION 
Morors ’’, AND ‘“‘ Z1GzAG LEAKAGE oF INDUCTION MoToRS ae, 
AT Niacara Fatts, N. Y., June 28, 1907. 


J. C. Lincoln: Have experiments been made to determine 
the relative importance of the three kinds of leakage found in 
induction motors? 

1. The leakage across the slots. 

2. The leakage across the gap, or so-called zigzag leakage. 

3. Leakage in the end-connections of the stator winding. 

Have experiments been made to determine the relative im- 
portance at full-load of these three sorts of leakages with reference 
to the main or useful flux? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: I want to call attention to one point that 
Professor Adams did not touch on, and that is with fractional 
pitch windings the extra insulation necessary plays an important 
factor in the design of both the motor and the alternating-current 
generator. That is, if we assume a Y-connected machine, three- 


_»- phase, and use a fractional pitch we have increased insulation 


necessary on the end-windings where the opposite phases come 
together in the same slots. This has quite an effect on the 
design. I think that the vast majority of the motors we are 
building to-day of the induction type are built with fractional 
pitch windings as are also most of the alternators. 

B. T. McCormick: I ask whether the claim for extra insula- 
tion is on the end-connectors or in the slots? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The insulation is progressive; that is, 
if we start from the neutral point as we go out from the neutral 
point the extra insulation is necessary, because we have the full 
potential between phases instead of the potential from the 
winding to the neutral point. 

Comfort A. Adams: Referring to the effect of fractional pitch 
upon the exciting current—I should like to point out that not 
only is the electromotive force induced in a fractional pitch wind- 
ing by a given flux, less than that of a full-pitch winding, but 
the magnetomotive force and the flux produced by a given 
current with fractional pitch is less than that for full pitch. In 
other words, fractional pitch introduces differential action both 
in the electromotive force and in the magnetomotive-force 
generation. The two differential factors are fully treated in 
my paper. 

It was stated by one of the speakers that if the magnetizing 
current increased in the same proportion as the reactance de- 
creased, there would be no resulting gain in power-factor. That 
there is in some cases a very decided gain will be apparent when 
it is remembered that these two elements vary approximately 
in reciprocal relation. Take, for example, a motor in which the 
exciting current is 14% of the load current and the reactance 
electromotive force 30% of the induced electromotive force; 
assume that the pitch of the winding is reduced in such a way 


1526 INDUCTION-MOTOR WINDINGS [June 28 


that the exciting current is increased one- and a-half times its 
original value, namely to 21%, then the reactance will be reduced 
to approximately two thirds of its original value, or about 20%, 
giving thus a total quadrature component of 41% in place of 
44% for the full pitch winding, which means a material improve- 
ment in the power-factor, to say nothing of the increase in start- 
ing torque and break-down torque. Of course an appropriate 
reduction in the number of primary conductors would have 
approximately this same effect. 

The extra insulation required by fractional-pitch windings 
would hardly be an item of any importance in induction motors 
of ordinary voltage, but might easily take on considerable 
proportions in high-voltage alternators. 

A. S. McAllister: The problem of determining the exciting 
current or the “ wattless volt-amperes ”’ is rendered very simple 
when the solution is based on the fact that any energy that is 
magnetically stored in the field during any part of the cycle 
must be restored during the next part of the cycle, in any ma- 
chine which has an alternating flux. Of course, the relation 
just stated does not hold in the case of the synchronous motor, 
where magnetic energy is initially stored in the exciting field 
but not given out during any part of the cycle. If, in the in- 
duction motor, we find the volume of the main magnetic path 
and divide it by the permeability, and find the volume of the 
teeth and divide that by the permeability, and find also the 
volume of the air gap and divide that by the permeability (which 
happens to be one) and multiply each of these values by the 
square of the flux throughout the respective paths, we can de- 
termine the value of the magnetic energy stored in each of the 
paths; this same magnetic energy is given out through each cycle. 
Therefore, the ‘‘ quadrature watts”? or the ‘‘ wattless volt- 
amperes ’’, can be calculated just as one calculates the core-loss 
watts in a motor, or in any other apparatus in which the flux is 
alternating. This fact was mentioned during the Milwaukee 
meeting, at which time an equation was given for representing 
the actual value of the wattless volt-amperes, 


A paper presented at the 24th Anmual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E. E. 


THE VECTOR DIAGRAM OF THE COMPENSATED 
SINGLE-PHASE ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTOR 


BY W. I. SLICHTER 


Although the compensated single-phase motor is simply a 
series circuit in physical connection, there are incidental reactions 
which have the effect of a combination of series and parallel 
circuits. These reactions have an effect on the efficiency and 
power-factor of sufficient importance to warrant a careful 
analysis of their character and cause. 

As is well known, the motor circuits consist of an exciting 
field winding producing the field flux, an armature similar to 
that used in the usual direct-current motor, and a compensating 
winding wound in the faces of the poles and having its magnetic 
axis coincident with the axis of the armature reaction, but 
producing a magnetomotive force in the opposite direction. 
Thus, in Fig. 1 is shown the diagram of connections of a four-pole 
compensated series motor. F, FF is the exciting winding with 
coils surrounding the pole pieces, C, CC is the compensating 
winding from pole to pole; and A, AA is the armature circuit. 
The current passes through these three in series, and the main 
reactions of one member on the others are very simple. 

But the coil in the armature undergoing commutation encloses 
the main exciting or torque-producing flux, and, asa result of the 
alternation of this flux at primary frequency, there is induced in 
the coil an electromotive force proportional to the primary 
frequency and to the magnitude of the flux. The brushes 
complete the circuit of this coil, and a current flows therein pro- 
portional to this electromotive force and inversely proportional 
to the impedance in the coil, brushes, and connections. This 
reproduces exactly the conditions existing in a transformer, the 

1527 


1528 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [June 28 


exciting winding F being the primary and the short-circuited 
coil BB being the secondary, as shown in Fig. 2. 

In considering the reactions in the exciting winding, therefore, 
we must regard it as a complex circuit. The effect is the same 
as if the coil were shunted by an equivalent circuit having 
resistance and inductance, as at Y in Fig. 2. This equivalent 


circuit represents the hysteretic current, supplying the core-loss. 


in the iron due to the alternation of the flux at primary fre- 
quency, and the current in the secondary coil BB. 
Fig. 3 shows the relations of the various quantities in the 


COPPQOE/ISQLIVIP! 


WIQMMIIIG 


exciting winding F. The resemblance to the transformer 
diagram will be noted. ¢ is the flux; the current which 
produces ¢ is O F, composed of O B the wattless component and 
OH the hysteretic component. OA is the current in the 
secondary and this combines with O F to form the primary or 
line current OC = I,. OE, 90° ahead of the flux, is the electro- 
motive force consumed in the primary circuit. Neglecting the 
impedance drop, which is very small in this case, the voltage 
across the terminals of the exciting winding is therefore O E. 
In Fig. 4, we have this same diagram as a starting point for the 
general case. Thus, with a main current J,, represented by OA, 


a 


1907] SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 1529 


we have J, = A B for the energy current in the equivelent 
shunt circuit, and Jy, = O B the wattless component in both the 
primary and shunt circuits, but consisting principally of the 
primary magnetizing current. 

The flux ¢ is in phase with OB and proportional to this 
primary component of O B (not to the main current) and the 
permeance of the magnetic path. 

The electromotive force induced in the exciting winding is 
I Xy = OE, and is 90° ahead of g. The electromotive force 
consumed by the leakage reactance of all the windings will be 
90° ahead of J, and proportional to J,. This is represented by 
IX, =EF. The electromotive force consumed by resistance 
is 1 R = FG, in phase with /,. 

The counter electromotive force due to the rotation of the 


Ere. 2 


armature conductors in the flux must be in phase with ¢, thus 
GH = e, (drawn parallel to O B) represents this electromotive 
force in phase, while its magnitude is proportional to the angular 
speed of the armature. 

The line potential E, is the resultant of all these components. 
Its magnitude determines the value of e,, which in turn determines 
the speed. O 4 represents the line potential, and the cosine of 

the angle HOA = y between E, and J, is the power-factor of 
the motor. 

The product of e, J, cos a represents the output at the arma- 
ture conductors. To obtain the true motor output, the armature 
core-loss, due to rotation, and the friction loss should be sub- 
tracted from this. 

The calculation of power-factor and efficiency is made by starting 


~ 


1530 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [June 28 


with the displacement angle a whose sine is Jy + J). Assuming 
the phase of /, as a reference point, we have the following 
resolution of the terminal electromotive force Ey: 


Wattless Energy 
I Xy cos a I X,, sina 
TX, IR 
-€, Sin @ €, COS @ 


The exact analytical expression of the reactions is as follows: 
Assume e = I Xy the voltage across the exciting winding as 
reference vector or zero phase. 


p------sl, 


Fic, 3 


I 


Quantitatively e = 4.44 nN ¢ 10° 
where: nm = primary frequency. 
N = number of exciting or field turns. 
d = flux per pole. 
Admittance of exciting winding = Y, = g,+ 7), 
Admittance of equivalent circuit = Y, = g,+7b, 
Admittance of combination Y,= Y,+Y, = gr+j bz 
Main line current = I, = e (g,+]j bz) = 74,4] 1, 
Resistance of all circuits = r 
Reactance (leakage) of all circuits = x 
Impedance of motor (except exciting circuit) = Z = r—jx 


1907] SLIGHT ER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR 1531 


Line voltage = FE, is resolved into electromotive force of 
rotation e,, electromotive force of excitation winding e, and 
the impedance voltage I, Z. 

é, is in phase with the flux ¢ and 90° from e; therefore, if é is 
the base of vectors, the electromotive force of rotation is ex- 
pressed in phase position by 7 @,. 


Fic. 4 


Hence E, = ¢+f7@+ 1,2 
Substituting : 


= e+fe,t+ (4+) %,) 7 x) 
= etirtixt] (¢g+t, r—t, x) 
Reducing to absolute terms: 


E? = (e+4,7+1,%)? + (¢, +4, 1—1, x)? 


1532 SLICHTER: SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR [June 28 


Solving for e,: 


e, = V E’—(e+iyr+1,x)?—(i,r—i,x) 


The output at the armature conductors is the product of the 
counter electromotive force and the current in phase with it, 
Gy ts: 


Apparent input = E, I, 
= [etirti«t+] (e,+4,7—1,x)] (4,47 1) 
Power input is the real component of above. 
= 4, (e+trt+t,x) +4, (¢,+4.r—i, x) 


The peculiar features introduced by this equivalent shunt 
circuit are: 

The counter electromotive force of rotation is not in phase 
with the main current, thus their product is not all energy. 

The current in the armature J, is not in phase with the field 
flux, and the torque is not truly proportional to the current but 
is reduced by this displacement. 

The more inductive the current in the short-circuited coil the 
less is this displacement, thus a resistance to limit the flow of 

current is not as valuable as some inductive effect. 

- The counter electromotive force e, being at an angle with the 
main current J,, it is possible by increasing the speed and magni- 
tude of e,, or by increasing the angle a, to cause the point H 
to lie in O L produced, thus making FE, coincide with J,, giving 
unity power-factor, or to cause e, to cross J,, giving a leading 
current condition. These of course are extreme conditions 
resulting from a very high speed or from large losses in the 
equivalent shunt circuit. 

The wattless component of the counter electromotive force 
(—e, sin a) has a marked effect on raising the power-factor, con- 
siderably more than the mere addition of the amount of energy 
which causes the phenomenon. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1533 


Discussion ON “‘ THE Vector DIAGRAM OF THE COMPENSATED 
SINGLE-PHASE ALTERNATING-CURRENT Motor”, at Niac- 
ARA Fa.ts, N. Y., JUNE 28, 1907 


V. Karapetoff: In the year 1904, I contributed to the In- 
stitute TRANSACTIONS a complete performance diagram of the 
series single-phase motor. The diagram is similar to the well- 
known circle diagram of an induction motor. Assuming the 
permeability of iron as constant, the reactance of the motor is 
constant, and there results a semi-circle as the locus of the 
primary current. Then by simple graphical construction it is 
possible to obtain input, output, speed, and efficiency. Soon 
after I had delivered the paper before the Pittsburg Branch 
of the Institute, I was fortunate enough to have in my possession 
complete performance curves of two single-phase motors. One 
was, I think, a 5-h.p. motor, the other a 25-h.p. motor, both 
tested very carefully. In working out backwards the diagrams 
of these motors, by plotting the actual locus of primary current, 
I found that instead of being a semicircle, as it should be theo- 
retically, it was a different curve which for practical purposes 
could be assumed to be the arc of a circle, considerably flatter 
than the semicircle. Upon investigation, I found this was 
due entirely to saturation in the iron. Then I assumed em- 
pirically that for a single-phase series motor the locus of 
the primary current is represented by an arc ofa circle, and 
I deduced graphically expressions for input, output, speed, etc. 
The saturation and the variation of permeability which it in- 
volves depend on the field current, and therefore can be deter- 
mined from the short-circuit curve (locked saturation curve) 
of the motor. 

I wish to call your attention to this fact, because in all the 
literature on the subject that I have happened to come across 
the effect of saturation has not been taken into account. Dia- 
grams of series motors derived on the supposition of a constant 
permeability are good enough to demonstrate to the student 
the theory of the motor, but should not be used in the predeter- 
mination of actual performance. 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engine- 
ers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING ON ELECTRIFIED ROADS. 


BY L. FREDERIC HOWARD 


Railroads signals may be divided into three general classes 
according to their functions: (a) Those which confer rights on 
trains, or restrict their rights, known as train-order signals; 
(b) Those which designate the route a train is to take, and insure 
the safe condition of all switches and opposing signals on such 
route, known as interlocking signals; (c) Those which are used 
primarily for properly spacing trains, known as block signals. 

Originally the operation and control of all these classes was 
wholly manual. Owing to the fallibility of the human agency, 
however, and also on account of the greater scope of protection 
to be secured, means were gradually devised to take from the 
operator under certain conditions the power to clear signals, 
while permitting him at all times to restore them to, and retain 
them in, the stop position. In some cases the signals were 
taken from his control altogether and made automatic. Means 
were also devised to prevent the operation of any switch 
while a train was approaching or passing over it. 

It will therefore be seen that there are three distinct types 
of signals according to method of control; namely, the manual 
or non-automatic, the controlled manual or semi-automatic, 
and the purely automatic. Train-order signals are of the first 
type, interlocking signals of the first and second types, while 
block signals are of all three types. 

The track circuit is by far the best expedient for effecting the 
control of the signal operator, and the power-operated block 
signal. It is used largely in connection with the latter; and as 
a means for dispensing wholly with the human agency, and pro- 
viding the safest and most practicable method of automatic 

1535 


1536 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


control will, for some time to come, remain the essential part of 
the automatic signal system. 

Beyond the track circuit are the various signals, switches, and 
other appliances, operated mechanically or by pneumatic or 
electric motors of various types. These are the parts used by 
the signal engineer in his art of increasing the capacity of a 
road for the safe handling of traffic over the miles of main line, 
and for safely accomplishing the maximum number of train 
movements in the least possible time, with the least cost for 
maintenance and operation in complicated yards and terminals. 

The track circuit being the factor upon which the signal 
engineer primarily depends for the automatic control of his 
apparatus, the use of the rails on electrically operated roads as 
common conductors for both signal and propulsion currents 
has brought to the front new conditions and new apparatus in 
connection with the track circuit, with which it is advisable that 
the electrical engineer should become acquainted. In this paper 
I shall try to trace the development of tracl:-circuit apparatus 
which has taken place in less than a decade, and give some 
idea of the relations existing between the track-circuit system 
and the propulsion system on electrified roads. 

The track circuit, as it exists in its simplest form on steam 
roads, is shown in Fig. 1, except that.the gravity cell is generally 
the source of electric energy. The storage-battery is rapidly 
. coming into use for this service, however, and is shown in Fig. 1, 
better to illustrate the relations of the elements constituting the 
track circuit. These elements are: a source of electromotive 
force ; a series resistance (comprised in the battery itself when the 
gravity cell is used); the rails forming the conductors, and in- 
sulated from the adjacent rails at the ends of the section, andin 
multiple across the rails the resistances of the relay, ballast, and 
ties. When the track section is occupied, there is. another re- 
sistance in multiple with the foregoing; i.e., that of the wheels 
and axles of the train. 

Through the contacts of the relay are passed the circuits 
which control the apparatus governing admission to the section; 
as, for instance, the semaphore signal shown in the figure. 

For convenience, the reciprocal of the resistances, or the 
conductances, of the ballast, ties, wheels, and axles will be used 
in much of what follows. 

The circuit shown in Fig. 1 differs from those with which the 
electrical engineer ordinarily has to deal, in that it is operated 


ian 1h tee 


~ 
. 


1907} HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1537 


by shunting, instead of disconnecting, the source of electric 
energy. This makes necessary the consideration of the relation 
of the operating shunt to the other elements of the circuit. 

The “ ballast conductance ”’ (which is considered as including 
the conductance of the ties) is a variable, and for any given 
section its value depends upon the weather. 

Suppose that the voltage across the terminals of the relay at 
which its contacts close is practically the same as that at which 
they open; or, as the signalman would say, that the “ pickup 
point ’’ is the same as the “shunting point”. This supposition 
corresponds closely with the facts in the case of alternating- 
current relays, where motion may be considered as due to the 
reaction between currents, but is not true of the ordinary 
attracted armature direct-current relay where the shunting 
point is approximately one-half the pickup point. Suppose 
further that when the ballast conductance is at its highest 


INSULATING 
TRACK FRAIL. LON? 


he Ree bie. 2 nef A 
BALLAST ESISTAVEE | Vb yt 
a Sodas RCN oa H 
eat 


tet a Rb! 
A 
TRACK FELAY 
SERIES [TESISTANCE << 
all Tack BATTERY 


fal (storace) 


value, as during wet weather, the track circuit is so adjusted 
that the relay just picks up. It is evident that when the ballast 
conductance has diminished, because of the moisture drying out 
or freezing, a conductance equal to the change in the value of 
the ballast conductance must be added between the rails in order 
to cause the relay to shunt. 

If the contacts of the relay must be open when a single car is 
in the track section, the reciprocal of this change of conductance 
determines the resistance from rail to rail allowable in the wheels 
and axles of the single car. This, in turn, determines the 
length of section which can be operated, as the change in 
ballast conductance due to weather conditions varies directly 
with the length of section. In practice the limit of power 
available for supplying the track circuit is usually reached 
before the shunting limit, as the length of the section increases. 

In considering the source of electrical supply for the track 
circuit, and its series resistance or equivalent, it should be noted 


1538 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


that the higher the voltage of the source, the higher the value of 
the series resistance necessary, and consequently the greater 
percentage variation in voltage across the relay with a given 
change of conductance between rails. The higher voltage 
means, then, a greater factor of safety as regards any variations 
in the shunting point of the relay, but also subjects the relay 
to wider variations of voltage.* 

About eight years ago the Boston Elevated Railway Company 
had its new elevated lines nearly ready for operation and wanted 
them protected by a track-circuit automatic block signal system. 
The motive power was to be direct current at 550 volts and with 


TROLLEY OF 3£2 RAIL 
@Q 


ng 
es 


POTENTIAL Across Retay Due To 
ResrurN Power CurRRENT 


Fl@ 2. 


ground return. One rail at least was to be continuous; that is, 
not divided into sections by insulated joints. Here, then, was 
a new condition of affairs with one of the rails of the signal 
circuit traversed by a foreign current of comparatively enormous 
volume. 

Fig. 2 shows at once the difficulty which the signal engineer 
encountered. The power generator is represented by the con- 
ventional symbol. V represents a voltmeter which as connected 


—_— ee 


*This subject of track circuits was taken up by Mr. H. G. Brown in 


a paper read before the Institution of Electrical Engineers, last 
December. 


1907] HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1539 


will measure the drop of potential due to the flow of return 
propulsion current over the continuous rail. Now with a 
train at the far end of the block from the relay, the latter has 
the same potential across its terminals as that measured by the 
voltmeter, for lead a connects one side at the same point as 
the positive lead of the meter, and lead b, the insulated rail, 
the wheels and axles connect the other side to the same point as 
the negative lead of the meter. Whether or not an ordinary 
electromagnet type of relay will close its contacts under these 
conditions depends on whether or not the voltage at which it is 
adjusted to operate is greater than the drop of potential caused 
by the return of power current over the length of rail measured 
by the length of block. In the case of the Boston Elevated the 
maximum drop which could occur over the return rail was 
_limited, owing to the facts that the blocks were - short and 
the return rail was bonded at close intervals to a structure hav- 
ing a copper equivalent of 14,000,000 cir. mils, from which the 
return current was taken to three power stations suitably spaced. 
These conditions made it permissible to use a relay whose 
voltage adjustment took care of any return drop which might 
occur, no alternating-current signal apparatus having been 
developed at that time. 

In addition to the armature which distinguishes the steam- 
road direct-current relay, the one designed to meet the conditions 
on the Boston Elevated had a polarized feature, which would 
prevent the relay from closing its contacts in case a car failed 
to obtain a good ground on the return rail and grounded through 
the relay. On account of this feature the relay had two 
separate and distinct sets of magnets as shown in Fig. 3. 
The stationary set, SS, is connected across the rails; the swing- 
ing set, P, is connected to the main leading to the negative 
pole of the signal generator, the positive pole of which is 
grounded. This generator replaced the batteries used on the 
steam road. 

Supposing the relay to have de-energized, the sequence of 
operations in closing the relay contacts is as follows: the signal 
current coming from the positive pole of the generator, via the 
return rail, passes through the stationary coils to the block rail; 
thence through the latter via the resistance to the negative 
signal main. This picks up the armature which closes the 
left-hand contact and completes the circuit through the swinging 
coils. The polarity of the latter being fixed, they will swing to 


1540 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


the right, if conditions are normal, bending the phosphor-bronze 
strip to which they are rigidly attached. This closes the cir- 
cuit to the local control mechanism through the upper right-hand 
contact. 

If the propulsion current from the car motors fails to obtain a 
ground on the return rail but flows through the stationary coils 
of the relay, their polarity will be reversed on account of the 
propulsion current flowing in the opposite direction to the 
signal current. This will cause the swinging coils, whose 
polarity remains fixed, to move to the left and open the right- 
hand control contact. 


500 VoLT 


CIRCUITS CONTROLLING A BLOCK. 


BOSTON ELEVATED RY. 
Fic. 3 

This Boston Elevated signal system comprises some 90 odé 
track circuits and 170 blades, including interlocked signals, 
and about 60 switches, the latter being distributed among five 
electropneumatic towers and two mechanical towers. 

The next electric road to be equipped with signals was the North 
Shore Railroad near San Francisco. On this road several of the 
blocks were to be over 4000 ft. long, and there was to be a maxi- 
mum of 8 trains of 4 motor cars each, taking about 1600 amperes 
per train at starting. The power station was to be in the middle. 
In this case there was no elevated structure of 14,000,000 cir. 
mils capacity to take care of the return drop of the power current, 
so the first alternating-current track circuit was installed. 


1907] HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1541 


The system used was what is termed the alternating-current 
single-rail return, and is shown in Fig. 4. The direct-current 
generator of the Boston Elevated is replaced by an alternating- 
current generator or transformer, stepping down from pro- 
pulsion power mains to a suitable voltage for transmission of 
current over the two signal mains. Instead of supplying the 
track circuits directly from the signal mains through a resistance, 
a step-down transformer is used with a resistance in its secondary. 

At the other end of the track section is an alternating-current 
relay, of the type shown in Fig. 5. It consists of a C-shaped 


PVPOALLEY OF FVAAPPD. PTATA. 


f Ac svewase —~ (€ 
L & OBWEAA FOr 


Ae veracn crcuwrrs FE ASLO ONDE £LUMCTAHIE POAD. 
SVCKL PTAlA PPE VAAN BYE TET 
FOS Vt 62. Basel A 


laminated core carrying a winding connected across the rails. 
One half of each pole-piece of the core is enclosed by a copper 
ferule. Between the faces of the poles is a sector of aluminum 
rotating on a shaft at right angles to its own plane. T he shifting 
magnetic fluxes in the pole-pieces cause the rotation of the vane 
according to the well-known Ferraris principle, when sufficient 
alternating current passes through the winding to overcome 
the counterweight on the aluminum sector. The shaft carries 
the contacts. This relay, of course, is immune to direct cur- 
rent so far as the operation of its contacts goes. To limit 
the direct current passing through it to an amount below that 


1542 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


which would dangerously heat it, or saturate the iron, the relay 
is shunted by an impedance coil, and a resistance is also in- 
serted in one end of the leads. Going back to the other end of 
the track section, it is seen that the resistance in the secondary 
leads of the transformer is assisting to prevent the flow of direct 
current through the secondary winding of the transformer, in 
addition to its other functions in connection with the adjustment 
of the track circuit. 

The track transformer and the impedance coil across the relay 
terminals are furthermore made with open magnetic circuits to 
keep down the density of magnetization caused by the flow of 


Cg 
FZ 
q 


direct current, due to drop of potential over the continuous rai? 
spoken of in connection with Fig. 2. 

On this particular installation about 10 miles of double track; 
and two-thirds of a mile of single track through a tunnel, were 
equipped with signals. The signal mains extend the length of the’ 
road and carry 60-cycle current at 2300 volts. They are sup- 
plied from the step-down transformers at the power house. 
One of the track sections is over a mile long. 

The description of the foregoing system applies equally well to 
the system installed in the New York Subway, so far as the 
alternating-current track circuit is concerned. 

The greater volume of direct current to be taken care of in the 


1907] HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1543 


latter system was offset by the number of tracks, the steel 
framework of walls and roof, the close spacing of the sub- 
stations, and the shorter blocks. The signal mains are sup- 
plied with 60-cycle, 500-volt current by transformers located 
in the sub-stations, and stepping down from the high-voltage 
lighting mains. In emergency, 25 cycles stepped down from 
the propulsion circuits is used. 

The New York Subway system comprises some 500 track cir- 
cuits, 700 signals, and 230 switches, and has a record of one 
failure of apparatus to 3,359,167 movements, with no false 
safety indications in more than two years. The installation 
of a system using practically the same kind of apparatus has 
recently been completed on the Philadelphia Rapid Transit 
Company’s new subway and elevated lines. 


TroLiey on THinp Frais. 


DE. Froryt. ay 


7Rack TRANSFORMER 


AC SIGNAL 
GENERATOR 


FIG & 


All the foregoing systems necessitated installing additional 
return conductors for the power current to compensate for the 
rail given up to the signal system, except where an elevated 
structure was available. The possibility of the use of a track 
circuit in which both rails should be used in common for signal 
and propulsion currents had been contemplated before this 
time. Local conditions on the Boston Elevated, the North 
Shore, and the New York Subway had made the single-rail sys- 
tem acceptable, however, and this led to deferring the develop- 
ment of the two-rail system shown in Fig. 6. 

A path for the propulsion current around the insulating 
joints is provided for in the two-rail system in the form of. the 
impedance bonds indicated in the figure. It is apparent 
that as the propulsion current divides so that each part passes 


1544 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


around the iron core of the bond in opposite directions, its 
magnetizing effect on the core is zero, so long as the current di- 
vides evenly. On the other hand, the full impedance of the bond 
is offered to the signal current in preventing its passage from 
rail to rail. 


Fic. 7 


Fig. 7 is a view of the bond out of its case. It consists ofa 
shell-type core and heavy strap copper winding. The effect of 
unbalanced direct current is provided for, up to limits well 
beyond those met on properly bonded tracks, by using an open 
magnetic circuit and working the iron so far down on the satura- 
tion curve that the impedance of the bond actually rises with a 


1907] HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT. SIGNALING 1545 


small amount of unbalancing. These bonds may be installed 
between the rails of a track, as shown in Fig. 8, or just to one side. 

The track transformers for this system are designed to have 
excessive magnetic leakage, and consequently a rapidly falling 
secondary characteristic, thus dispensing with the series resist- 
ance used with the battery or generator of the direct-current 
track circuit, or transformer of the single-rail, alternating-current 
track circuit 


s aw 
me pt Lk oe me tah ES 
RO RY AOE 


Again the Boston Elevated was the scene of the installation 
of a new system, about 14 blocks of this type being installed 
during the winter of 1904-5, in the tunnel under the harbor, 
between Boston and East Boston. 

The next installation of the double-rail return was on the 
electrified lines of the Long Island Railroad. The requirements 
here were 1100 amperes of return propulsion current per rail, 
and 800 amperes unbalancing. The track transformers and 


1546 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


relays were grouped as shown in Fig. 9, instead of being placed 
at opposite ends of the blocks. 2200-volt mains carrying 25- 
cycle current supply a commercial 2200 to 55-volt transformer 
at each group of track transformers. 

About 140 track circuits were installed and 19 miles of double- 
track road and 4.5 miles of four-track road were equipped with 
signals. 

Last fall a third installation of the double-rail system was 
completed; namely, that on the West Jersey and Seashore 
Railroad. The sub-stations were to have a maximum ultimate 
capacity of 7000 amperes each, which, if distributed equally 
over the four rails, would mean 1750 amperes per rail. 

The blocks were about 4000 ft. long and the innovation was 
introduced of placing the track transformer at the middle of the 


re Cee ep = 
ros ALES LL 


TRACK 


bad rec La 
Li Lt 
Browns Lianrs SO voLTs InreRmeonre 
CONNECTION 
| Al SIGNALING MAINS 2000 WTS 


2. 1000 VOLTS FIG 7 


block (Fig. 10) with the relay at one end and a small step-up 
transformer at the other. The relay is really a motor with the 
armature rotating through about 45 degrees. The field winding 
is connected to the near end of the block, and the armature to 
the secondary of the small step-up transformer at the far end. 

At each sub-station on the section equipped, a transformer 
between one leg of the power mains and the ground steps down 
to 1100 volts for the signal mains, which are carried on the poles 
below the power mains. 

The signal system being installed in the electrified zone of the 
New York Central and Hudson River Railroad is also a two-rail 
system, using inductive bonds connected as in the systems 
described, but the relay is a two-phase induction motor with one 
phase fed from the track circuit, and the other from the signal 
mains, the difference in phase being obtained by the proper 
combination of the elements of the two circuits, 


ouTWwe Bond & 


a iO. ACTRACK RELAYS 


1907] HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1547 


Having thus briefly described the different track circuit Sys- 
tems in operation on electrified roads, it is of interest to recall 
the discussion given in the earlier part of the paper of the 
simpler form in use on the steam roads, and then consider the 
changes made in some of the elements of the track circuit by 
the use of the double-rail return system. The latter system is 
chosen for discussion, as it constitutes the latest and most 
radical departure from the simpler form. 

By the use of an alternating signaling current, we have an 
increase in the apparent resistance of the rails, due partly to 
skin effect and partly to magnetic induction. This increase is 
of course a function of the frequency. 


A:C: Mains 


TRACK TRANSFORMER 
INDUCTIVE 


C_Inpuctive Bonos 


TRANSFORMER RELAY 
FOR ENERGIZING ARMATURE 


Douste Rait RetuRN, IRANSFORMER IN MIDDLE 
Or Biock 
Fic. 10 


We have also introduced an artificial apparent conductance 
between the rails in the inductive bonds, and they, together with 
the relays, introduce another inductive component. 

The increase in the apparent resistance of the rails means, of 
course, higher voltage at the source of supply for the track cir- 
cuit, and consequently more power. On account of the higher 
impedance of the rails and the consequently higher voltage re- 
quired at the source of the supply of the track circuit, other 
things being equal, a given shunt applied to the rails at the relay 
will produce a larger percentage change of voltage across the 
terminals of the relay. 


1548 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING {June 28 


On the other hand, where relays with a single winding are used, 
and there is leakage around an insulation joint from an adjacent 
block, a train at a given distance beyond the relay has less shunt- 
ing effect on the relay, and there is greater danger of getting a 
clear signal with a train in the block, than with the direct-current 
track circuit. 

This may be seen more clearly by an inspection of Fig. 11. 
The insulating joint, A, is defective, and current from the section 
on the right, flowing as indicated by the arrows, will tend to 
make relay R close its contacts. The resistance of the rails 
between the shunt, S, and relay, R, diminishes the effectiveness 
of the shunt as the effective resistance of the rails increases. 

This danger may be diminished in various ways, among which 
are adjustment of the voltage of the source of current supply to 
the track circuit, so that to the relay is given just enough energy 
to operate satisfactorily under the worst weather conditions; 


SiGnae MAINS 


(nDUCTIVE BONDS 


by arrangement of the track circuit apparatus, Fig. 9; and by 
the use of two element relays, Fig. 10, with the rails of adjacent 
blocks of opposite polarity. 

When two-element relays are used, they should be as free as 
possible from any tendency to close the contacts because of 
repulsion or induction motor effects, caused by normal or acci- 
dental short-circuiting. In some forms of frequency relays the 
effects of open circuits must also be guarded against. 

The introduction of artificial apparent conductance between 
the rails by the use of inductive bonds also has its advantages 
and disadvantages. Principal among the advantages is the 
smaller percentage change in voltage across the relay due to 
changes in ballast conductance with varying weather conditions. 
For the same reasons the shunt produced by the train causes 
less percentage change in voltage across the relay. 

These two effects may be taken advantage of in the design of 


1907 j HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING 1549 


the transformer supplying the track, by making its secondary 
characteristic with a steeper gradient than where the bonds are 
not used. The greater the apparent conductance of the bond, 
the steeper should be the gradient. 

The principal disadvantage arising from the introduction of 
the apparent conductance of the bonds between rails is the extra 
amount of current taken and the consequent drop in voltage 
between the track transformer and the relay. with the re- 
sultant increase in leakage through the ballast. 

It is at this point that the electrical engineer laying out the 
power system for a road which is to use direct-current pro- 
pulsion should realize that the higher the efficiency of his 
return system the cheaper will be the signal system, both in 
first cost and operation; and when the signal engineer of the road 
who is making up specifications for the signal manufacturers to 
bid on comes to the electrical engineer for information as to 
how much current per rail the bonds must carry continuously, 
and how much unbalancing they must withstand without causing 
the signal to go to danger, the electrical engineer must not 
state an amount which would give 40% loss in the rails, and in 
addition state that the inductive bonds must withstand 50% 
unbalancing. The larger the current to be carried by the 
bond, the greater the first cost of the copper. 

The larger the amount of unbalancing the bond must with- 
stand, the larger must be the capacity of the track transformers, 
the signal mains, and the generating apparatus, and the larger 
the amount of power to be supplied for the track circuits. 

The greater amount of signal current to be supplied to the 
track circuit because of greater unbalancing capacity in the 
bonds is due to the fact that this unbalancing capacity is ob- 
tained by widening the air-gap in the magnetic circuit of the 
bond. This of course increases its apparent conductance and 
the current demands on the track transformers. 

With roads using alternating-current propulsion, this unbalanc- 
ing becomes of minor importance; first, because the return pro- 
pulsion current is so much smaller; secondly, because the propul- 
sion current being alternating, the actual resistance of the rail 
has a small ratio to the apparent resistance, and a compara- 
tively large difference in the actual ohmic resistance of the two 
rails of a track may exist without making any great change in 
the propulsion current values in the two rails. 

The inductive bonds for roads using alternating current for 


1550 HOWARD: TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


propulsion can therefore be made without an air-gap, and the 
only effect of unbalancing is to produce a voltage across the 
terminals of the relay of the same frequency as the propulsion 
current. This voltage being small with any reasonable amount 
of unbalancing, it may be taken care of in the frequency relay. 

This frequency relay is so constructed that the presence of a 
voltage across its terminals of the same frequency as that of the 
propulsion current will not close the relay contacts, the presence 
of a higher frequency signaling current being necessary to 
accomplish this result. 

The difference in unbalancing effect on roads using direct- 
current propulsion from that on roads using alternating-current 
propulsion, together with the higher frequency signaling 
current, made necessary when alternating-current propulsion 
current is used in order to operate the frequency relay, con- 
stitutes the principal differences in the relations between the 
elements of the track circuit as used on the two systems; so that 
what has been written of the double-rail track circuit on the 
direct-current road applies equally well, with the exceptions 
noted, to the same system on the alternating-current road. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1551 


Discussion on ‘“ TRACK-CiRCUIT SIGNALING ON ELECTRIFIED 
Roaps”’, at Nracara Fatts, N. Y., JUNE 28, 1907. 


Charles F. Scott: This paper is quite special in its scope and 
is valuable for the information it gives, but is not apt to be 
fruitful of general discussion. I have been interested to note 
during the reading of the paper, and also in my observation 
during the last few years of this signal development, the gen- 
eral course of that development and the effect of the electrifica- 
tion of railways on signal work. At first, on the ordinary steam 
road, the only electricity used in connection with the track 
system was the small amount employed in connection with the 
signals. The use of the track, however, for carrying direct 
current for railway motors has caused some voltages to be intro- 
duced which begin to affect the signal circuit and they have to 
be taken care of in ways which when they are worked out and 
explained seem simple and adequate, but did not seem so simple 
when the difficulties first arose. The introduction of single- 
phase alternating current and the use of the rails for conducting 
this current again introduces a new kind of disturbance in the 
signal system. It is interesting to note how the signal work 
has followed these various intrusions of greater currents. One 
rail was set aside for signal work, and later on the signal system 
adapted itself to the condition existing when both rails were used 
for propulsion current. The signal engineer follows the example 
of the railway engineer and gets into alternating current; if the 
alternating current in the railway is bad for his work he cures the 
evil by adopting alternating current himself. He solves the 
frequency question by going to a high frequency instead of a low 
one. This also illustrates the amount of electrical engineering 
which can be applied to what most of us who have not come in 
contact with this work at all have probably considered a very 
simple sort of thing, but the grade of engineering work and the 
knowledge and ingenuity required in devising these systems, 
with the remarkable reliability and excellent way in which they 
perform their work, is something to elicit our admiration. 

There is still another source from which other currents may come 
and affect the signals, which I snderstand has been characteristic 
of one installation, and that is when the tracks were bonded to- 
gether for the operation of the railway these track connections 
formed an inviting path for currents from adjacent railways 
which were strolling through the earth, hunting convenient 
paths by which to get home, and these currents got into the 
tracks and the signal apparatus producing some unexpected 
combinations of signals. This illustrates again the interference 
between different kinds of currents and the need of the signal 
engineer to be alert for their avoidance. 

Henry G. Stott: I think we ought to be congratulated on the 
presentation of a paper of this character. It is perhaps sig- 
nificant of the very small general knowledge on the subject of 


1552 TRACK-CIRCUIT SIGNALING [June 28 


the signaling system which we have, that so few people are 
ready to discuss it. I am connected with a railroad which is 
using the type of signaling described in Mr. Howard’s paper, 
and I am perfectly free to admit that I know very little about it, 
We have a signal engineer, but his work is so specialized that it 
is an entire department by itself. If we all knew what signaling 
engineering is and the mass of details with which the signal 
engineer must contend and the wonderful ingenuity which he 
displays in arranging them, I think we would put the signal 
engineers at the very top of the class instead of the bottom. 

In the first operation of the signaling system on the Subway 
in New York City considerable difficulty was encountered, due 
to the fact that the source of supply of the current was one 
which had variable electromotive force. The 60-cycle current 
was generated by a generator coupled to a direct-current motor 
which was operated from the ordinary third-rail current and 
‘subject, therefore, to very wide fluctuations of voltage. That 
reacted, of course, to keep the tongues of the relays on the signal 
system almost in continuous vibration, thereby reducing the 
life, and in some cases with very wide changes, resulting in 
failures in the signal apparatus itself. We changed that over 
so that the current is now supplied directly from 60-cycle tur- 
bines and the regulation on that is one per cent. Since that 
time the failures of signals to operate have diminished so that 
they practically do not exist. I forget what the record is, 
perhaps Mr. Howard has stated it, but I believe it is about one 
failure of the signal to operate in three or four million. 

It seems to me that this development of the complete block 
system has got to come to all railroads. Until such is the case 
the appalling accidents which have taken place on many of our 
main lines during the past year will continue, because in the 
operation of power plants, and in the operation generally of all 
important apparatus, we find now that the apparatus itself has 
improved to such a point that the failures are not of the appara- 
tus but of the men who operate them. A man may go along 
perfectly for years, doing the same thing every day, and then 
he fails absolutely. For example, in the power plants with 
which I am connected, in three years we have had only one 
shutdown, and that was caused the other day by the gross 
blunder of a man, who has done the thing perfectly hundreds 
of times, failing to do what he should have done. He could 
not explain it and no one else could explain it. The more we 
can eliminate the human element from our signal system the 
more perfect it will become. 

Charles A. Perkins: It seems to me that this paper calls our 
attention to the desirability of extending the block system much 
beyond the range of signals; it is desirable, not only that the 
signals should be given, but also that the obeying of the signal 
should be beyond the option of the engineer or motorman who 
is operating the train, I have been in an accident caused by the 


= ei 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1853 
engineer on a following train running by a danger signal. In the 
multiplication of automatic schemes for safety, such a scheme 
should be included in the block and signal system. I should like 
to hear from Mr. Stott as to how far this has been accomplished. 

Henry G. Stott: On the Subway system this feature is abso- 
lutely automatic. The man cannot run past the signal. If he 
does the brakes are automatically set and the current is cut off. 
It is absolutely impossible for him to run by the signal without 
its being known. He may do it once, but he is not likely 
to repeat the offence, because he has got to get down and go 
under the car and reset the air-brake valves under the car before 
he can start the car again. This means, when he gets to the 
end of the line, he has to make an explanation why he ran 
by the block, and that means he is laid off for a week. 

L. F. Howard: I shall make a few comments on the matter 
of the automatic stop. It is used on the Boston elevated, and 
I believe there are a few automatic stops on the Chicago elevated 
system. The matter is also being agitated on some other roads. 


On surface roads it is more difficult to apply, on account of 


weather conditions, when it is down on the ground. A number 
of years ago it was suggested that an arm should extend from 
the signal mast when the signal was at danger, this arm to be 
so arranged as to engage with a glass tube or stop cock on top 
of the engine cab. The tube or cock being connected with the 
train pipe of the braking system, the breaking of the glass tube 
or opening of the cock, in case the engineman ran by a “ stop ”’ 
signal, would set his brakes. 

There are, however, quite a number of points in connection with 
the use of train stops on surface roads as yet undecided, and the 
present general feeling amongst the officers of such railroads is to 
adhere to present practice and exercise closer checks on their 
employees. 


~ Lt fees va ib a oie. 
t, ry) t. = te are hey bua pia wed 
oad aa, oS ot oe 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical En 
gineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907, 


Copyright 1907, By A. I. . E. 


SOME POWER TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 


BY FRANK G, BAUM 


In designing power transmission systems, 
itis always well to bear in mind that the 
ultimate development of the art and of the 
country has not yet been reached. 


In the early days of railroading, the roads and equipment 
were not of the present trunk-line standard. Light rails, engines 
and cars, and unfenced right-of-way, and unballasted roadway 
sufficed. To construct, at that time, up to the present standard 
would have meant bankruptcy. Even now the manager or engi- 
neer, who would build his branch lines of the same standard as his 
trunk lines, would invite a receiver to take charge of the road. 

The same conditions hold true for power plants and transmis- 
sion lines. The wise manager or engineer builds to meet existing 
conditions, looking into the future as far as he can. He can not 
afford to build duplicate plants. and lines for every case, nor 
build all his lines on private rights-of-way with steel towers and 
other refinements and safeguards. He can not afford to build 
a duplicate transmission line, at an additional interest cost of 
$5,000 per year, when the probability ofan interruption, which 
will cause a loss of revenue of $500 per year to a consumer, is 
extremely remote. 

It may not be as difficult to determine the proper power station 
and line to build when unlimited capital and ideal power con- 
ditions exist as when there is restricted capital, limited revenue, 
and low-priced power at the consumer’s end. Although in the 
latter case the amount of money to be expended may be much 
less than in the former, even more thought is demanded of 
the engineer; for, in the former case, having ample resources, 

1555 


Fic. 2, Structure 1—Spans up to 500 ft., 
7-ft. triangle. Single construction. On corners, 
5600 double arms and plates and one pin. 


49600 Fic. 2, Structure 2.-Spans 500 ft. to 700 ft., 
9-ft. triangle. Double arms and plates, one pin. 


“20 On corners, double arms and plates and two pins. 


Fic. 1—Profile of 
Mountain Pole Line. 
Distances in ft 


1907.] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1557 


he builds -as best he can, while in the latter he must be a 
judge of conditions and see far ahead, in order that the line which 
he builds may earn money and at the same time be capable of 
extension on some plan to meet the growing needs of the 
country and business. 

To illustrate the necessity of doing things in inexpensive ways 
in the early development of an art, a business, or a country, 


Fic. 2, Structure 3.—Spans 700 ft. to 900 ft. 11-ft. triangle. Double 
arms and plates and two pins. Corners special. 


some examples are given of the work done on the system of the 
California Gas and Electric Corporation. Along some of the 
lines where the load is small, one wire only is run to the sub- 
station, an inexpensive building, and one transformer, with 
ground return, is installed. One-phase motors are used. For 
larger stations, sometimes up to 500 kw., two wires are run to 
the sub-station and, by using ground return on the primary and 
open delta on the secondary, three-phase motors are operated. 


1558 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


Fic. 2, Structure 4.—Spans over 900 ft. to 2000 ft. 16-ft structure, 
Double 6-in. by 6-in. arms, plates and two pins. Two-pole structure. 


Fic. 2, Structure 5.—Spans 2000 ft. to 3000 ft. 24-ft. structure. 
Double 6-in, by 8-in. arms, plates, and three pins. Three-pole structure, 


1907.] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1559 


Loads as large as 1500 kw. have been carried to a distance of 100 
miles on two transformers Y-connected on the primary, with 
grounded neutral, and open delta on the secondary. Neither 
the power consumer, nor the power-house operator has noted 
anything unusual. 


Fic. 3—-Pole-top extension. 


For larger sub-stations a single three-phase transmission line 
supplies the load, even where the length is 50 miles or more. 
The consumer can not afford to pay for a duplicate line when the 
output per year of the factory is practically unaffected by inter- 
ruptions. Interruptions amounting to one hour per month would 


1560 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


be one-seventh of one per cent. of the total time, and the power 
company that has an average of an hour’s interruption per month 
is certainly giving very bad service. It is evident that the con- 
struction of a duplicate pole-line for such service is entirely un- 
warranted. 

As to the construction of pole-lines, it has been found that in 
some parts of the West where cedar poles may be purchased 
at a low price, this class of pole-lines is still the most econom- 
ical, and everyone must admit that this type of construction has 
proved remarkably effective. Of course under certain con- 


Fic. 4—LEarly type of oil-switch. 


ditions tower lines only would be considered, but two wooden pole 
lines entering a city by two different routes will give greater 
reliability than any two-circuit tower line that can be built. 
The cost of a two-circuit tower line would be as great as that 
of two pole lines. A line using tower construction requires a 
private right-of-way, and in a new country it may not be possible 
to pay from the earnings the interest on the increased cost of 
the right-of-way as well as on the tower construction. The 
engineer, of course, always prefers the best construction, but 
he must consider the net revenue to be derived from an en- 


1907..] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1561 


terprise in a given number of years. In mountain sections, the 
economies of line construction lie in the use of the hills for the 
structures and in using long spans. In some cases the amount 
saved in clearing, in poles, insulators, and labor will amount to 


50%. 


Fic. 5—Later types of oil-switches. 


Fig. 1 shows a profile of a line recently constructed, the 
middle section of which consists of a series of spans varying 
in length from 700 to 2700 ft. It will be seen that by taking ad- 
vantage of the hills to form the greater part of the height of the 
structure great economy results. A span of 3000 ft., with 
an allowable sag of 300 {t., would, if on the level, require towers 


1562 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


over 300-ft. high, while, in this line on similar spans, simple 
wooden pole structures 30-ft. high are all that is necessary. The 
profile of a line of this kind is first determined, and the span- 
length and structures designed so that the wires clear the ground 
sufficiently. This gives an economical and satisfactory line 


SSS 
arm 20: 


SS 


“hy 2 
Y i; 
Y Z 
N\ 3 
\ 3 
IN. Zs t 


Fic. 6—Modern type of oil-switch. 


On long spans the wires are spread at the structures as shown. 
In addition, the top or middle wire is given 10 to 40 ft. less sag 
(depending on the span) than any of the others. One of the 
outside wires is also given 5 to 20 ft. less sag than the other. 


1907 | BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1563 


In this way there is obtained a vertical separation at the middle 
of the span; and 10 ft. of vertical separation is better than 20 
ft. of horizontal, because the wires then can not come together 
even when acted upon by gusts of wind having a tendency to 
lift the wires. Spans greater than 2000 ft. are not installed 
exceptin certain cases where they can scarcely be avoided. Spans 
of 600 to 1500 ft. give the best line. 

Fig. 2 shows standard types of pole structures used on some 
of the mountain lines recently constructed in California. 


Vxi'x6’4"L 


Fic. 7—Three-pole grouping of oil-switches. 


Structures of this kind are sometimes also used for river crossings 
where the cost of steel towers is prohibitive or the time too short 
to install them. These are sometimes over 100 ft: high. 
Referring to old lines which were constructed ten, or even 
five years ago, nearly all the lines were built with 40 poles to the 
mile, using 35-ft. poles. Now, the tendency is to use longer spans 
on account of the lower cost and the reduced number of insulators 
or weak points in the line. Some of these old lines have to be 
reconstructed later for a higher voltage, and, in order to obtain 
a reasonably good line and also to reduce the cost for insulators 


1564 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


and future line maintenance, it is advisable in reconstructing 
to reduce the number of poles. To do this, the supporting points 
of the wires must be raised higher above the ground. In order 
to accomplish the result of reinsulating and reconstructing 
several hundred miles of line (which would have kept all the 
insulator factories busy for two years furnishing insulators for 


Fic. 8—Outdoor two-break air-switch. 


the old type of construction), the pole-top extension shown in 
Fig. 3 was used. This has proved effective. By using this pole- 
top extension, every other pole is taken out, with a saving of 
$9.00 per pole for new insulators and the additional salvage of 
the old poles, arms, pins, andinsulators. Where sufficient height 
can be obtained by putting the arm below the top of the pole, 


Se Ne Sancta . ro cin ae 


1907.] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1565 


this construction may be simplified in the fastening of the arm 
and pipe to the pole. 

Another important adjunct of the transmission line is the 
switches, oil and disconnecting. It will be found that the same 
arguments regarding economical line construction apply to 
switches. Five years ago no one was sure of a high-tension 
switch and it would have been folly to install expensive switches 
of the first type that suggested itself without giving them a 
thorough trial during several years under operating conditions. 
In selecting switches and structures for high-tension lines, it is 
well to bear in mind that the ultimate development has not yet 


Fic. 9—-Outdoor switch. 


been reached. In solving our switch problem, this was kept in 
mind at all times. 

The first high-tension oil-switches were made as inexpensive 
and as simple as possible, and were as shown in Fig. 4. These 
operated so satisfactorily that we became convinced of the suc- 
cess of the type and soon changed to a more substantial form, as 
shownin Fig.5. They are generally installed for hand-operation. 

Although we have more than 100 of these switches on our 
lines, nearly 1000 miles at 60,000 volts all tied together, 
and over 50,000 kw. in generators operating on the lines at 
all times, the switches although cheaply constructed have given 
excellent results. All line switching is done on these high- 
tension switches, and the plants and lines are separated thereby 


1566 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


incaseoftrouble. The stations are synchronized at sub-stations, 
which are 100 to 150 miles from any power station. 

We have now adopted the type shown in Fig. 6, two-break 
switches for the ordinary station, and four-break in each 
tank for the heavy service. These switches are grouped in three- 
pole arrangement as shown in Fig. 7. 

For small sub-stations, for line-sectionalizing switches, 
and for disconnecting from bus-bars, switches of the type 
shown in Figs. 8 to 11 are used. In handling the high-tension 
lines, these switches are used as much as the oil-switches. 

A glance at Fig. 12 will show that our high-tension lines are also 


PLEXIBLE CABLE 


Fic. 10—Outdoor switch and fuse for small sub-stations. 


practically distributing lines, as loads are taken off at a great many 
points. We have more than 100 sub-stations on our lines. Such 
a system is, of course, much more difficult to operate than a 
straight away line with a power station at one end and a load at 
the other. 

On the hydraulic construction and also on the power-house and 
3ub-station installation and construction, the engineer is required 
to devise something that will pay the largest net income in a 
given number of years. Sometimes he is called upon to make 
installations on the assumption that the plant is to be abandoned 
inafew years. Ofcourse, the engineer will be criticized if he puts 
in a plant to meet present or apparent future needs and, due to 
some change in the industry or development of the country, the 
plant must be remodeled later. But it is the business of the 
engineer to solve his problems as he sees them, 


es 


1907.] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1567 

I have given these examples of line and switch construction 
to show that the best solution of a problem may be one which ac- 
complishes the purpose satisfactorily with the least amount of 
money, on account of the changes in design which become appar- 
ent as our experience is broadened and as the industry develops. 
That there will be further advances is certain, but, as far as high- 
tension work is concerned, little of the present apparatus—trans- 
formers, insulators, switches—need be thrown away; for, should 
the line voltage be forced up, the present apparatus may be used 
on the lower-voltage lines. And too, the high-tension trans- 


TO OUTDOOR DISCONNECTING SW: 


\ 
| 
I 
i 
3 


a 


4 


SIDE VIEW 


Fic. 11—Oil-switch in compartment, showing disconnecting-switches, 


former is so flexible in its operating-voltage connections that use 
can always be found forit. Itis very probable that in time higher- 
voltage trunk lines will be built which will feed into the present 
lower-pressure (60,000 volts) lines at various points, using the 
present 60,000-volt lines for the primary distribution, and stepping 
down to about 11,000 for the regular factory distribution. An 
example of work of this kind is shown byoursystem. A great 
many miles of comparatively low-tension lines—10,000 to 
23,000— have been changed to higher voltage, but all the old line 


1568 BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


wy, 
pe R- 
( _ 
a c 
3 ¥ 
De Sabla = & 
: ‘ we ks 
NORTHERN CALiFORNia, Centerville fA < 
POWER CO'S.LINE’ ; 4 fy 
Chicd Cito 
Durham ~.__ 
R. 
Thermalito* we Tuba 
2 g R ( 
+ )Ovoyille 5 jaale Yuba 
6,000 VOLTS: , 
1 Colgate gouth abe EZ ; 


Yuba P.H. yy 


Dredgers A / 
a 


$ 
Nevada P. H 


Colusa 


“ER Yuba City | 


eh | 
@ H 
oo s 
$ n 
° 
2 
WY 
Woodland 
Folsom 
Davis, 4 Sacramento R. 
Vi we 
Santa Rosa Dixons ye ry 
Na 
Sebesiapol 3 os Awador F thc 2 
Vacaville s Sutter Cr\20, 
Kapat Cement fe Jackson /Blectra ~— 
Petal Napa,Je. A 
‘etaluma mi Cordelia Ly p% San Andreas 
rT suo 
poo * Av.rdeera Sen f. » 
San Rafael SPowerl’ dy SS Antioch PS 
3, es My ly “%, o 
Richmond ag, iy, — *4 
’, yr a emescal ep, ong ME io 2 Stockton 
Saviratito’s z J Meamont TCo, 
biarta @ lst & Grove a 
San pa eae ©), #5 Enmhurst Hurdlynj Groveland 
a 
ye Martin , \ stanislaus 
a f & Liverniore 2 
F 
8.San/Franclacs ~ > % Tuolumne us 
_ Y 
[ Reawood Ph, 47 Mission San Jose i cal 
ON. SQ Bisa 2 
esq Alviso t ? : 
- Mtn. View 
} * San Jose 
SWITCHING ARRANGEMENT 
oO OF 
eS TRANSMISSION LINES 
or CALIFORNIA GAS AND ELECTRIC CORPORATION 
a Davenport 
y ggonta Cruz From Colgate to North Tower is 117 Miles. 
From Electra and Misslon San Jose 95.5 Miles, 
b 4 Me “San Francisco 145 


Fic 12.—All lines not otherwise marked are at 60,000 volts. 


Ee 


— 


— 


1907] BAUM: TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS 1569 


material, switches, insulators, transformers, etc., have been again 
utilized. 

The saving in conducting capacity and the improvement in 
the service and the salvage have well paid for all the changes. 
No doubt a part of the future work of the electrical engineer will 
be to redesign and reconstruct the high-tension systems 
for the economies to be gained. The ease by which the change 
to the higher voltage may be made as necessity arises is encourag- 
ing alike to the transmission engineer and to the investor. 


1570 TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


Discussion ON ‘‘SoME PowER TRANSMISSION EcoNnomics”’, 
AT NraGarRA Fa ts, N. Y., JUNE 28, 1907 


Chas. P. Steinmetz. This paper describes a construction 
suitable for power transmission where the utmost reliability 
is not necessary, but where cheapness is needed to make the 
installation feasible. It is desirable in all such discussions to 
give some clue of what is understood by “ reliable ” or “ satis- 
factory’ operation. In listening to statements of satisfactory 
operation of transmission lines, it will be found that “ satisfac- 
tory operation ”’ is a flexible expression; for what may seem to 
one engineer under certain conditions as satisfactory, may to 
another engineer, seem very unsatisfactory. For instance, the 
chief engineer of a large city told me a few days ago that in his 
city the power has not been off the low-tension bus-bar in fifteen 
years. In such a case a number of shutdowns averaging one 
shutdown per year, of five minutes or less duration, would be 
unsatisfactory operation; because if it should happen there 
probably would immediately be a legislative committee to in- 
vestigate why it happened that some thousands of citizens were 
caught by the failure of the power in elevators midway between 
the floors of office buildings. In another instance, in a trans- 
mission line supplying power to a mining district, it may be 
perfectly satisfactory operation if the number of shutdowns 
averages not more than two per month, with perhaps a total 
duration of an average of twenty minutes per month. That 
may be perfectly satisfactory in that case. 

It would seem desirable, then, for an engineer who makes a 
statement of this kind to preface his statement with something 
like this: I consider as the limits of a satisfactory operation a 
number of shutdowns averaging not more than two per month 
of a total duration of not more than twenty minutes per month; 
or I consider as the limits of satisfactory operation a number of 
shutdowns averaging not more than two per year of a total 
duration of not more than five minutes per year, whichever 
may be the case. Then we really could compare the cases in- 
telligently, while now we really cannot do so. 

The thing which brought this matter to my attention is that 
we have had so much discussion of what is proper to do for trans- 
mission at voltages above 60,000, and we have discussed trans- 
mission lines of 100,000 volts, and more than 100,000 volts, and, 


too, someone has asked the question, which has remained un- ' 


answered, whether there is anywhere in this country or anywhere 
else any transmission system in successful satisfactory com- 
mercial operation of 60,000 volts or more. The answer to the 
question would entirely depend on what one calls satisfactory 
operation. If satisfactory operation is to be judged from the 
experience of the city engineer in whose system the power had 
not been off the bus-bars for fifteen years, I do not think there is 
any such system, or will be for a long time, If by satisfactory 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1571 


operation is meant the case of the engineer who figures the time 
when the power is off the circuit in per cent. of the total time, 
and is satisfied if it is not more than one per cent. of the total 
time when there is no power, then there will be quite a number 
of systems in successful operation. 

F. B. H. Paine: I think that Mr. Steinmetz asks too much 
of the engineer. I was brought up in a school where the use of 
the word “satisfactory ’? was prohibited. Manufacturing com- 
panies have eliminated that word from their vocabularies and so 
I think it would be necessary to understand, not so much what 
the engineer of the transmission company thought was satis- 
factory, as what each one of his patrons thought was satis- 
factory; I have yet to find a unanimity of opinion anywhere as 
to what satisfactory service may be. 

The great value of Mr. Baum’s paper is in bringing out strongly 
the great difference in transmission practice of the West and the 
East. I have recently made an extended trip in the West in 
order to harmonize, if I could, the conflicting statements as to 
the availability of certain apparatus and methods for high-voltage 
transmission that are not regarded in this part of the country as 
permissible, yet I knew to have been in successful operation in 
the West. The most striking differences which Mr. Baum 
brings out in his paper are two: the use of the ground as a return 
for high voltages, and the fact not expressly stated in his paper, 
that no automatic apparatus is used on their system. The fact 
that no automatic apparatus is used permits the use of a class 
of switching and other line apparatus, even on a system of that 
magnitude, which would be utterly impracticable on a system 
of lesser magnitude where automatic apparatus is used. The 
oil-switches that are shown here are excellently constructed, 
but to one who is accustomed to the immense switches used for 
60,000-volt service in the East they are astonishing; they only 
cost $200 or $300, and we are accustomed to pay $1500 to 
for our switches. I attribute the successful use of these 
cheaper well-made switches to the fact that they are non-auto- 
matic and are used only under more or less ordinary operating 
conditions, not emergency conditions. They are used, further- 
more, on long transmission lines with comparatively small 
conductors and the most complex system that is imaginable. 
They are extremely useful devices; they ought to be available 
for special service in the East, but they would not do to control 
large transmission systems with large conductors and large gen- 
erating units behind them. 

The use of the ground as a conductor I have supposed to be 
open to serious objections. I should suppose this to be the case 
particularly, as in their case, where it is used for 60,000 volts, 
for 12,000 volts, and 2300 volts and how many other voltages 
I do not know, I wish that Mr. Steinmetz and Mr. Scott would 
speak on that phase of the subject. , 

There are a good many things described in the paper that 


1572 TRANSMISSION ECONOMICS [June 28 


indicate a construction applicable only to a country free from 
extremely high winds and sleet. The very ingenious pole-line 
construction would not be usable in such a climate as New York, 
and this should be fully appreciated. Mr. Baum regards two 
independent pole lines entering the city from different directions 
as being more reliable than two circuits on an individual tower 
line, or two circuits each on their own tower lines, presumably 
supplying power from the same source. The difficulty in build- 
ing up one circuit out of two, two wires on one, and one on the 
other line is very much increased and made almost impracticable 


if the circuits themselves are distant from each other and if . 


each line feeds different customers. Lines in the same vicinity 
are equally likely to injury from lightning whether they are 
adjacent or two or three miles-apart. 

The reason for the use of different tensions in the three wires 
on a pole line is not obvious, and I was not able while in the West 
to ascertain any satisfactory reason for the practice. Unbal- 
anced strains on one fragile structure are mechanically very 
undesirable. 

The reason given by those in charge of various lines was that 
it was found impossible to string the wires sufficiently close to 
the same tension, therefore in a wind storm the different perio- 
dicity of the swing of three wires would ultimately bring them 
together. I think a more careful inspection of the lines during 
construction would make it possible to string them to the same 
tension. On our 400 miles of line no one has ever discovered a 
tendency of the cables to swing together. We use aseven-foot 
triangle, with spans normally at 550 feet and ranging up to 1200 
feet, 1200 feet being approximately the longest span we have. 
We find the cables swing synchronously and are sluggish in their 
movement when subject to sudden gusts of wind, 


A paper presented at the 24th Annual Convén-= 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28,1907 


Copyright 1907. By A. I. E. E. 


SINGLE-PHASE HIGH-TENSION POWER- TRANS- 
MISSION. 


BY E. J. YOUNG. 


The recent advance in Europe of the Thury direct-current 
system of power transmission demonstrates the fact that 
unless an alternating-current system approaching it in 
simplicity of design and economy of material is developed, it 
is only a question of time before the high-tension direct current 
will gain a hold upon this continent. Consequently, the 
writer proposes a high-tension single-phase system having several 
desirable features not in common with either the direct-current 
or the three-phase system. 

While the present three-phase system is more flexible than the 
direct current, it is more complicated, and requires a con- 
siderably greater outlay for transmission material. The ordinary 
single-phase system is simpler than either of these two, but 
requires 25% more copper than the three-phase system and a 
proportionately greater amount than direct current. Then again, 
considering the strain upon the insulators as a standard of compari- 
son, the fundamental difference between direct- and alternating- 
current systems gives the former an advantage that no alternat- 
ing-current system can overcome. 

In Fig. 1 is shown a general outline of the proposed single-phase 
system. Single-phase generating apparatus is supplying energy 
to step-up transformers—for convenience only one is indicated. 

The center of the high-tension windings is permanently 
grounded, thereby reducing the electromotive force from line to 
ground to one-half that between the line wires, and in so doing 
placing single-phase transmission at least on a par with three 
phase in the matter of economy of copper. At the receiving end 
the step-down apparatus is similar to that at the power station, the 


1573 


1574 YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION _ [June 28 


center of all high-tension windings being grounded. At the sub- 
station there is a motor-generator set consisting of a single-phase 
synchronous motor and a three-phase power and lighting gener- 
ator. The set isstarted by an ordinary single-phase series motor 
operated by current from an autotransformer connected across 
the secondaries of the step-down transformers. The exciter 
may be on the motor-generator shaft as in Fig. 1, or operated by 
a separate motor, as best suits the conditions. 

An example will probably serve to illustrate the comparison 
between the different systems, especially those by alternating 
current. Therefore it is proposed to transmit 15,000 kw., 100 
miles with 10% loss. The electromotive force to be 50 kilovolts 
from line to ground at the receiving end, and the alternating- 


POWER STATION SUB-STATION 


100 MILES 
|| GRouno GROUND II 
2 
TRANSMISSION 


ONE-PHASE 
GENERATOR 


AUTO TRANSFORMER 

Fig..1 
STARTING MOTOR 
SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR EXCITER 


THREE-PHASE GENERATOR 
4 WIRE 


current frequency to be 30 cycles. The following conditions 
for the three-phase line are assumed: 


Power-factor = 0.9, 

Star-connected transformers with grounded neutral. 
Electromotive force to ground = 50 kilovolts, 

Electromotive force across line = 501.732 kilovolts. 

By transmission formulas the copper section per line will be: 


é : : D : : 
1. Cir. mils = eat as in which 


D = 1005280 x 1.02 ft., 2% allowed for sag in conductors, etc. 
P = 15,000,000 watts. 

K = 1330'for 0.9 power-factor, three phase. 

M = 10% loss. 

E = 501.732 kilovolts. 


1907] YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION 1575 


Consequently : 
100 x 5280 x 1.02 x 15,000,000 x 1330 


2. Cir. mils: = 10 x (60,000 x 1.732)? = 143,270. 
Weight of copper per mile of line = ei xs = 6876 lb. 


As shown in Fig. 1, the center of the high-tension windings 
is grounded. The electromotive force of the single-phase system 
may therefore be double that to ground and still retain the same 
strain upon the insulators as in the three-phase system. One- 
phase conditions: 


Electromotive force.......... 100 kilovolts. 
Power-factor........ 0.9 

Costantino 2660 for 0.9 power-factor, single phase. 
Therefore: 


: : 100 X 5280 X 1.02 x 15,000,000 x 2660 
3. Cir. mils = 10 x 100,000? = 214,890. 


9 
Weight of copper per mile of line eee =6876 lb. 


In order that the direct-current system shall be under the 
same conditions as the alternating current, the electromotive 
force to ground will be 50 + 0.707 orapproximately 70.7 kilovolts. 
This will give practically the same strain on the insulators 
as would 50 kilovolts alternating current. By grounding the 
row of generators at the power and receiving stations, as pro- 
posed on the direct-current transmission from Monthoux to 
Paris, France, there would be a potential of 141.4 kilovolts 
between line wires. 

According to formula 3, with K equal to 2160 for direct- 
current, all other factors remaining the same, we obtain: 


100 X 5280 X 1.02 X 15,000,000 x 2160 


: ‘iat = 270. 
4, Cir. mils = 10 X 141,400? 87,270 


; 87,270 X 2 
Weight of copper per mile of line= Saget = 2192-A1b. 


Comparing these results, we find that as far as transmission ma- 
terial is concerned the direct-current system is far. more eco- 
nomical than either the three-phase or the single-phase system. 


1576 YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION [June 28 


There is practically no choice between the latter two. Therefore, 
any advantage the alternating-current system may have, 
must necessarily be in the power house and the sub-station. 
Comparing now the three phase and single phase with the idea 
of estimating the probable saving the latter would represent in 
line material: on the single-phase system there would be at least 
12 less insulators and pins per mileif steel towers were used, and 
44 on ordinary pole construction. At $2.50 per pin and insulator, 
this would mean an initial saving of $30, or $110 a mile for pins 
and insulators alone. The cross-arms, etc. of the single-phase 
line would probably be longer and heavier than those of the three- 
phase line on account of the wires being farther apart, due to 
higher electromotive force, but this is more than compensated 
for by the poles being about 5 ft. shorter, since the upper wire is 
done away with. There is also the difference in cost in stringing 
wires—three wires on one system and only two on the other. 


POWER STATION SUB-STATION - 


100 MILES 


00s 
i OoL 


, 
\ LINE GROUNDED 


Fig. 2 


One of the most important advantages of the proposed 
system, with reference to continuity of service in case of trouble 
on transmission line, is shown in Figs. 2, 3, and 4. In Fig. 2 
the line is supposed to be grounded. The number of turns in 
the transformer windings is indicated in order to illustrate the 
effect of such an occurrence. With independent automatic 
circuit-breakers in each high-tension line at the power house 
and sub-stations—those at the power house operated by over- 
load time-limit relays, and the sub-stations supplied with reverse- 
current relays operating with practically no time-limit—the 
affected line will be cleared by the short-circuit. 

We have now a 50-kilovolt transmission in which the ground 
serves as one conductor. At the receiving end the ratio of trans- 
formation is doubled, but at the same time the electromo- 
tive force is reduced one-half. Consequently, the secondary 
potential will not be altered by one line being cut out of circuit 


on account of trouble or for repairs and inspection. In erder: 


a a el 


1907] YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION 1577 


to raise the system to approximately its original capacity, the 
high-tension windings, being in two sections, are connected as 
ime-Big%s..3. 

Upon removing the trouble and connecting the transformers as 
in Figs. 1 and 2 it would appear that, by simply closing the switches 
upon the repaired line, normal operating conditions would be 
resumed. Although this last operation might result in conditions 
that could only be learned by experience, the illustration will show 
that as long as one line remains upon the insulators the ser- 
vice will neither be interrupted nor the transmitting power of 
the line very much reduced. In the event of the above trouble 
occurring upon the three-phase or direct-current lines, the effect 
is different. With three phase the entire system will be 
interrupted; with direct current one half the motor-genera- 

_tors will stop. It will therefore be seen that the necessity of a 
duplicate line is much less needed on one phase than on either 
of the other systems. 


SUB-STATION 


POWER STATION 100 MILES 


Owing to the high electromotive force of the alternating- 
current system the space occupied by the high-tension bus-bars 
etc. as ordinarily installed would represent a considerable 
portion of the station. Consequently, a diagram of the station 
distribution requiring small space but giving ample insulation, 
the high-tension lines being under oil, is shown in Fig. 4; although 
applicable to three-phase or single-phase, it will obviously present 
less complications when used with the latter. 

In Fig 4 are shown four independent transformer units placed 
in a single case partioned into four chambers. Each chamber 
contains a transformer, the switches necessary for its operation, 
and the interconnecting bus-bars between adjacent transformers. 
The lines C and D lead to low-tension generator bus-bars; A 
and B lead to high-tension line-switches which are controlled 
by overload relays; four lines, that is, A and B, being necessary 
in order to facilitate inspection or repairs of individual transform- 
ers while others arein operation. It will be seen that any trans- 


1578 YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION [June 28 


former may be cut out of circuit from adjacent units by the 
disconnecting switches S, which, under normal operating con- 
ditions are all closed; S, and S, indicate double-pole, double- 
throw, remote-control switches for connecting the high-tension 
coils either in series across A and B, or, in the event of trouble 
on one line, in parallel from ground G to the unaffected line. 


TRANSTORMER TRANSFORMER 


The interconnecting switches S, and S, connect the bus-bars in 
different chambers. Under ordinary operating conditions all 
transformer switches S, and S, would be thrown to the right, thus 
putting the high-tension windings in series. In the event of line 
A being cut out, all switches, S,, could be thrown to the left 
there by placing the two windings in multiple from B to ground G; 


1907] YOUNG: SINGLE-PHASE TRANSMISSION 1579 


if line B is disconnected, all switcnes, S4, would be to the right 
and S, to the left. Since the cooling coils have been dispensed 
with, the intention is to place the entire case in a pit surrounded 
with running water, or to have the oil withdrawn from the case 
and cooled externally, as is proposed in certain transinission 
plants. 

Notwithstanding all that has been said in favor of the single- 
phase system it has several disadvantages. In the first place 
the generating apparatus costs more than three-phase, but less 
than direct-current apparatus. The inability of operating large 
induction motors is also a serious disadvantage, and would 
necessitate the use of motor-generators in many cases. Then 
again, there might be greater liability of surges in the single-phase 
circuit due to the larger current carried by them, but the troubles 


~ accompanying star-connected transformers, as explained by Mr. 


J. S. Peck, are entirely eliminated. The number of transformers 
upon the system, as shown in Fig. 4, will be much less with 
sing'e phase, and the entire switching apparatus is not only 
reduced but also greatly simplified. 

In the preceding suppositions the writer appreciates the fact 
that a number of factors which would enter into the design of a 
transmission system of such length and capacity have not been 
considered, the case taken being simply to illustrate a general 
theory of the proposed system. On comparatively short trans- 
missions the disadvantages of single-phase operation and distribu- 
tion would no doubt counterbalance any advantage it presents. 
However, where very long lines are contemplated, such as the 
250-mile line in France, or electrifying railway systems in this 
country, single phase is not only the simplest, but unites max- 
imum reliability of service with a minimum number of trans- 
mission wires. 


1580 ONE-PHASE TRANSMISSION {June 28 


Discussion on ‘‘ SINGLE-PHASE H1GH-TENSION PowER TRANS- 
MISSION”, AT NiaGaRA Fa ts, N. Y., JUNE 28, 1907 


Chas. P. Steinmetz: In this paper Mr. Young gives a dis- 
cussion of the relative economies of the different transmission 
systems. In bygone years considerable discussion took place 
on this point, and it was shown that the three-phase system re- 
quires only 75 per cent. of the copper of a single-phase system or 
a four-wire two-phase system, on the basis of equal maximum 
electrostatic stress. With the change of industrial conditions, 
such conclusions will have to be revised. When the matter 
was discussed before, then the statements were correct, because 
in those early days all electrical circuits were operated as isolated 
systems without grounded neutral; and in that case the voltage 
which came into consideration was the voltage from conductor 
to conductor, across two insulators, and in that case the three- 
phase system has an advantage of 25 per cent. in copper. 

Now, with voltages of 60,000 or more, it is almost always the 
custom to ground the neutral, and in this case the maximum 
stress is from the conductor over a single insulator to ground, 
corresponding to the voltage which in the single-phase system 
is the voltage between the conductors divided by two, or half the 
line voltage. In the three-phase system the voltage between the 
conductors is divided by \/3 or the Y, voltage; in other words, 


when operating with grounded neutral, all systems, single-phase, 
two-phase, or three-phase are exactly alike in their copper econ- 
omy. They are all combinations or multiples of single-phase sys- 
tems with grounded return and zero resistance in the return. 
All these systems, as we know, theoretically can be considered and 
are considered as a number of single-phase systems, each system 
being one of the transmission wires, returned over the ground 
with zero resistance in the ground. The statement that the 
three-phase system has an economy in copper of 25 per cent. 
is not correct for the high potential line with grounded 
neutral, for at present with grounded neutral the three-phase 
system does not offer any advantage in copper economy over the 
single-phase or four-wire two-phase system. The advantage of 
the polyphase system over the single-phase system is only the 
greater usefulness of polyphase power, since the largest part 
of the power is always used for synchronous motors, induction 
motors, synchronous converters, etc. The advantage of the 
three-phase system over the two-phase system is the advantage 
of three wires over four wires. This is what upholds the three- 
phase system at present. 

In comparing the three-phase or single-phase system with 
direct-current high-tension transmission, it was pointed out in 
the early days that they cannot be compared as regards copper 
economy, on the basis of maximum voltage or effective voltage, 
because one stress is alternating with the average equaling zero, 
the other stress is unidirectional, and so all those effects of the 


es —— 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1581 


electrical stress which are unidirectional exist to a very small 
extent only in the alternating-current system, while prominent 
in the direct-current system, and all those effects which depend 
on instantaneous voltage are greater in the alternating-current 
system. So direct-current high-tension and alternating-current 
high-tension cannot directly be compared on the basis of some 
voltage, average, effective, maximum, or whatever it may be, 
but require a further investigation which the future will give ; 
and the future will indicate whether the direct-current high-po- 
tential transmission should be reintroduced to any appreciable 
extent. I do not believe it will. 

E. H. Schwarz: 1t is obvious that in single-phase trans- 
mission, single-phase alternators might be used, and I would 
like to know, where there is a low power-factor due to a heavy 
overload, whether the armature reaction in a single-phase ma- 
oe ate down the voltage less than in a three-phase ma- 
chine? 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The opposite is the case. In a single- 
phase machine the armature reaction lowers the voltage more at 
heavy load and low power-factor than in the polyphase machine, 
and not only lowers the voltage but also changes the wave shape 
by superimposing the triple harmonic on the main wave. The 
result is that a machine cannot be operated at the same output 
single-phase that it can be operated polyphase; that is, a certain 
type and size of machine when built single-phase must be rated 
at the lower output, probably about three-quarters of that when 
built as a polyphase machine. 

E. H. Schwarz: In making short-circuit tests on three-phase 
and single-phase machines, I have noticed that it takes less 
field current in single than in three-phase. I thought that was 
due to the fact that in the three-phase alternator the maximum 
current in one phase would demagnetize the field at a time when 
the other phases should be generating a certain voltage, while in 
the single-phase alternator the demagnetization due to maximum 
current could only affect the one phase of the machine, and since 
the voltage would be zero at this time, the demagnetization 
would have no effect upon it. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: If there is a three-phase machine and it 
is short-circuited single-phase, it will require less excitation for - 
the same short-circuit current as when short-circuiting the ma- 
chine polyphase. But the same current in the single-phase ma- 
chine corresponds to less power, since for the same power the 
single-phase current should be \/3 times the three-phase current ; 
while with the same current the field excitation and the regula- 
tion may be better single-phase, with the same power; that is, 
,/3 times as much single-phase as three-phase current. The 
regulation single-phase must be very much poorer than three- 
phase; in other words, at equal output, other things being the 
same, the single-phase machine gives poorer regulation and also 
a greater heating than the three-phase machine. Inversely, 


1582 ONE-PHASE TRANSMISSION [June 28 


to get approximately the same regulation and heating in a single- 
phase machine, the output has to be reduced considerably below 
that which the same machine would have as a polyphase machine. 

C. T. Wilkinson (by letter): The feeling aroused not only in 
Europe but also in this country in regard to the high-tension 
direct-current system of transmission devised by Mr. Thury is 
illustrated by Mr. Young’s interesting paper. As one who has 
observed somewhat carefully the operation of this system I 
beg to offer the following comments. 

First, and possibly the most important consideration, is 
telephonic and telegraphic disturbances, due to the grounding 
proposed by Mr. Young. Where this one-phase system operates 
under normal conditions it is uncertain whether serious trouble 
of this character will develop. but it seems highly probable that 
when running under the emergency condition proposed by Mr. 
Young in a case of a breakdown of one line that very serious 
difficulty would be expected. 

The connection of the two high-tension transformer windings 
in multiple, as shown in Fig. 3, doubles the current of the trans- 
mission line and therefore increases the losses four times while 
it is possible that regulation would be seriously interfered with 
and that considerable trouble might be experienced due to 
hunting or surging of the single-phase synchronous motor- 
generator sets at the receiving end. 

In the case of a ground on the direct-current system, Mr. 
Young states that one-half the motor generators will stop. In 
this connection attention may be drawn to the method of building 
the Thury sets in semi-groups, each semi-group containing two 
armatures on the same shaft which are connected in series. the 
idea being that, if the station capacity is to be increased at any 
time, it can be done by connecting these two armatures in 
multiple, thus doubling the current and halving the voltage. 
While, of course, the switching arrangements should enable 
this to be done rapidly in case of breakdown, this would some- 
what reduce the present remarkable simplicity of the Thury 
system. This method would solve the difficulty quite satis- 
factorily, though of course the line losses would be doubled. The 
semi-groups being thus connected in multiple. they would all be 
thrown across between the earth and the remaining line. 

Perhaps, it is worth while considering the arrangement Mr. 
Thury has devised in case a breakdown occurs where it is not 
desirable to ground the whole line. In these cases he places the 
transmission line (as in the case of the transmission from Mou- 
tiers to Lyon) in several sections, providing what are called 
“earthing-cabins ”’ at intervals in order that only the broken 
section of the line need be earthed. 

With regard to Fig. 4, it seems at first sight as though greater 
simplicity ought to be obtained, since a large number of high- 
tension large rupture capacity switches must be employed. 
Further, it is not quite clear why four transformer tanks must be 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NIAGARA FALLS 1583 


used; would not two separate tanks be ample with a third in 
reserve? Possibly Mr. Young would be kind enough to explain 
this matter a little more fully. 

When comparing this system with the direct-current system it 
must be remembered that it is a comparatively easy matter to 
guard the latter system from lightning trouble, for in spite of 
the high advance made in all types of lightning arresters in recent 
years, trouble is: occasionally experienced with alternating- 
current transmission. 

The further troubles due to capacity and inductance need only 
be referred to, since it is, of course, thoroughly appreciated that 
their absence is an inherent advantage of the direct-current 
system. It might be well, however, to hold in mind that with high 
voltages the direct-current system allows the line wires to be 
somewhat closer together with resulting economy in transmission 
towers. 

G. T. Fielding Jr. (by letter): While engineering practice 
sometimes drifts in the wrong direction, it seems as though there 
are legitimate reasons for abandonment of the original single- 
phase machinery and systems, passing of the quarter phase, and 
then gradually but surely settling down to three phase. 

Engineers and station operators have not a very friendly 
feeling toward single-phase machinery, especially in units of 
appreciable capacity. The heavy vibration under load, the 
excessively large exciting current with inductive loads, and in- 
ferior regulation do not add inits favor. The most serious draw- 
back to the single-phase synchronous motor is the lack of starting 
torque, and with units of large size difficulties in bringing up the 
speed and synchronizing in are anticipated. 

A single-phase motor caused to drop out of step by momentary 
overload or any passing cause cannot of itself regain its syn- 
chronism as can a three-phase machine, but will quickly come to 
Test. 

The cost of a single-phase machine would probably be about 
20% more than a three-phase type if figured on an all around 
equal basis. 

Though it is said that the switching would be simpler with the 
single-phase system, it is not evident from the writer’s layout in 
Fig. 4. Iv would seem that the half transformer might be ar- 
ranged to connect in series rather than in multiple in case of the 
failure of one line. The amount of power transmitted upon the 
same basis could not be doubled by making the multiple connec- 
tion, and if the line insulators were based on a liberal safety- 
factor the series combination should reasonably be maintained 
until repairs are made on the damaged line. ; gee 

While Mr. Young calls to attention some interesting points in 
making comparisons, it would seem that the disadvantages of 
single-phase machinery would weigh heavily upon whatever 
merits there may be in the transmission. 


A paper presented at the ®ist Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, Oct. 11, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I. E. E. 


THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL, WITH AND WITHOUT 
SERIES RESISTANCE, IN HIGH-TENSION SYSTEMS 


BY PAUL M. LINCOLN 


The object of this paper is to raise for discussion the question 
of grounding the neutral, a question that continually confronts 
the engineer operating an alternating-current generating, trans- 
mitting, or distributing system. The writer wishes to consider 
this question from the viewpoint of the operating engineer, since 
it is naturally he who is most interested. 

The questions that would arise in the mind of the operating 
engineer are probably these: 

1. Why should the neutral be grounded? What advantage 
would be gained, if any? and what disadvantages would be en- 
countered ? 

2. If a ground is used, shall it be at one point of the system, 
or several? 

3. Shall a resistance be used between the neutral and the 
ground? and if grounded at several points, shall a resistance be 
used in each place? 

4. If a resistance is used, how much? and what shall be its 
current-carrying capacity? 

5. What character of resistance is best? 

Let us begin at the beginning of this list of questions and 
itemize, so far as possible, the advantages and disadvantages 
of a grounded neutral. The first part of this discussion will 
deal with the general question of ground versus no ground. 
Later in this discussion the modifications introduced into this 
general question by use of resistances, multiple grounds, etc., 
will be briefly treated. 

1585 


1586 LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL (Oct. 11 


Advantages. a. Electromotive force between conductor and 
ground remains fixed and constant. 

b. Prevents cbnormal static induction on neighboring circuits. 

c. Provides opportunity for using the ground as a working 
conductor. 

d. Makes possible the detection (and immediate removal if 
desired) of any grounded portion of the system. 

e. Insures equality in the condenser current drawn from each 
phase. 

Disadvantages. f. One ground disables a part or the whole 
of the system. 

g. A proper ground is difficult to obtain. 

Discussing more in detail these points of advantage and dis- 
advantage, we find: 

Advantages. a. In practically every transmission system the 
greatest danger of breakdown of insulation exists between line 
and ground, rather than between lines; it is therefore highly 
important that the voltage from line to ground be permitted 
to assume no abnormal or excessive value. The higher the 
line voltage the greater becomes the importance of this point, 
since the factor of safety of insulation naturally decreases with 
increasing line voltage. With the neutral fixed at ground 
potential, it is impossible to obtain, between any conductor and 
the ground, more than a certain definite proportion of the 
maximum line voltage. In a three-phase system—including 
as it does practically all transmitting and distributing systems— 
the voltage between the neutral and ground is about 58% of that 
between conductors. If, therefore, the neutral be connected 
permanently and solidly to ground, the maximum potential 
that can develop between the line and ground is about 58% 
of the voltage between the conductors. With an ungrounded 
system a ground on one conductor will cause full line potential 
to develop between the two remaining conductors and ground. 

On further analysis it is doubtful if all the advantage ap- 
parent at first sight is really obtained, for it can safely be 
asserted that in the large majority of cases it is not the action 
of the steady line voltage that causes breakdowns in the insula- 
tion of transmitting or distributing systems; the voltage 
strain necessary to cause breaks in insulation is usually very 
much higher than the normal voltage applied, even in the case 
where a system is operating with one conductor grounded. The 
condition giving rise to trouble is to have superimposed upon 


a 


ee 


1907] LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1587 


the normal line voltage a so-called ‘“‘ surge”’ of such value that, 
when added to the normal strain, their resultant causes suffi- 
cient strain on the insulation to break it down. Lightning 
is the usual cause of surges, although they may be caused 
by many other things; for instance, by switching, or a partial 
ground, or a broken conductor, or a heavy short-circuit. Insu- 
lation being once broken down, the normal voltage is usually 
sufficient t) maintain an abnormal flow of current through the 
break. With the neutral grounded, a momentary break in 
insulation at one point on one conductor gives rise to oppor- 
tunity for a destructive are at that point. With the neutral 
ungrounded, before a destructive arc can take place there must 
be simultaneous breaks on the insulation of two separate con- 
ductors. The use of a resistance between the ground and 
neutral modifies these conditions, as will be discussed in a later 
paragraph. 

A very material advantage incident to this fixing definitely 
the maximum potential of conductors above ground is that it 
allows a much closer adjustment of lightning-arresters than 
would otherwise obtain; that is, the arresters can be ad- 
justed so that a comparatively small rise above normal poten- 
tial to ground will discharge across them. In an ungrounded 
transmission system it is not safe to adjust for a discharge poten- 
tial materially less than line voltage; otherwise, in the event of 
one conductor becoming grounded, the constant discharge which 
necessarily occurs over the lightning-arresters between the two 
good conductors and ground will destroy the arresters within 
a short time. 

b. An advantage incident to keeping the neutral of a trans- 
mission system at ground potential is to prevent abnormally 
large static induction by a transmission line on neighboring 
circuits. Those who have endeavored to operate a telephone 
line in proximity to a transmission line wil realize the im- 
portance of this point. It is evident, without further ex- 
planation, that so long as the neutral of a transmission line is 
at ground potential its static influence on neighboring circuits 
is practically negligible. If, however, one of the conductors 
of the line is grounded, the static induction of the remaining 
two is usually sufficient to prevent the satisfactory use of 
telephone circuits strung on the same right-of-way. Grounding 
the neutral will prevent such a condition. 

As to electromagnetic induction, it is evident that the grounded 


1588 LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL (Oct. 11 


neutral can have no influence unless the ground is carrying 
current. In that event, electromagnetic induction on neigh- 
boring circuits is increased. This increase is due to the fact that 
the return circuit through the ground, instead of being in close 
proximity to the outgoing circuits, thereby neutralizing most of 


its action, is at a comparatively great distance, making the 


inducing loop of large area and comparatively great power. 

c. In a three-phase transmission system with the neutral 
grounded both at the generating station and at a sub-station, it 
is perfectly possible to continue the transmission of power with 
one of the conductors out of commission. In this case, if the 
phases remain balanced, the ground will carry a current 1.73 
times that in each of the two remaining conductors. Further- 
more, it is perfectly possible to continue to transmit single-phase 
power with only one of the three conductors remaining. In 
fact some transmission plants make a practice of running but 
a single wire to some customers using single-phase current, and 
but two of their three conductors to other of their customers 
using polyphase currents, relying in each case on the ground 
to act as a return conductor for the normal operating current. 
Still other plants make use of the ground as a working conductor 
only in emergency. 

It must be counted as a distinct advantage in favor of the 
system with a grounded neutral that it makes available at any 
time the use of the ground as a working conductor. This does 
not mean that the ungrounded system cannot make the ground 
available, but in the latter case special switching arrangements 
must be provided, while in the former its action as a working 
conductor is practically automatic. 

The practicability of using the ground as a working conductor 
is also dependent upon the ground resistance. This is an ele- 
ment that varies largely with geological formations, soil, season, 
moisture, parallel return circuits, and construction of ground- 
plate; it is therefore difficult to make any general statement 
covering this matter. However, there seems to have been no 
difficulty in using the ground asa conductor for moderate amounts 
of power at pressures of 20,000 volts and above. 

dand f. With a grounded neutral, a ground on any conductor 
will cause a short-ci1cuit. This fact may be regarded as an 
advantage or a disadvantage, depending upon circumstances, 
and also upon the point of view of the operator. If it is possible 
by use of the grounded neutral automatically to cut out the 


1907] LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1589 


damaged conductor, and continue service to the affected part 
of the system over other lines, the grounded neutral may 
undoubtedly be regarded as an advantage. If, however, 
the grounding of the neutral means an interruption of service 
which could be avoided with an ungrounded neutral, the ground- 
ing may be justly regarded as a disadvantage. Protection of 
service is of great importance to the operator, and he is willing 
to run very considerable risks in order to give continuous 
service. That certain portions of his system are temporarily 
overloaded, or that part of his line conductors are temporarily 
undergoing an abnormal insulation strain to ground, is of no 
particular moment, so long as service is being rendered and 
the abnormal condition does not give rise to further trouble. 


-- When considering questions of protection of service, the use of 


Fic. 1 


resistance in the ground connection is at once involved; the 
discussion of this phase will be treated in subsequent paragraphs. . 
e. All alternating-current transmission lines take from the 
generators a condenser current whose volume depends upon 
the size, length, and disposition of the transmitting conductors 
and upon the voltage and frequency supplied to them. These 
currents may be considered as flowing over two paths, as follows: 
I. Through the condensers formed by the conductors as 
opposite plates, as cin Fig. 1, and 
II. Through the condensers formed by considering the con- 
ductors as one plate and the ground as the other, asat c’, Fig. 1. 
The currents flowing through capacity c are evidently inde- 
pendent of any grounded neutral conditions. Those flowing 
through capacities c’, however, depend entirely upon the po- 


1590 LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Octane 


tential of the neutral with respect to ground. With the neutral 
at ground potential, the condenser currents through c’ are 
taken equally from each of the three conductors. Assuming 
an extreme case—one of the three conductors grounded—all 
the currents through c’ are taken from two of the conductors, 
and further, the total kilovolt-amperes represented by these 
currents is double what it would be with the neutral at ground 
potential. A moment’s investigation will show this latter point. 
With the grounded neutral the total kilovolt-amperes, taken 
through capacities c’, may be assumed as proportional to 3 c’ £,’, 
where E, is the potential between any conductor and the neutral. 
Gror~ding one conductor has the effect of short circuiting one 
of these condensers and throwing a potential of E=./3 E, 
upon the othertwo. In the latter case the total kilovolt-amperes 
taken by condensers c’ is 2c’ E? = 6c’ E,?. 

When the charging current is large compared with the gen- 
erator capacity, it is probable that such an increase in its volume, 
as well as taking it largely from two of the three conductors, 
would cause a serious unbalance in voltage between phases. 
This seems to be a good, though not controlling, reason for main- 
taining the neutral at ground potential. 

g. A satisfactory ground is very difficult to obtain. The 
antiquated idea that the ground is of zero resistance, because 
it is of practically infinite cross-section, has long since been 
recognized as an error. In case of grounding to a buried plate, 
most of the resistance of the ground occurs in the immediate 
neighborhood of the ground-plate, and the ground resistance 
depends upon the character and condition of the soil in the 
immediate neighborhood. This is to be expected on account 
of the fact that it is only in the immediate neighborhood of the 
ground-plate that the cross-section of the ground, considered 
as a conductor, is sufficiently restricted to give rise to any ap- 
preciable resistance. The conditions other than the character 
of the soil that make for a low-resistance ground are moisture 
and the exposure of a large surface of ground-plate: the larger 
the exposed surface the lower the resistance. It is this reason 
that makes water-supply systems good grounds. 

Even where good engineering practice dictates a resistance 
in the neutral, the unavoidable resistance in the ground con- 
nection is not so valuable as it might be, because of its extreme 
variability. The difference of the seasons, as well as the drying- 
out action of any ground current that may flow, will cause large 


EEE 


1907] LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1591 


variations in ground resistance. However, on high-potential 
systems the presence of even the maximum amount of resist- 
ance that is contingent upon good construction is rarely suffi- 
cient to cause trouble. 


MopiricaTions Due to Use or RESISTANCE AND MULTIPLE 
GROUNDS 


If an operating engineer has come to the conclusion that his 
neutral should be grounded, the next question is, naturally, 
that concerning the number of places to ground—whether it 
shall be at his power plant or plants only, or at other points 
where neutrals can be obtained. The answer to this question 
usually depends upon the object sought in grounding. If it is 
the use of the ground as a working conductor, there must natu- 
rally be grounds both at the generating and receiving points. 
- On the other hand, if the object is to prevent an abnormal! 
voltage rise on any conductor, due to the grounding of another, 
then the grounding of the neutral at one point is sufficient 
and in most cases preferable. 

In some methods of connection the problem is still further 
complicated by the entire absence of an available neutral. In 
any three-phase system a delta connection of transformer or 
generator windings gives no opportunity of obtaining a neutral. 
A delta connection requires the use of a separate autotransformer 
connected across proper points of the delta, from the winding 
of which a tap may be brought out for the neutral connection. 
A three-phase star-connected generating system has of course 
the neutral at the star connection. If, however, a bank of 
transformers has both the primary and secondary connected 
in star, the star connection is not necessarily at the neutral point. 
In this case the neutral is practically free to move around any- 
where within the three-phase triangle; in case of a dead short- 
circuit on any transformer, the voltage on that particular one 
disappears and the two remaining transformers assume the 
whole potential of the line, being then virtually connected in V. 
If, therefore, the star connection of a star-to-star group of 
transformers be connected to ground, it does not follow that 
the neutral is grounded; if one side is connected in delta and the 
other in star, then the star connection can be treated as a fixed 
point at the center of the three-phase triangle. In a star-to-star 
group proper conditions can be assured only by connecting the 
star point on either side to a fixed neutral: such for instance 


1592 LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


as the connection of the star of the transformers to the star 
point of the generating system. The star point of the generating 
system being fixed at neutral, this also fixes the transformers. 

The question as to how many points of a system shall be 
grounded is naturally influenced by the above considerations. 
The final answer, however, must be dictated by considerations 
which depend upon the reason leading to making any ground 
connection. 

Probably the most important question in connection with 
this whole matter of grounding the neutral is that as to the 
use of resistance between the neutral and ground and the amount 
of resistance that is best. In considering this question the fol- 
lowing analysis is pertinent. In any polyphase system, so long 
as each conductor has the same capacity and ground, the same 
insulation from ground, and a balanced load, the neutral will 
remain at ground potential, whether it is connected te ground 
or not. In other words, so long as conditions on the trans- 
mitting or distributing system remain normal there is no occa- 
sion for grounding the neutral, as nothing will be accomplished 
thereby. The object sought in grounding the neutral is to take 
care, not of normal conditions, but abnormal ones. It is the 
first thought of the operating engineer to maintain his service, 
and he therefore installs automatic circuit-breakers and other 
devices to protect his system in case of an abnormal condition 
arising, The abnormal conditions that may arise are: 1, short- 
circuits; 2, open circuits; and 3, grounds. 

1. Short-circuits. By short-circuits is meant accidental con- 
nection in any manner between conductors of opposite polarity. 
It is evident that under this condition the behavior of automatic 
devices is in no way influenced by grounding the neutral, so 
that the consideration of this contingency is not pertinent to this 
paper. 

2. Open circuits. In a three-phase line, with the neutral 
grounded at both generating and receiving stations, the ground 
will, under normal conditions, carry no current, even though the 
ground be of zero resistance. If, however, one of the con- 
ductors should break, the ground immediately begins to carry 
current. If induction or synchronous motors are being used at 
the receiving end, the three-phase relation will be approximately 
maintained, the degree of approximation depending upon the 
ground resistance and upon the relative motor load to non-motor 
load. If the neutral is grounded at one point only, an open 


————— 


1907] LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1593 


circuit in one conductor would have an effect no different from 
that which would take place if the neutral were not grounded, 
except that the distribution of charging current between con- 
ductors will be somewhat disturbed and more or less of this 
current would pass through the ground connection. 

3. Grounds. A ground is the most frequent abnormal con- 
dition that is encountered, and also is the one most affected by 
grounding the neutral. With the neutral connected direct to 
ground, another ground on any conductor means a short-circuit ; 
the action of automatic circuit-breakers will then take place 
accordingly. The amount of current that will flow through 
such a short-circuit can be limited by inserting resistance, and 
practically the only object of resistance is to cause such a lim- 
itation of current. 

The flow of excessive currents, such as would take place 
were there no resistance, is detrimental for several reasons. 
It throws an unnecessarily great strain upon the circuit-breakers 
which are called upon to interrupt the current. The large 
current flow which takes place may cause a phase distortion and 
drop of voltage which may, in turn, be sufficient to cause syn- 
chronous apparatus on the line to drop out of step. Almost 
invariably an arc takes place at the point of grounding of con- 
ductors, and an excessive current will cause excessive destruction 
at this point. A dead short-circuit on any system causes a 
heavy shock due to the tremendous currents, and a consequent 
tendency to distort the windings of any synchronous apparatus 
connected to the system. 

All of these objections can be overcome to a greater or less 
degree by resistance in the neutral. Increased neutral resistance, 
however, while it limits the current flow through a grounded 
conductor and overcomes the above objections, can do so only 
by allowing an increase in the potential of the two good con- 
ductors above ground while the current flows. If the object in 
grounding is to prevent such an abnormal rise, the inserting 
of resistance tends to defeat that purpose. The choice of the 
proper resistance becomes a question of compromise between 
the disadvantages of going to either extreme. There seem to 
be good reasons for adopting a ground resistance which would lie 
between the following limits: on the one hand, large enough 
to prevent a severe shock to the system; or the voltage on the 
affected phase dropping to a point where the synchronous ap- 
paratus will drop out of step. This consideration would dictate 


1594 LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Octraa 


a resistance that will not allow more than, say, three times full- 
load current at the most to flow through the armatures of the 
generators supplying the circuits. On the other hand, the re- 
sistance must be small enough to permit sufficient current to 
flow to trip the heaviest circuit-breaker on the system. 

In all alternating-current circuits there is present a condition 
equivalent to a neutral grounded through a certain amount of re- 
sistance, in that static capacity exists between any conductor 
and ground. The longer the line and the higher the voltage 
and frequency, the lower the resistance in the equivalent circuit 
having a resistance in grounding connection. The effect of a 
grounded neutral, either with or without resistance, is, in case 
a conductor becomes grounded, to pass a current of greater 
or less volume through the affected conductor and into the 
ground. The effect of the static capacity of conductors to 
ground is exactly the same, the difference being that no cur- 
rent passes into the ground at the generating station, and that 
the phase relation of the current through the capacity to the 
electromotive force producing it are not the same in both 
cases. The static capacity of an overhead conductor to ground is, 
with ordinary line construction, from 30 to 50 per cent. greater 
than that between conductors. Assuming a fault that makes 
the affected conductor of the same potential as the ground, the 
affected conductor would take roughly 50 per cent. more charging 
current than the unaffected ones. It may be noted also that 
the total kilovolt-amperes of charging current in all conductors 
would be increased about 33 per cent. Where the normal charg- 
ing current amounts to a considerable percentage of the total 
generating capacity, as it would in long, high-voltage, high-fre- 
quency lines, it will be seen that the condenser effect has the 
same action as a moderately-low ground resistance. 

If a ground resistance be used, the question of its current- 
carrying capacity is an important one. Since current is drawn 
through the ground resistance only during emergencies, its ca- 
pacity should be chosen to meet the maximum that any emer- 
gency can throw upon it. Usually the time during which cur- 
rent will flow is limited to the time required to trip a circuit- 
breaker, probably not more than a few seconds at most. The 
quantity of current that will flow as a maximum is also fixed as 
that which is required to trip out the most heavily set circuit- 
breaker. The question of current carrying capacity is therefore 
one which depends upon the character and setting of the safety 
devices used. 


1907] LINCOLN: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1595 


As to the character of resistance, permanency is the most 
essential. Considerable latitude is allowable in the amount of 
resistance, but that latitude does allow variations of many 
hundred per cent., such as past experience has shown is apt to 
take place with graphite mixtures or similar structures. A me- 
tallic resistance is satisfactory but has the objection of being ex- 
pensive and bulky when the voltages involved are high. This 
problem has not yet been satisfactorily solved, but it. seems 
probable that where high resistances are demanded—200 ohms 
or more—some form of non-metallic resistance will be found of 
sufficiently permanent character to be satisfactory. 

In the preceding matter the writer has endeavored to present 
some of the considerations to be taken into account when this 
question of grounding the neutral arises. There areso many vari- 
_ ables connected with this matter that it is impossible to draw 
any conclusion that is general in its nature. The proper action 
to be taken depends upon the specific conditions surrounding 
each individual case. 


A paper prestnied at the datst meeting of thé 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, October rr, 1007. 


Copyright, 1907, By A. I. E. E, 


THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 


BY F. G. CLARK 


During the consideration of the design of one high-tension 
installation, the question of grounding the neutral was inves- 
tigated, and resulted in a decision to ground the neutral points of 
the generators through a limiting resistance. It was my privilege 
to contribute to that design and to recommend that this resist- 
ance be omitted. The reasons for grounding, the reasons for and 
against the resistance,and facts relatively to operation covering 
a period of over two years may therefore be of interest in con- 
nection with this discussion. 

The installation comprises a power station centrally located 
for the ultimate conditions prescribed, but unfavorably to the 
preliminary electrification of a steam railroad requiring seven 
sub-stations, and undergound and overhead transmission of 
three-phase current at 11,000 volts and 25 cycles. Fig. 1 will 
give an idea of the present and ultimate conditions. The future 
circuits from the power station will be underground cables. 
There are now five 250,000-cir. mil three-phase circuits leading 
from the station undergound to No. 1 cable house. From there 
the feeders are aerial to sub-station No. 3. This will be seen 
to be the distributing point for the present installation. Two 
aerial circuits lead to sub-station No. 5. At cable-house No. 2 
the circuits are submarine, and again at cable-house No. 3 
submarine cables are used from the north end of the draw to the 
sub-station. 

The feeders leading east and west from sub-station No. 3 are 
underground. Three circuits lead to sub-station No. 2, and from 
there two circuits lead to sub-station No. 1. Three circuits 
lead to sub-station No. 4 and are overhead from cable-house 

1597 


1598 CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


No. 4. From No. 4 sub-station one circuit leads direct to sub- 
station No. 6 and another to portable station No. 1, and from 
there to No. 6. At portable station No. 1a three-phase No. 2 
conductor branch leads to sub-station No. 7. One circuit leads 
from sub-station No. 4 to portable station No. 2, and from there 
a single-phase No. 1 conductor circuit leads to transformer station 
No. 1. A typical location of this system and length of feeders 
is shown in Fig. 2. 

The protective features are low-equivalent lightning-arresters, 
inverse time-element relays on circuit-breakers, a peculiar method 
of operating exciters, and the grounded neutral. A voltage 


STATION a 
= TRANSFORMER STAN?) 


CABLE HOUSE NO.1 


PORTABLE S.S.N°2 


S.S.N° 7 CONVENTIONS 


OVERHEAD CABL 
----— UNDERGROUND 


cs 


PORTABLE —-— SINGLE PHASE OVERHEAD CAB] 
5.3.N meme ARRESTER HOUSES 
DISTANCES 
—. | MILE 
os “ 
c- 
o— 
E— 
S$.S.N°6 ioe 
= CABLE HOUSE No.2 a 
rages 4 . — 
Dy S.S..Ne 5 {= 
J — 
K— 
tl 
“— 
0 ewe 


Fic. 1 


regulator has lately been installed and has a bearing on the situ- 
ation. 

The lightning-arresters-are used in connection with choke- 
coils at the ends of all overhead feeders. They tend to protect 
the undergound feeders, the station apparatus, and, to a certain 
extent, the aerial transmission lines from the effects of lightning 
and from static strains due to switching, grounds, orshort-circuits. 
The arresters are set to discharge at 8500 volts. The pressure 
between the ground and two conductors of the 11,000-volt, 
three-phase system, with one conductor grounded, is 11,000 
volts when the neutral is not grounded; it is 6380 volts when the 
neutral is dead grounded; it is between 6380 volts and 11,000 


1907] CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1599" 


volts with resistance in the neutral conductor. The locations of 
the lightning-arresters are shown in Fig. 2. 

The inverse time-element relays afford protection against 
overloads, and are used in connection with the oil circuit- 
breakers on all feeders. The speed in opening the circuit-breaker 
varies with the increase of current in the circuit controlled. 

The relays at the power station ends of the feeders are set 
éo allow a maximum of current to flow for a period of five sec- 
onds before they actuate the control circuits to open the cir- 
cuit-breakers. This is just above the amount of current allowed 
as a maximum per feeder. . The relays at the nearest sub-station 
are set to open the circuit-breakers on feeders to more remote 


TRANSFORMER 
STA.N2 1 


Ped 


PORTABLE $,S:N9 2 / 


CONVENTIONS 


——TRANSMISSION LINE 
«=---- RAIL ROAD © 
% LIGHTNING ARRESTERS 


"CABLE HouseN'2 ¢ 
~ + 3% 


soe 


sub-stations in four seconds for the same current. The relays in 
the sub-station next in progression are set for three seconds 
with the same current, and so on. The relays are connected 
with series transformers, one on each leg of the circuit con- 
trolled, to open the circuit in the event of one leg grounding. 
The excitation of the generators depends upon induction 
motor-generators, with no steam exciter or battery reinforce- 
ment, although both are available for starting up in case of an 
interruption. The induction motors are supplied from the 
main generators through transformers and have about 2.5% 
slip. The output of the exciters depends upon the power-factor, 
which decreases with the voltage. The excitation automatically ° 
‘ceases whenever the bus-bar voltage goes below 5,000. 


1600 CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


A voltage regulator tends automatically to increase or de- 
crease the generator excitation as its voltage lowers or rises, 
The effect of this is to increase the intensity of the accidental 
overload and therefore hasten the automatic interruption. 
This is a radical change from the usual practice of holding up 
the exciter voltage under all conditions. It means a few more 
power station interruptions, but less damage when short-circuits 
occur, and less time lost in sub-stations. 

The foregoing explanation of the protective features of this 
installation may appear to be irrelevant to a discussion of the 
grounded neutral, though it hasa bearing which should not be over- 
looked. The neutral point of each generator is led to a bus-bar 
through a fourth pole of the generator circuit-breaker. Theneutral 
bus-bar is connected to one end of a cast grid resistance suitably 
insulated. The other end of the resistance is connected to a 
ground-plate located in earth kept moist with salt water. There 
is 6.7 ohms resistance, or sufficient to allow 1000 amperes in the 
neutral circuit in the event of a ground. A current of 1000 
amperes will raise the temperature of the resistance approxi- 
mately 1000° fahr.in one minute. An ammeter on the switch- 
board indicates the amount of current in the neutral connection. 
A pilot lamp lights whenever 50 amperes or more flows through 
the resistance. This lamp remains lighted until an auxiliary 
circuit is opened, and has been instrumental in determining 
the number of short-circuits that were also grounds. 

The grounded neutral affords protection against rises in poten- 
tial and high-frequency oscillations due to grounds. An ac- 
cidental ground will establish a power circuit supposedly suffi- 
cient in all cases automatically to open the circuit-breaker. 
Were the neutral not grounded, the accidental ground would 
allow the charging current to be discharged through it, tending 
to burn the insulation and cause a short-circuit in the case of an 
underground cable, or burn off the conductor in the case of an 
aerial line. The electrostatic charge would also tend to cause 
oscillations in the case of underground cables and possible 


breakdowns at various points of the system. This has occurred. 


during the operation of several high-tension systems. 
Grounding the neutral has the disadvantage of increasing 
the number of short-circuits, and consequently the interruptions 
of service. These short-circuits are dangerous to power-station 
apparatus, as they may cause breakdowns involving greater 
expense and loss of service than the possible resonance troubles. 


EEE 


1907] CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1601 


There are conditions peculiar to each installation which have a 
bearing on this question, and these conditions determine the neces- 
sity of a resistance in the neutral circuit, the amount of resistance 
to be used, and whether more than one generator should be 
grounded. 

In systems where synchronous converters have low synchro- 
nizing power, the voltage drop due to grounds will cause the con- 
verters to drop out, and a limiting resistance must be placed in 
the grounded neutral. In other systems the generator coils 
are insufficiently braced, and resistance in the neutral is a pre- 
ventive for generator breakdowns. In stations where the 
generators are driven by slow-speed reciprocating engines the 
neutral points cannot be connected to a common bus-bar on 
account of cross-currents. A resistance would be required 

-for each generator or that one generator be run with its neutral 
grounded. 

A consideration of these facts led to a decision to use a re- 
sistance of 6.7 ohms in the power station of the installation 
described. It was anticipated that this resistance would allow 
sufficient current to flow through any ground which might occur 
to clear the system of that ground, and that grounds on two legs 
or short-circuits would be cleared by the inverse time-element 
relays, or, if very close to the power station, by an interruption 
of service due to the “killing” of excitation. The events of 
operation indicate that the neutral ground is essential and that 
the other protective features perform their functions suitably. 

Conditions obtain, however, which mitigate against the 
proper operation of this protective feature. One instance will 
serve to illustrate this point. A wire-rigged sloop which had 
been anchored near the cable-house No. 2 draw (Fig. 1) drifted 
out of the channel until a stay-line connected with one leg of 
the transmission circuit, causing a ground. The ground held 
for about three minutes, when the boat shifted and another part 
of the rigging connected with a second leg, causing a short-circuit 
which opened the circuit-breaker. The current in the ground cir- 
cuit was approximately 400 amperes, which was not sufficient to 
open any of the circuit-breakers between the ground and the 
power station. It was enough, however, to burn off an anchor 
chain and several of the wire stays on the boat, and to raise 
the temperature of the neutral resistance to that of a bright-red 
heat. 

When the ground occurred, the neutral point rose from 0 to 
about 2700 volts, and the two ungrounded legs were approxi- 


1602 CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


mately 9000 volts to ground. The electrostatic condition very 
nearly approached that which would obtain in an ungrounded 
system. The lightning-arresters being set at 3500 volts, began 
to discharge, and oscillations were a possibility 

The inductive drop and the resistance of the ground, added 
to the set resistance of 6.7 ohms, were sufficient to limit the 
current to 400 amperes. With the 6.7-ohm resistance out, 
the current would have been above 650 amperes, or sufficient 
to have opened the nearest controlling circuit-breaker in less 
than one second. The inductive drop was about 1000 volts 
and the resistance through the ground sufficient to divert the 
current to the numerous telephone lines as paths of least resist- 
ance. The fact that telephone troubles are not coincident with 
grounds of short duration would seem to indicate that induction 
is not an important factor in this particular case. There have 
been no indications of trouble in telephone or telegraph lines 
due to induced potential. 

Some action must be taken to prevent this ground current from 
causing trouble. The grounded neutral is a preventer of electro- 
static troubles and therefore shoud be retained. The resistance is 
a positive detriment to receiving the full benefit of this effect. 
It should, therefore, be omitted whenever the local conditions 
will permit. In the case described this can be done without 
perceptibly increasing the hazard to apparatus. This would 
enable the relays to clear any of the grounds that have occurred 
within five seconds. 

A transmission line may be so long that its total drop and 
the resistance of the ground will produce a condition analagous 
to that described. Such a case would require special treatment, as, 
for example, providing a low-resistance neutral conductor leading 
toa point safely within the area normally protected by the neutral 
ground at the station, and equipping the feeders to points be- 
yond, so that they may be opened byarelay. The relay could be 
actuated by a small current flowing in this extension of the neu- 
tral, and in phase with current flowing in one leg of the feeder. 
Such a condition does not obtain on the system described and 
we can therefore be reasonably assured that in removing the 
neutral resistance we will have removed the cause of trouble in- 
cident to the grounded neutral. 

During two years’ operation there have been over 70 short- 
circuits. About 25 of these have caused sub-station interrup- 
tions, and 6 have been close enough to cause power-station 


1907] CLARK: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1603 


interruptions. About one-half of these short-circuits showed 
a ground connnection. There have been 10 grounds, of which 
the neutral ground cleared 8. One held for four minutes and 
one for three minutes, both developing into two-wire short- 
circuits. 

It is quite probable that in a system operating with under- 
ground cables only, there would be no outside disturbances in 
connection with sustained grounds. The lead sheaths which 
are generally bonded together in manholes would provide the 
path of least resistance for the ground circuit. The ultimate 
installation will require undergound cables, and except for 
the greater power effects, and greater charging current, will 
alter the present situation but little. 


A paper presented at the 22st Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York. October 11, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E.E. 


EXPERIENCE WITH A GROUNDED NEUTRAL ON THE 
HIGH-TENSION SYSTEM OF THE INTERBOROUGH 
RAPID TRANSIT COMPANY 


BY GEORGE I. RHODES 


The chief circumstance which led to the grounding of the 
neutral of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company’s high- 
tension system was the serious nature of cable burn-outs. As 
a rule the detectors gave indication of a ground on one leg 
of the system from five to thirty minutes before the circuit- 
breaker opened, but on account of the large number of feeders 
connected it was practically impossible to isolate the damaged 
feeder before the short-circuit occurred. In a total of twelve 
operating burn-outs, the grounded cable was located but twice 
in time to prevent trouble. 

During the period between the first grounding of the cable 
and the final short-circuit, the system was operating under ab- 
normal potential conditions, the two ungrounded phases oper- 
ating at full delta potential of 11,000 volts above the ground. 
Undoubtedly the potential between phases was raised to a cer- 
tain extent by the increased charging current due to unbalanced 
potential conditions. The presence of abnormal potentials dur- 
ing this period of ground was evidenced by static discharges in 
the power and sub-stations that could hardly be accounted for 
by the operation of two legs at 11,000 volts above the ground 
potential. 

The charging current which flowed to ground through the 
fault before the short-circuit between phases was large enough 
seriously to injure the insulation of all three conductors, so 
that when the burn-out occurred it was so severe that the 
oil-switches usually opened with considerable violence. Surges 

1605 


16L6 RHODES: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


were started which at times caused other burn-outs to follow, 
in one instance causing a very disastrous shutdown.* The 
cable itself was always considerably burned, all three legs being 
grounded and usually burned off. At times the conductors 
were blown apart several inches. With the faults in this con- 
dition, it was quite impossible to locate them by the bridge 
method, and it was necessary to open a great many manholes 
before locating the trouble. 

In view of the fact that one phase of a cable almost invari- 
ably grounded some time before short circuiting, it was decided 
to ground the neutral through a resistance of proper magni- 
tude to allow sufficient current to flow to remove the grounded 
feeder without affecting the system in any other way. It is 
obvious that with only two feeders to a sub-station, a ground 
on one of them will open the circuit-breakers of both, and that 
the certainty of continuous operation.of the sub-station increases 
with the number of feeders. 

The scheme of grounding the neutral as originally proposed 
was as follows: the neutral point of each generator was con- 
nected to a common or neutral bus-bar through a disconnecting 
switch and a current transformer. The transformer operated 
a relay on the main switch of the generator, The neutral bus- 
bar was grounded through a resistance of about six ohms in 
each power station, making about three ohms’ resistance be- 
tween the neutral of the combined system and ground. In case 
of a ground, the maximum possible current was 1000 amperes 
per rheostat, all of which was generated by the grounded gen- 
erator. The relays on the feeder-switches were set to operate 
instantaneously at 3800 amperes, and the generator relays at 
about 900 amperes after five seconds. Under these conditions 
it was to be expected that a ground on a cable would instantly 
remove it from service before any other disturbance could result. 

‘The neutral rheostats were of the iron grid type having a re- 
sistance of about six ohms and a reactance at 25 cycles of about 
0.3 ohms. They were made up in sixteen series sections, each 
insulated from the others and from the ground by porcelain 
insulators, Each section was made up of six series groups of 
cast ‘iron grids connected two parallel and twelve series per 


group. Each grid was made up of ten bars 0.25 in. by 0.75 in. 


*See paper on ‘‘ High Power Surges in Electric Distribution Systems 
of Great Magnitude,” by C. P. Steinmetz, Transactions A. I. E. E., 1905, 
also discussion on same. 


1907] RHODES: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1607 


by 6 in., and two bars 0.25 in. by 0.75 in. by 4in. A number 
of extra grids were used to adjust the resistance to the required 
value. The rheostat will carry 1000 amperes for two minutes, 
a capacity far in excess of anything that would be required 
in service. 

With the scheme as above outlined, very serious trouble was 
encountered from the triple-frequency cross-currents in the 
neutral connections. These neutral currents fluctuated very 
rapidly from nothing to one-half full-load current per generator. 


Fic 1.—Neutral rheostat. 


Upon synchronizing there was a very large rush of current in 
the neutral, so large in fact that with four generators running 
it was very difficult to synchronize a fifth with its neutral 
grounded.* These cross-currents had such serious effects on the 
operation of the system that the scheme of grounding the neutral 
was delayed for a time to allow making some experiments. 

An oscillographic study of the neutral currents was made 

* “Experience with a Grounded Neutral on a High Tension Plant,” 
C. W. Ricker, Electric Journal, September, 1906. 


1608 RHODES: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


and has been describedfully.* The records (Figs. 2and3) proved 
without a doubt that the currents were caused by irregularities in 
the angular velocity of the prime movers and unequal excitations 
of the generators. It wasfound that the insertion of resistance in 
the neutral connections of the generators would reduce the cur- 
rents to a safe value. This, however, was undesirable on ac- 
count of the variable resistance in the ground circuit, depend- 
ing on the number of generators in operation. Furthermore, 
resistances of sufficient magnitude and capacity would have 
occupied too much space to be used in these power stations. 
It was finally decided that full protection could be obtained 
by connecting but one live generator at a time to the neutral 
bus-bar in each power station. The transformers in the neutral 
connections were also disconnected from the relays on the main 
generator switch. Even with but one generator grounded in 
each power station, the interchange of current through the 


_ 


IRA 


Fic. 2,—Combined effect of excitation and fluctuation of angular velocity. 
Curve 1, Potential between phases. Curve 2, Neutral current. 


neutral rheostats, and the tie-line between the stations, is at 
times large enough to make it undesirable to open the neutral 
disconnecting-switch of a live generator. 

The Interborough Rapid Transit Company’s system was 
operated for about three and one-half years without a grounded 
neutral, in which time about 150 miles of cable was operated 
for three years and 330 miles for one-half year. Since ground- 
ing the neutral, the system has been in operation for two years 
with about 330 miles of cable. 

Previously to grounding the neutral, there were twelve dis- 
tinct operating burn-outs, and since then there have been six- 
teen. It appears from this fact, that grounding the neutral 
has had no material effect on the number of burn-outs. This 
is as was expected. 


| 
*“ Neutral Currents of a Three-Phase Grounded System,” Electric 
Journal, July, 1907, 


_ a eEeEEOEEEeeoOooeeee 


_ ee 


1907] RHODES: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 1609 


Of the twelve burn-outs occurring previously to the grounding 
of the system, four shut down the power station; one other shut 
down two sub-stations; and four more shut down one sub- 
station. Of the other three which did not shut down the sub- 
station, two were isolated in time to prevent a short-circuit. 
In all of these cases, there were five or six cables to a sub- 
station. During most this period only the Seventy-fourth 
Street power station was in operation, so that there were no 
tie-line troubles. | 

Of the sixteen burn-outs that have occurred since grounding 
the neutral, not one has caused a shutdown of either power 
station; eight have shut down the sub-station fed by the cable, 
two have caused one other feeder to open, and six have caused 
no disturbance other than the opening of the switches of the 
feeder in trouble. In three of the cases in which the sub-station 
was shut down, the tie-line between the power stations opened, 


2 


YA 


Fic. 3.—Effect of fluctuation of angular velocity. Curve 1, Potential 
between phases. Curve 2, Neutral current 


but without disturbing the operation of either. Of the eight 
burn-outs which shut down the sub-station, three were stations 
having three feeders each, one having four feeders, two having 
five feeders, and two having six feeders. Of the other eight 
burn-outs which did not shut down the sub-station, two were 
sub-stations having three feeders each, two having four feeders, 
two having five feeders, one having six feeders, and one having 
seven feeders. 

Previously to the grounding of the neutral, the switches 
operated with explosive violence on the short circuiting of a cable, 
at times throwing oil and burning the contacts. Under present 
operating conditions, however, the switches always open very 
quietly, so quietly in most cases that it was necessary to install 
a tell-tale to indicate when there had been abnormal current 
through the neutral rheostats. 

Before grounding the system, in all burn-outs the cable was 


1610 RHODES: THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct--28 


so badly injured that it was impossible to make any bridge test, 
and it was necessary to open a great many manholes before 
locating the trouble. Of the sixteen burn-outs that have oc- 
curred since the grounding of the neutral, fourteen of them were 
in such condition that the fault could easily be located by the 
Murray loop method. In most of these cases but one leg was 
grounded. Inthe two cases where all three legs were grounded, 
making the bridge test impossible, the burn-out was the 
result of very severe mechanical injury. Locations of the 
fault are always made to within a duct length, even on the 
longest cables of more than 45,000 ft. The saving in time 
effected by this accurate predetermination of the trouble by 
the bridge method is an important factor in the time necessary 
‘to restore a sub-station to normal conditions of operation. 

It is probable that something would be gained by increasing 
. the resistance between the neutral and ground. When the 
scheme was first contemplated, it was planned to ground the 
neutral through six ohms, there being at that time but one power 


station. Now with two stations in parallel the effective ground-- 


ing is through but three ohms, making the possible grouhd cur- 
rent twice that originally planned for. There is no doubt but 
that with the resistance as first decided upon there would have 
been fewer sub-station shutdowns. 

From the above data, it is seen that grounding the neutral 
of this system through a series resistance has been quite suc- 
cessful. It has greatly reduced the disturbance from cable 
burn-outs and the time necessary to restore an injured cable 
to service. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1611 


Discussion ON “THE GROUNDED NeutRAL,” at New YorK, 
OcTOBER 11, 1907 


r Peter Junkersfeld: In November, 1900, the Commonwealth 
Electric Company of Chicago in one portion of its territory put 
into commercial service the first extensive system of four-wire, 
three-phase distribution at 4000-2300 volts. This 60-cycle 
system was soon installed in all the company’s outlying and 
suburban territory, and has since grown to such an extent that 
the total length of three-phase or equivalent line of feeders 
to-day aggregates 525 miles, of which 55 miles is underground, 
the remainder overhead. The neutral of this 60-cycle system 
has always been connected solidly to ground. 

In May, 1902, the Chicago Edison Company raised the volt- 
age of its three-phase, 25-cycle transmission system from 4500 
to 9000 volts, and put into service its first star-wound generator 
delivering 9000 volts directly to the bus-bars without step-up 
transformers. This system now aggregates 270 miles of three- 
conductor cable and is practically all underground, only nine 
miles being overhead. The neutral of this 25-cycle system has 
been connected to ground from the beginning. During the last 
year a part of this system has, however, been connected to 
ground through resistances. The remainder of the system 
during the last year and all of the system during the previous 
four years has been connected solidly to ground. 

In June, 1907, the Chicago Edison Company put into com- 
mercial service its first 25-cycle underground line operating 
at 20,000 volts. The transformers were connected in delta at 
the receiving end and in star at the sending end. The neutral 
at the latter is connected solidly to ground. 

The two companies mentioned above have recently been 
consolidated into the Commonwealth Edison. Company, which 
thus operates a total of about 800 miles of three-phase overhead 
and underground lines at pressures of 4,000, 9,000, and 20,000 
volts in the various zones and for different purposes, but on 
all of which the neutral either with or without a resistance is 
connected to ground. The experience in operating high-ten- 
sion systems with the neutral grounded has, therefore, been 
considerable, and the engineering policy on this matter has 
been definite for several years. The experience, however, in 
grounding the neutral through a resistance is still somewhat 
limited. The various steps in this experience and development, 
and some of the reasons, with the conditions now existing, may 
be of interest in this discussion. 

The 4,000—-2,300-volt, four-wire, three-phase system of dis- 
tribution in the outlying and suburban sections permits standard 
2080 to 115-230-volt line transformers, thus giving a single- 
phase, three-wire lighting and small power service at 115-230 
volts. It was felt that such a system of distribution would be 
unstable and would permit annoying and serious voltage fluc- 


1612 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


tuations if the neutral of the primary system were not grounded. 
After considerable discussion the neutral was finally grounded, 
under the writer’s direction, just before the first four-wire, 
three-phase circuit or feeder was put into service. 

Among those who at that time (November, 1900) argued 
most strongly against the grounding of the neutral but who 
later, after making some experiments, became one of the most 
ardent advocates, was Mr. George N. Eastman, who, early in 
1901, had occasion to make certain tests which led to a series 
of very careful investigations at a time when accurate informa- 
tion on this subject was very meagre. Some of the results of 
these investigations were presented by him in a paper before 
the Boston convention of the National Electric Light Asso- 
ciation in May, 1904. These investigations, with the first 
few years of actual experience, practically fixed the engineer- 
ing practice on this particular matter in the two Chicago 
central station companies, who have, since 1900, continued to 
develop their three-phase transmission systems with the neutral 
grounded. 

-We have no direct comparative experience with an un- 
grounded system under exactly similar conditions. The re- 
sults from this grounded system have, however, been very satis- 
factory. There have been practically no underground cable 
burn-outs on this 60-cycle system, and comparatively little 
trouble on pot-heads or on the other overhead construction. 
The total number of transformer burn-outs from all causes, 
including lightning, overloading, and defects in the apparatus, 
during the last two years, has been about 1.4%, and 1.2% of 
the total number of line transformers in service. The per- 
centage expressed in kilowatt capacity connected has thus far 
been even less. Similar, four-wire, three-phase systems with 
grounded neutral have during the last few years been installed 
in so many cities of the country that this practice has become 
quite well known. The grounding of the neutral on three-phase 
systems for general distribution has also become very common, 
at least in parts of Europe. 

The 9,000-volt, 25-cycle transmission system in Chicago is 
used exclusively for transmission to sub-stations, not for 
general distribution. With the exception of a few induction 
motor driven exciters, all equipment consists of synchronous 
converters or synchronous motor-generators. 

The present total continuous capacity of the two principal 
and two subsidiary generating stations is about 110,000° kw. 
The neutral of the 25-cycle, 9,000-volt system is, however, 
grounded directly only in the Harrison street and the Fisk 
street stations. The latter at present contains ten turbo- 
generator units, the first four of which were originally rated 
at 5,000 kw. and the last six at 9,000 kw. each, with the usual 
overload guarantee. The transmission lines from the two 
stations are operated normally as “radial” systems; that is, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1613 


outgoing lines are independent of each other and are not tied 
together at the sub-station ends. 

_ The neutral of this system was connected‘ solidly to ground 
in May, 1902, when the first 9,000-volt generators were started 
at the Harrison street station. Since the Fisk street station 
was put in service, the transmission system has at times been 
operated all in multiple; at the other times, sectionalized. 
In the latter case each part or section of the system had a 
grounded neutral so as to avoid having two non-synchronous 
sections without a grounded neutral on each. At present, and 
during a large part of the last year, the entire 25-cycle system 
has been operated in two approximately equal sections, desig- 
nated “System A” and “System B.” Previously to this 
time the Fisk street station contained but four turbo-generator 
units, to which have since been added six units of a larger 
type with slightly different characteristics. Partly for this 
reason, and partly for the reason that. with the rapidly increasing 
~ generating capacity it might be well to limit, in case of acci- 
dents, the possible flow of current to ground, there was installed 
a 0.5-ohm resistance between the neutral of each of the four new 
generators and ground. The four older generators are left 
with the neutral grounded solidly on each. Normally, the two 
sets of generators are operated on separate sections of the 
system, one of which was thus operated with, and the other 
without, a resistance in the neutral. 

During the previous four years, or since May, 1902, the 
neutral had always been grounded solidly, and with satis- 
factory results. In case of a cable breakdown between con- 
ductors and ground, each cable was usually disconnected from 
the bus-bars by the overhead relays and oil-switch before the 
remaining two conductors became involved, thus permitting a 
quick and accurate location test by the Murray loop method. 
As the generating capacity of the system increased, and as it 
became necessary to have heavier overload and longer time- 
limit setting of relays on outgoing lines, the destructive effects 
of cable breakdowns have apparently been somewhat greater, 
although this may be due in part to the very heavy setting of 
relays. This indicated the desirability of limiting in some 
manner the current flow in case of accidents to decrease the 
destructive effects. It was also desirable to secure some com- 
parative data on this matter of resistance or no resistance. — 

Four possibilities naturally presented themselves: 1, the design 
of generators with a lower short-circuit current; 2, grounding 
the neutral on only one of the groups of generators running in 
parallel, leaving the neutral open on the remainder so as to 
limit the flow of current to ground to the short-circuit current 
of the one generator; 3, the introduction of one large resistance 
between the neutral bus-bar from a group of generators and 
ground; 4, the introduction of a separate resistance between 
the neutral of each generator and ground. Partly for reasons 
previously stated, the latter method was adopted. 


1614 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


Both of the first two methods mean holding the neutral 
where it belongs, while both of the last two methods will cause 
displacement of the neutral with attendant rises in potential, as 
has been pointed out in Mr. Lincoln’s paper. 

In four cases of trouble, each affecting from 10 to 30% of 
the total service at the time, during the two years before the 
installation of resistances, and during the one year since, the 
effects might or might not have been modified if the neutral had 
been grounded with instead of without a resistance. In all the 
other cases of trouble during this period, and in most of the 
cases during the three years previously, the use of a resistance 
in the neutral would probably not have effected any improve- 
ment. In most instances the overload relays on feeder oil- 
switches were set at 100% overload for six seconds, although 
in some cases they were set at 100% for three seconds. The 
generator switches are all non-automatic and are opened only 
by the switchboard operator. 


During the last five and one-half years, even after eliminating 
all cases of trouble which have no bearing on this subject of 
the grounded neutral, in addition to the four serious cases above 
mentioned, there have been quite a number of minor cases 
which havea strong bearing on the matter of the grounded neutral. 
Especially is this true of cable troubles which, during the last 
three years, have averaged only two cases per one hundred miles 
per year. This includes all troubles on 9,000-volt cables from 
known or unknown causes, except those due to external injury 
to the lead sheaths. . 


Notwithstanding these results, we have started some inves- 
tigations with the oscillograph, and have also installed for pur- 
poses of observation some spark-gaps at different points on 
the system, all with special reference to securing more accurate 
information for guidance in the development of the 20,000-volt 
underground system into suburban districts. These investiga- 
tions have not yet progressed sufficiently to afford much definite 
information. There are some indications that in the Fisk street 
station the spark gap when set for 100% above normal, dis- 
charges occasionally when the oil-switch on the distance sub- 
station end of the line is opened. This instantaneous rise of 
potential occurs even with the neutral grounded, and may be 
due to the stored energy of the line. We have thus far not been 
able to find rises of potential coincident with any other switching 
or other operation. 


Our investigation and experience with one system for five 
years, and another system for seven years, leads us to believe, 
that between operating with the neutral grounded or not 
grounded, under our conditions the grounding of the neutral 
is the better policy. As to whether or not any additional 
benefits would be secured by grounding the neutral through 
‘a resistance, we feel that our experience is still too limited, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1615 


Philip Torchio: The papers presented by Mr. Rhodes and 
Mr. Clark give the experience of two moderately high voltage 
Systems operated with grounded neutral. I shall contribute 
to their discussion the experience of the New York Edison 
Company’s system which is also operated at moderately high 
voltage, but without grounded neutral. This comparison is 
not offered in a spirit of criticism of the admirable work de- 
scribed by Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Clark, but as an expression of 
opinion of those who have not yet found enough evidence of 
either the desirability or the necessity of grounding the neutral 
of 6600-volt, high-tension systems operated underground. 

The Edison system operates at 6600 volts, three-phase, 25 
cycles. The cables are mostly paper insulated, with 49 in. 
insulation between conductors and 48 in. between each con- 
ductor and ground. The feeders are operated on the radial 
system, not connected in multiple at the sub-stations. The 
system was started in 1898 with about three. miles of high- 
~ tension cable, and grew steadily from year to year to the present 
system of about 200 miles. During the nine years’ operation 
we have had 66 cable troubles of all kinds; of these, 32 developed 
during operation, and 34 were found either by the periodic in- 
sulation test or by inspection of the routes. 

Table I gives a summary of all kinds of troubles divided into 
three classifications. In the first column are the operating 
troubles proper, cable troubles manifested during operation of 
the system; in the second column are cable troubles manifested 
when the cables were out of service, by periodic or special in- 
sulation test; the third column shows defective cable troubles 
found by visual inspection by the line inspectors.. It must be 
noticed that the Edison Company’s high-tension cables are dis- 
tributed over all the city, where a lot of underground work has 
been done, causing a lot of interference and damage to the 
cable line. The table shows that there have been, in nine years, 
32 operating cable troubles, 14 of which were due to mechanical 
injury. The majority of the troubles in the rest of the cases 
were in splices due to defective installation, etc. 

If we eliminate the 14 troubles due to mechanical injury, and 
make allowance for the great amount of interference attendant 
to the subway conditions under which the New York Edison 
Company operates, we see that the number of troubles per mile 
of cable per year compares favorably with Mr. Rhodes’ figures 
for the Interborough system. As to the extent of trouble caused 
by the cable burn-outs, in no case was the cable subway damage 
more than nominally. 

We have been fortunate up to now in not having a severe 
blowing up of the subway cables, as mentioned by Mr. Rhodes. 
_In one instance only the cable short-circuit was so severe as to 
overtax one of the old circuit-breakers—not of standard make— 
which caused a shutdown of the generating station. The short- 
circuit was caused by the driving of a pick into one high-tension 


1616 


THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 


TABLE I 


[Oct. 11 


CLASSIFICATION oF ALL HiGcH-TENsION CABLE FAULTs FOR THE PER10op BETWEEN 
NoveEMBER 14, 1898, AND OcToBER 8, 1907, INCLUsIvVE 


Manifested by opening of 
circuit-breakers during 


Manifested by low 


Reported by line 
inspectors 


1. Injured in manhole by 


operation insulation test 

i 1. In splice 
rae arc cable burn-out 
2. Nail driven into cable} 2. In splice 2. Nail into cable 


(extraneous injury) 


3. In sharp bend in man- 
hole 


; 4. In damaged sleeve (ex- 
traneous injury, cause un- 
known) 


5. In bend in small man- 
hole 


6. Wet end of cable (ex- 


3. In splice 


3. Damaged in manhole by 
alternating-current 
cables burn-out 


4. In cable (steam exhaust)] 4. In cable (extraneous in- 


5. Moisture in old rubber 
splice 


6. Moisture in old rubber 


traneous injury due to water|splice 


leak) 
7. In splice 


_ 8. In bend (extraneous in- 
jury) 


9. In bend—defective 


10. In cable (possibly ex- 
traneous) 


11. In splice 


12. Drill forced through tile 
duct into cable (extraneous 
injury) 


_ 13. In splice (extraneous 
injury) 


_ 14. In splice (extraneous 
injury due to water leak) 


15. In cable 


16. In splice 


17. In cable 


18. In splice 


_ 19, In cable (extraneous in- 
jury) 


20. Crowbar driven into 
cable (extraneous injury) 


21. Puncture in straight 
section of cable (connected 
with station trouble) 


7. Moisture in old rubber 
cable (extraneous injury) 


8. Nail driven into top con- 
ductor (extraneous injury) 


9. In cable (steam leak) 


10. In splice (steam leak) 


11. In defective splice 


12. In cable (steam leak) 


13. At splice end 


14, At splice 


jury) 


5. Damaged by outside par 
ties doing subway work 


6. Damaged by outside par 
ties doing subway work 


7. Damaged by outside par 
ties doing subway work 


8. Burn-out Fortieth street 
manhole, injury from adja- 
cent cables 


1393 Armor damaged by ad- 
jacent burning cables 


_ 10. Armor damaged by ad- 
jacent alternating current 
burning cables 


_ 11. Armor damaged by ad- 
jacent burning cables 
anne PSs Rega SE ks L 
_ 12. Armor damaged by ad- 
jacent burning cables 


13. In cable, damaged by 
adjacent burning cables 
eee Sep ae 
_ 14. Splice damaged by ad- 
Jacent burning cables 
beni cine rete. TE 

15. Punctured splice prob- 
ably due to surges 


16. Damaged by outside 
parties doing subway work 


17. Damaged by adjacent 
burning cables 


18. Damaged _ by outside 
parties doing subway work 


19. Damaged by outside 
parties doing subway work 


20. Damaged while doing 
excavation work 


lighting 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1617 


ee 


Manifested by opening of 


circuit-breakers during Manifested by low Reported by line 
operation insulation test inspectors 


_ 22. Ground detector acted 
in conjunction. Drill forced 
through tile duct into cable 
(extraneous injury) 


_ 23. Ground detector acted 
in conjunction. Moisture in 
straight cable due to extrane- 
ous injury 


24. Ground detector acted 
in conjunction. Moisture in 
straight cable due to extrane- 
ous injury) 


25. Defective splice 


26. In easy bend in cable 
—connected with station 
trouble 


27. Defective splice 


28. Burns and mechanical 
injury to cable 


29. Damaged by adjacent 
burning low-tension cables 


30. Ground detector acted 
in conjunction. Defective ca- 
bie in duct 
31. Defective splice con- 
nected with operating trouble 


32. Ground detector acted 
in conjunction. In straight 
cable—connected with station 
trouble 


14 Mechanical injury 5 Mechanical injury 19 Mechanical injury 
8 At or in splice 9 Atorin splice . 1 At or in splice 
4 In bends in manholes 
6 In cables 


32 Total 14 Total) 20 Total 


RECAPITULATION 


38 Mechanical injuries 
18 At or in splices 

4 In bends 

6 In. cables 


66 Grand total. 


cable in proximity to the generating station. In other cases 
the relays and oil-switches cleared the short-circuited cable 
without affecting appreciably the bus-bar voltage. 

Mainly on account of the large storage-batteries on the low- 
tension system, the effects of cable troubles have been consider- 
ably minimized. For the last three years all the cable troub- 
les lowered the distributing voltage an average of 5% for 45% 
of the total system load with a total elapsed time of reduced 
pressure of 2.5 minutes. I omit other data corroborative of the 
general good results of the operation of this system and its 
freedom from violent disturbances due to cable burn-outs. 
Furthermore, in every instance when we had a burn-out or dis- 


1618 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


turbance of any kind, we fully investigated all attendant cir- 
cumstances and tried to figure out how the results might have 
been modified by having the neutral grounded. In no case of 
cable burn-outs did we find that the results might have been 
sensibly improved by the presence of the grounded neutral. 
On the other hand, station and sub-station troubles, which are 
usually minor but considerably more numerous than cable 
troubles, would in some cases have been made very serious by 
the presence of the grounded neutral. In the papers presented 
by Messrs. Rhodes and Clark no mention is made of these troub- 
les inside the stations. But I think that they have an impor- 
tant bearing on the subject, and in most of the plants would 
weigh very heavily against the adoption of a grounded neutral 
without resistance, or with low resistance allowing ground 
currents considerably in excess of the condenser capacity cur- 
rent of the system. 

Aside from these practical experiences, there is the theoretical 
side of the matter, which has been very ably treated by several 
prominent engineers in this country and abroad.* But un- 
fortunately we know very little of the direct bearing of the 
theories applied to the operation of the underground systems 
now under consideration. And in this connection I want to 
make clear that none of the experiences with grounded neutral 
given here to-night claims that the grounded neutral. per se, 
will prevent violent surges on the system when under the provo- 
cation of a heavy two-wire short-circuit; that is, the grounded 
neutral has been made to assist in making the operation of 
certain mechanical relays and switches reasonably more positive 
than they would otherwise be. If for any reason a heavy 
two-wire short-circuit takes place, the presence of the grounded 
neutral is ineffective to change the results from those that 
would take place if the neutral were not grounded. Further- 
more, by grounding the neutral without resistance, a dead 
short-circuit occurs on a cable every time the insulation 
resistance of the cable is reduced enough to let an appreciable 
amount of current pass to ground, while without a grounded 
neutral the operator might have time to disconnect the de- 
fective cable from the system before the ground had developed 
into a short-circuit. Now, the elapsed time between the be- 
ginning of the deterioration of the insulation around one con- 
ductor and its final dead grounding is usually very long. It 
may be several minutes, or hours, or days. 


* Steinmetz, American Institute Electrical Engineers, 1901; Kennelly, 
Electrical World and Engineer, 1901; J. D. Nies, Electrical World and 
Engineer, 1902; Thomas, American Institute Electrical Engineers, 1902; 
G. N. Eastman, Western Electrician, 1903; G. H. Eastman, Electrical 
Congress, 1904; David, Societe Int. des Electriciens, 1904; Blondel, 
Societe Int. des Electriciens, 1905; Brylinski, Societe Int. des Electriciens, 
1905; Steinmetz, American Institute Electrical Engineers, 1905; Thomas, 
American Institute Electrical Engineers, 1905; Patchell, Institution of 
Electrical Engineers, 1905-1906. ; 


EEE er 


1907] - DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1619 


The speaker and Mr. T. W. Varley have taken advantage of 
this fact and have developed a device now being applied to the 
New York Edison system by which it is expected to obtain all 
the advantages of selecting and disconnecting the defective 
cable considerably before the condition of a dead ground is 
reached. The device can be operated on a system with or 
without grounded neutral. The device takes advantage of 
the unbalance of condenser capacity current on the cable 
system when the insulation of any conductor begins to deterio- 
tate. 

In Mr. Lincoln’s paper there is shown very clearly the con- 
dition of an electrostatically balanced system, when there is 
no faulty insulation to ground; a similar diagram in Fig. 1, 


oa 


+Norma/ conditien- |-Gbnormal conditions | Some os Fig2.- Dead 
Sclaned system. | Lowering of insulationte | later period after 4 we 
ground to a limit abowing | greater deterioration | es 
on appreciable amount of | Of faulty insulation ie. 
current to tiow te. High | Moderate resistance ground. 


resistance ground, 


Fig.1. Fig.2. Fig.3. 
Sum of condenser Sur of condenser 
cerrents = Zero. currents > zero. 
Omount of unbalanced 
current returns via 
grourd. 


The time elapsed in the deferioration of insulation resistance fo ground 1s nor 
Cefinitely Known but undoubtedly is comparatively tong, extending to several minutes } 
ond possibly hours or days. 


PLate I 


Plate 1, shows approximately the amount of capacity current 
between conductors, and the condenser current between each 
conductor and ground. The sum of these condenser currents 
under normal conditions is zero. If the insulation resistance 
to ground begins to get lower, and an appreciably small amount 
of current flows between one conductor and ground, there will 
be an electrostatic disturbance that will cause the different 
amounts of condenser current to vary proportionately to the 
discharge from the conductor to ground as shown in Fig. 2. 
It should be noted that the sum of the condenser currents is 
greater than zero, and the amount of unbalanced current would 
now have to find: another path to the bus-bars, and that path 
is through earth. 


1620 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL © fOct. 11 


Fig. 3 shows the same condition as Fig. 2, but the resistance 
to ground is still lower, almost a short-circuit of conductor to 
ground, Fig. 4 shows the condition of a dead ground, as when 
all the capacity current of one conductor is discharged to ground. 

Referring to Plate II, the device consists of a current trans- 


CONDENSER, 


LEAD SHEATHING 
TRANS FORMER 


CONDENSER 


Nn 
z| 
TRANSFORMER |] 
4 
ay ict 
1p, Wes 
hay 


Prats II 


former applied to the Icad sheath of each feeder. The secondary 
of the transformer is connected by means of a condenser to a 
relay, which is intended to ‘operate either the circuit-breaker 
or a signal similar to a telephone drop relay of standard make, 
as desired. This plate shows how the transformers are applied. 


1907] “ DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1621 


On each feeder we are putting on three of these transformers; 
ey are about 6 in. long, and cover about 18 or 20 in. of the 
cable. 

In Plate III are indicated a set of three-phase bus-bars and 
four high-tension feeders. The feeders can be extended to any 


LEAD SHEATH 
oR 
GROUND 


REPRESENTING THE 

CONDENSER OCTION 

BETWEEN 4S CONDUCTOR 
ANO GROUND. 


— NORMAL CONDITIONS. — 


Ce Elee: eZ 
Ly 


Ss) 


— UNBALANCED CONDITIONS. — 


Pirate ITI 


number. The circies indicate diagrammatically the cable, and 
the segments of circles inside indicate the capacity current to 
ground of each conductor; and they are made equal, which 
indicates that the capacity currents in each cable are balanced 
and no current flows through the earth. The conditions of un- 


1622 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL +* [Oct 11 


balanced capacity current as illustrated in Plate I, Figs. 2, 
3, and 4 are covered by the arrangement of the devices 
shown in Plate III. When there is a dead ground, the con 
denser current of that wire disappears and the condenser current 
of the other two wires has grown to twice the size. The return 
for these unbalanced currents is shown by the arrows via earth 
to the faulty insulation and the grounded conductor of the 
defective feeder which takes the unbalanced current of all the 
other feeders on the system. By applying the relay in prox- 
imity to the bus-bars. we detect the sum ot the unbalancing of 
all the feeders By this means we expect to detect trouble 
long in advance of the short-circuiting of the feeder which is 
going to be in trouble, and give plenty of time to the operator 
to disconnect it from the system. ‘This relay can be operated 
as well on an ungrounded system as on a grounded system: 
and even with the grounded system I think it will be a valuable 
auxiliary, especially if the grounded neutral is made through a 
high resistance limiting the ground current to a few amperes 
(in the order of the condenser capacity current of the system 
to ground) sufficient to discharge the cumulative electrostatic 
charges, and also hold the ground current as soon as the insula- 
tion at any point of the system lowers sufficiently to allow an 
appreciable flow of cuirent. 

N. J. Neall: I have chosen for my part of the subject a few 
comments on the effect of grounding the neutral with or without 
resistance, from the lightning protective apparatus standpoint. 
An analysis of the papers presented to-night shows that one 
deals with comparatively low-voltage underground service; the 
other intimates the needs of a high-voltage overhead system. 
We are not much concerned about the lightning protection for 
an underground system, for certainly no arrester or arrester 
scheme between the conductors and the ground will be of 
great benefit, perhaps of no benefit at all, in the line of the 
disturbances that have been described to-night. Endeavors 
have been made to protect across phases; perhaps that is the 
remaining and only form of protection required for underground 
service. Lightning protection for high-voltage overhead sys- 
tems has as much bearing on the selection of a grounded neutral 
as any other one element of operation. Moreover, the mere 
benefit of grounding is not the sole consideration in selecting 
the type of apparatus or the method of cperation. For example, 
in an underground system there are a number of conductors 
in multiple, so that the elimination of one conductor does not 
cut out the entire service. 

The situation can be looked at from the standpoint of design 
or manufacture and also the standpoint of operation. Manu- 
facturers I think, follow rather than lead in the adoption of 
high-voltage protective apparatus; so that as the contemplated 
voltages for commercial service get higher, it is very doubtful 
whether one can obtain arresters as quickly as one can get appar- 


1907] . DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1623, 


atus suitable for this service. Now, to ground the neutral would 
. throw the arrester ratings into a group which has been already 
only partly developed. Moreover, the question of insulators 
for these high voltages is also an important element in the selec- 
tion of the methced of connection. Neither a grounded neutral 
nor an ungrounded neutral will save the puncturing of insulators 
by high-voltage strains induced by lightning. I do not refer 
to direct strokes, but to those concentrated charges that are 
known to exist on transmission lines and do not seem to be able 
_to pass more than a few hundred feet at most from the point 
-of application. It has been thought in times past that these 
charges jumped over the insulators, but.it often happens that 
they cause punctures. Now, if a line be grounded, with resist- 
ance or without, and the charge just described takes place— 
discharging over the insulator—a short-circuit follows which 
might be of sufficient strength to shatter the insulator. If it 
be an ungrounded system, it might be merely a static discharge 
of the local condenser current, so to speak, which will not have 
- heat enough and will be so attenuated that it will not cause 
anything further than a temporary disturbance of that particular 
part of the line. ; 

A grounded neutral, moreover, does not help lightning- 
arrester operation. Theoretically, it throws more of a strain 
on the arrester at the time ot operation than if the line were 
not grounded. The arrester, as Mr. Lincoln has said, can be 
insulated for a lower voltage and closer adjustment to the 
normal voltage of the line, but it is a grave question whether 
that is not offset by the fact that the arrester helps to form at 
the time it operates a partial short circuit on the system,’ pro- 
vided the resistances do not give way under the strains, which 
is most doubtful. 

Another element of line operation that is not helped very 
much by grounding is the telephone plant. One of the most 
serious conditions in long-distance transmission at the time 
of any disturbance is the interruption of telephone service 
within the transmission system itself. 

If a resistance must be used—and there seems to be in certain 
cases good reason why this has been selected—it seems an easier 
matter to select a resistance suitable for low voltage than one suit- 
able for high voltage. Those of us who have studied the resist- 
_ ance for lightning protective apparatus know that a resistance of 
small size, of small cost, of large current-carrying capacity, and’ 
current-choking capacity, isa very hard thing to get. The same 
problem in only a modified way exists in the high-tension system 
‘with the grounded neutral. I donot believe it is possible to pre- 
dict any positive method of operation, but I should say, judging 
from the progress of the art, that if the apparatus can be made 
sufficiently. insulated to be connected in delta, and lightning- 
arresters can be found that will operate nicely at that voltage, 
and proper provision is made for the sectionalizing of the line 


1624 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL . [Oct. 11 


or cross-sectionalizing of the line if it happens to be a parallel 
circuit, that a minimum of interruption of service can be ob- 
tained. If in addition to this the progress of the art of light- 
ning protection will indicate relief from a great deal of these 
induced disturbances that I have spoken of, and if the promise 
of electrolytic lightning-arresters can be fulfilled, a great deal 
that I have just said about lightning protection will be very 
happily modified. 

John B. Taylor: The grounded nuetral with or without re- 
sistance must be regarded as a protective device, and for this 
reason the trend of discussion seems to be similar to discussions 
on lightning-arresters and choke-coils. Apparatus or devices 
which become operative only in emergency conditions cannot 
be subjected to tests that will absolutely determine their value 
for the emergency condition, hence the reported results of 
successful operation from plants where the neutral is grounded 
and also-where it is not grounded. 

Mr. Lincoln speaks of obtaining a neutral connection from 
‘an auto-transformer connected to proper points of the delta.” 
I have had occasion to make up stable artificial neutral points 
where no neutral is availabie on any of the apparatus, but 
my arrangements could not be described in his terms and I ask 
Mr. Lincoln to show us a diagram of the arrangement he has in 
mind. 

In discussing the proper value of resistance in the neutral 
lead, Mr. Lincoln states that this resistance must be such as 
to. pass sufficient current to trip the heaviest circuit-breaker. 
This requirement appears proper for feeder distribution systems 
which have already been referred to as “ radial feeders,’ but 
these should be considered as a special rather than a general 
case. The general case where it will be found desirable to 
make use of resistance in the neutral, is a system mainly of 
underground cables, supplying a number of sub-stations, having 
two or more cables which are parallel on the sub-station bus- 
bars as well as on the main station bus-bars. A consideration 
of this interconnection of cables will readily show that the 
current flowing to ground at the cable fault will divide according 
to the resistance of the various branches, part flowing from the 
main station over the faulty cable which has to be cut out, 
the rest flowing by way of healthy cables, sub-station bus-bars, 
and faulty cable from the sub-station end. In general, then, 
the limited current must be at least twice that at which the 
circuit-breakers are set, and in addition to this there must be 
a liberal allowance for combined effects of conductor resistance, 
resistance at the fault itself, resistance of earth return, and 
drop in voltage at the generator. This requirement makes it 
difficult to make an entirely satisfactory application of the 
neutral resistance to systems that have heavy feeders and at 
the same time fluctuating load, so that only limited generator 
capacity may be at times in service, especially in the small 
hours of the night, 


— os nena 


1907] ' DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1625 


From the record of cable breaks, in Mr. Rhodes’ paper, I 
have figured out the number of breaks per mile of cable per 
year. I think it a matter of interest that Mr. Junkersfeld’s 
figures on cable breaks, on a 9000-volt system in Chicago, for 
100 miles of cable per year, are very nearly the same. From 
Mr. Rhodes’ figures the number of cases of burn-outs per mile 
of cable per year are slightly greater since the neutral was 
grounded. While the purpose of the ground in this plant is to 
secure selective operation of switches, yet I should look for a 
reduced number of burn-outs. With the resistance, grounds 
are more quickly removed, with consequent reduction in time 
of increased voltage strain on the whole system. Possibly the 
records do not cover a sufficiently long time to eliminate the ele- 
ment of chance; it is also possible that the increased number 
of faults since the resistance was installed are due to trouble in 
the joint, etc., incidental to the installation of a number of 
miles of new cable. 
_ Mr. Clark’s experience with neutral resistance is certainly 

interesting and I hope that he can give us some more data on 
the following points. What is the resistance of the plate 
ground? Why have they not availed themselves, in addition 
to the plate, of the extensive system of water pipes, etc., which 
is generally available in the neighborhood of any large genera- 
ting plant? We have very little data on resistance of circuits 
with different earth terminals, and if Mr. Clark can advise how 
much the neutral resistance (given as 6.7 ohms) is increased by 
the earth resistance at the plate, we shall be indebted to him. 
Talso hope that Mr. Clark will tell us the material of the neutral 
resistance, as cast-iron heated up to 1000° fahr. will practically 
double its resistance with corresponding reduction in current 
allowed to pass. : 

The assumption that the resistance will pass 1000 amperes, 
apparently makes no allowance for resistance in the rest of the 
circuit. Obviously, if conditions were such as to permit the 
flow of 400 amperes—and this is insufficient to trip the circuit- 
breakers—the neutral resistance could not be expected to 
accomplish much under these adjustments. I will ask Mr. 
Clark to tell us what the circuit-breakers are set at? and whether 
or not parallel feeders are interconnected at sub-station bus-bars? 

I am also interested to know how Mr. Clark distinguishes 
alternating curreut shunted into telephone lines from alter- 
nating current with the same frequency induced in telephone 
lines. It is of course quite possible to have this current in 
telephone lines due either to fall of potential between two 
points in the earth, or due to induction, and I hope Mr. Clark 
will give a little more data on the local conditions showing 
that the alternating currents are due to conduction rather than 
induction. f 

Cari Schwartz: On account of the many variables connected 
with grounding the neutral of a three-phase generating and 


1626 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


- distribution system, a careful study of the individual conditions 
should govern a decision as to: 

1 Whether the neutral should be grounded or not. 

2 Whether directly or through resistance, and 

3 If resistance be used, its amount and proper connection. 

In the system referred to in the following discussion, the 
neutral is grounded through resistance, but partly owing to 
the fact that the system has been in operation for a compara- 
tively short time, not very extensive experience has been 
- gained. The only statement which perhaps can be made is that 
so farno trouble has occurred to reason against the arrangement 
adopted, nor have objectionable features appeared. There are 
two. power stations, ultimately to contain six units of 5000 
kilowatts, 11,000 volts, three-phase, 25 cycles each, and eight 
sub-stations, one power station with 20,000-kw. capacity, and 
three sub-stations in operation at the present time. 

The neutral ground connections are arranged as follows: 


$00,000 Ci 


Fics t 


Fig. 1. A bus-bar of ground potential, 500,000 cir. mils, grounded 
at both ends, runs through the station. To this are connected 
the neutrals of the individual machines through separate re- 
sistances. Disconnecting knife-switches between machines and 
resistances allow their separation as may be required. 

The ground plates are of copper, about 20 square feet, and 
buried deep enough to be always under salt water. Current 
transformers are inserted in each neutral, and also in the ground 
connection. The secondary leads of the neutral current trans- 
formers are brought to the main operating switchboard and 
ammeters can be inserted in the circuits by means of plugs. 
For the neutral ground connections, however, the two am- 
meters are located on a record board in the office of the load 
dispatcher. 

The former instruments are of little importance, while the 
latter indicate any ground or abnormal condition in the system 
and are used as ‘trouble indicators.” The neutrals of two 


—— 


EEO eee 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW .YORK 1627 


adjacent generators can be connected together by a tie-switch 
which is ordinarily kept open, and closed only in case one 
machine alone is running in a station, as one resistance alone 
would not allow sufficient current to flow to trip the feeder- 
switch relays. 

The resistances are constructed of cast-iron grids, set in iron 
frames on porcelain insulators, and enclosed in fireproof brick 
compartments, with proper ventilation. The resistance of each 
of them is about 19 ohms, so that with a difference of potential 
between phases and ground of 6300 volts, about 330 amperes 
can flow through each resistance. From two to four resist- 
ances are to be used in parallel at one time. 

There appear to be a few points in favor of the arrangement 
outlined, as follows: 

1. It will be noted that two resistances, equal to about 38 
ohms, are always in series between two machines, and experi- 
ence confirms that practically no cross-current flows between 
_ the machines at the time of synchronizing or otherwise. A 
heavy, 75-cycle, cross-current flows if the neutrals are tied 
together directly, unless the field current can be adjusted to 
avoid this condition. 

As Mr. Rhodes points out on the third page of his paper, 
these cross-currents may have a very serious effect on the opera- 
tion of the station and interfere more or less with synchronizing 
of the machines. For instance, with a load of 1800 kilowatts 
on each of two generators, 90 and 160 amperes field current 
respectively, a cross-current of 130 amperes was observed. 
With 120 amperes field current on both machines, and 2100 and 
600 kilowatts load, respectively, the cross-current was 605 
amperes. In both cases the neutrals were tied together solid. 

The difference in load in these particular instances was not 
very large, but the figures indicate the conditions to be expected 
with a greater difference or with improper field adjustment. 
This cross-current disappeared entirely with the resistance of 
_ 38 ohms inserted. 

2. The main bus-bar has ground potential like all resistances 
and apparatus connected thereto and not in use. This would 
not always be the case were resistance inserted between the 
main bus-bar and ground. 

3. The arrangement allows the testing of either ground con- 
nection; one of these can be opened any time for this purpose. 

4. As not all the resistances are required for normal operation, 
the others serve as a reserve in case of a burn-out. 

5. The amount of resistance to be inserted into the neutral 
ground connection can be sufficiently varied to suit different 
operating conditions, at the discretion of the operating super- 
intendent. Son 

C. W. Stone: With an ungrounded system a short-circuit 
is expected to open the feeder-switch. If the neutral of that 
system were grounded without a resistance, it would contribute 


1628 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Wctenia 


to the chance of a short-circuit, because one phase to ground 
means an equivalent to a short-circuit and a consequent shock 
to the apparatus. It seems advisable, therefore, to put in a 
resistance to cut down the amount of current existing at this 
time, and for this reason I have always contended that the 
resistance should be inserted in the neutral. 

In one of the papers it is stated that it seems inadvisable 
to put in a resistance for each unit, resulting in a variable re- 
sistance according to the number of units in service. This is 
true. But it seems to me that a larger current flowing through 
the circuit is not serious if there are more machines in circuit, 
and the relative effect on the system is no greater than if with 
the single resistance and only one machine. 

Mr. Lincoln mentions the different points for grounding a 
system. I think it a bad plan to ground at more than one 
place. I know of one case where a lighting system was operated 
with the ground, not only in the main station, but in different 
sub-stations; and when a car started up in an outlying district 
the fluctuation in the lights was serious, due to the flow of 
direct current on this grounded connection, the neutral being 
a better ground return than the rails. 

If the neutral be grounded on a high-tension system, and 
an automatic switch be used, three current-transformers will 
be necessary instead of two—and current-transformers are 
not the best things to use in a high-tension system. 

Mr. Lincoln leaves wide latitude in the selection of the type 
of resistance. I think that care should be taken in selecting the 
type of resistance. I note in both of the other papers that iron 
grids have been used for the neutral resistance. I think this 
is objectionable, because there is no doubt but that there is a 
certain amount of reactance with the iron grid. Reactance in 
series with the condenser action of the cables is not good, as 
we all know. It therefore seems best to use some resistance 
with practically no reactance. In the case cited by Mr. Junkers- 
feld, they carefully avoided the iron grids and put in german- 
silver ribbon. 

F. B. H. Paine: There are places where it is desirable to 
use a high resistance in the neutral in order to limit the current 
to a certain small amount, regardless of the amount of energy 
being sent out, or the number of generators in service. There 
is no difficulty in operating the main switch with this limited 
neutral current if a current transformer is placed in the neutral 
and connected through a relay to operate the main switch with 
the predetermined current in the neutral. 

There is one case where it is desirable that the sub-station 
neutral at the end of the line be connected to ground through 
a resistance as well as that of the power station; that is, where 
this sub-station is connected to the source of power through 
fuses or other automatic apparatus which may open one leg 
of the circuit and leave the other legs connected, thus permitting 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1629 


the electromotive force of the unconnected wire to soar accord- 
ing to the static capacity of the line, transformer, connections 
etc. and resulting in injury to the sub-station transformer. 
_Chas. F. Scott: One point has received but little considera- 
tion, and that is the automatic circuit-opening devices. Relays 
and circuit-breakers have been mentioned, but their importance 
and their bearing upon the question now under discussion have 
not been fully brought out. One of the purposes of grounding 
the neutral is to facilitate the cutting out of a defective circuit. 
The presence of a permanent ground and the amount of resist- 
ance which may be inserted in it for limiting the current when 
one of the circuit wires becomes grounded are, therefore, very 
intimately related to the automatic opening devices. These 
devices are of various kinds. There must first of all be a dis- 
criminating, selective instrument which can recognize the con- 
ditions under which the circuit should be opened. Such an 
instrument may act upon overload or upon reverse current and 
it may incorporate certain time-elements. This device trans- 
mits its indication, usually through a relay, to the circuit- 
breaker. The circuit-breaker should be one which will act in- 
stantly and smoothly, cutting out the damaged circuit so 
quickly that the operation of the other circuits will not be ap- 
preciably affected. The action must be practically instantaneous 
in order to prevent a drop in potential on the system in general, 
which would affect the running of synchronous apparatus. 
The opening devices must, therefore, provide for action not only 
in case of a ground on one wire but also when there is a short- 
circuit between two of the wires. The whole matter of auto- 
matic circuit-opening devices is, therefore, very intimately 
connected with the grounding of the neutral. This indicates 
some of the various ramifications of the general problem of 
grounding the neutral in an operating system. Sah 

The discussion this evening confirms an opinion that I ex- 
pressed some time ago with regard to experience with grounded 
neutrals. I said that so far as I had been able to determine, 
the managers of those plants which operate without a ground 
abhor grounds of all kinds and would not think of purposely 
grounding any point on the system. On the other hand, others 
who have operated with a grounded neutral place great re- 
liance for safety and reliability upon the fact that the neutral 
is grounded, and would not think of operating in any other 
way. 
Paul M. Lincoln: Answering Mr. Taylor’s question as to 
the method of obtaining a neutral in the delta connected system, 
there is no particular difficulty about this matter. In the ab- 
sence of a blackboard, if Mr. Taylor will imagine an equilateral 
triangle as a three-phase system, a conductor at each corner, 
then the neutral of that system will be at the centre of that 
triangle. Now, draw a line through the centre and let it 
intersect the side where it will, and call that line which you 


1630 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


have drawn through the centre an auto-transformer, with a 
number of turns proportional to the length between the centre 
and the points where it intersects the side, that will be the 
proper connection for an auto-transformer to obtain a neutral. 
For instance, if one end of the auto-transformer be connected 
to the middle of one side of an equilateral triangle, and the 
other end to the opposite corner, so to speak, then the neutral 
will occur at a tap in the auto-transformer winding such that 
there is one turn in the section between the tap and the middle 
of our equilateral triangle to two on the opposite side. 

Another point which Mr. Taylor mentioned is that in cases 
of multiple-connected feeders, a short-circuit occurring at_a 
point near the farther end of these feeders, the ground currents 
will divide nearly equally between them. 

The point is well taken, but is not at variance with the state- 
ment in my paper that, ‘‘ the resistance must be small enough 
to permit sufficient current to flow to trip the heaviest circuit- 
breaker on the system ”’. 

Mr. Stone has raised the question as to relative advantages 
of a resistance in the neutral of each generator as against one 
resistance for all. So far as the action upon the windings of 
the generator is concerned, the former is the logical method of 
operating, because the resistance in neutral of each generator 
will limit the current which can flow through that particular 
generator to the point that the resistance is adjusted for. 
However, that is not the only point to take into consideration 
when fixing the neutral resistance. Of more importance than 
the destructive effects on the windings is the damage which 


will occur at the point of breakdown. Where the current’ 


is large, the damage at the point of breakdown is bound to be 
large, and I believe that limiting the damage at the point of 
breakdown is one of the great. functions of resistance in the 
grounded neutral. Limitation of damage at the point of break- 
down requires a fixed resistance rather than a resistance depen- 
dent on the number of generators in circuit. 

George I. Rhodes: The object of the neutral resistance is to 
minimize the effect of a ground and still remove the damaged 
feeder. With a single rheostat, the possible disturbance to the 
generating system will be a maximum with one machine run- 
ning, and a minimum with all generators on the line. With 
a separate rheostat for each generator, the relative disturbance 
will be the same at all loads. In either case, the effect will be 
the same with a single machine on the line, hence a constant 
resistance will give the better results when more than one gen- 
erator is running. 

In an underground system such as that of the Interborough 
Rapid Transit Company, a ground on a cable is invariably 
followed by a short-circuit when the neutral is insulated. I do 
not see any way in which grounding the neutral can increase 
the number of short-circuits. In most of our burn-outs since 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK + 1631 


grounding the neutral, the switches have opened very easily 
without evidence of heavy currents. 

The inductance of cast-iron grids is very small. Our 6- 
ohm rheostat has a reactance of about 0.3 ohms at 25 cycles. 
In view of the large inductance of the generators and trans- 
formers on the system, this small increase can have very little 
influence on resonance effects. 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: In the early days of designing high- 
potential long-distance transmissions, engineers were very care- 
ful thoroughly to insulate every part of the system from ground. 
In later years grounding the neutral was tried, and the results 
were so satisfactory that the practice found extended accept- 
ance and many engineers since that time have recommended 
grounding the three-phase neutral. While I do not believe in 
promiscuous grounding, I recognize that in many cases a great 
advantage results from grounding the neutral of a three-phase 
system. It seems to me that the conditions in this respect are 
-about as follows: 

1. The neutral of the three-phase system should not be grounded 
where grounding 1s not necessary. Grounding the neutral intro- 
duces the liability of a number of troubles and disadvantages, 
for any ground on a conductor of a system with the neutral 
grounded is a short-circuit, and shuts down the system or a 
part of the system. Theoretically it is true that with one con- 
ductor grounded and cut off by some automatic device the 
three-phase system can be operated with two lines and the 
grounded neutral as the third. This is called the “ inverted 
three-phase system’”’. But this practice is not always feasible 
or safe; and just in those cases where grounding is especially 
desirable to maintain the electrostatic balance of the system, 
this inverted three-phase system, which is electrostatically un- 
balanced, would very likely be inoperative—it might lead to 
high-frequency oscillations and other serious disturbances. 

There is an essential difference in this respect between Western 
long-distance transmission lines and Eastern underground cable 
systems. Many things that are feasible and safe on a long- 
distance transmission line would prove disastrous in an under- 
ground cable circuit. Where the resistance of the circuit is 
large, so large that the effect of the resistance is comparable 
with that of the capacity, as is usually the case in a long-distance 
transmission line, it frequently is feasible to operate safely 
with an unbalanced electrostatic condition. It is also feasible 
to dead ground the neutral, the currents being limited, and 
oscillations, high-frequency disturbances are damped by the 
dead resistance. In an underground cable system the problem 
of keeping down the temperature of the cable, with its pocr 
heat-radiating capacity, limits the resistance of the cable to 
such values that the resistance effect is practically negligible 
compared with the capacity effect. In such a case, the damping 
effect of the circuit resistance is small, the volume of current 


1632 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


passing over an oscillating arc is large and correspondingly 
dangerous, and frequently the operation of the system when 
electrostatically unbalanced is not feasible, or at least unsafe. 
The experience with such low-resistance cable systems is then 
quite different from that with high-resistance long-distance 
transmission lines. 

Another difficulty liable to result from grounding the neutral 
is ground currents, which may reach serious values, flowing over 
the neutral, especially where several neutrals are grounded, the 
current flowing between generator neutral and generator neutral, 
or between transformer neutral and transformer neutral; or, 
which is usually the most vicious case, between generator neutral 
and transformer neutral, in the latter case overheating the 
transformer by excess current even at no load. 

Another trouble is that grounding the neutral superimposes 
upon the pressure difference between ground and line an ad- 
ditional electromotive force, usually of treble frequency, gen- 
erated in the generators or the transformers. This changes the 
wave shape of the potential difference between the ground and 
line, produces a sharp peak, and raises the potential difference 
of the conductors against the ground by sometimes as much as 
40 per cent. and more beyond their normal values. These 
higher frequency voltages may lead to serious surges or high- 
voltage oscillations, due to the building up of the voltage by 
the capacity of the circuit between line and ground being in 
series with the inductance of transformers or generators in the 
circuit of these treble-frequency electromotive forces. 

Furthermore, telephone disturbances are liable to result from 
grounding the neutral, electrodynamic induction due to the 
currents flowing over the ground, or electrostatic induction due 
to this treble-frequency electromotive force appearing between 
line and ground. I have known a number of instances where 
the ground had to be taken off the generator neutral because 
of telephone interference. 

2. The neutral should be grounded if the system cannot be 
operated safely when electrostatically unbalanced. The three-phase 
system with grounded neutral is electrostatically balanced; 
that is, all three conductors have equal potential differences 
against ground. The three-phase system without grounded 
neutral, in normal condition of operation, is also electrostatically 
balanced, and the three conductors have equal potential differ- 
ences against the ground, and the electrostatic relations are 
the same as in the grounded system. If, however, a ground 
appears on one of the phases in the ungrounded system, then 
electrostatic unbalancing occurs and the other two line conductors 
rise to full potential difference against ground. In this case 
the grounded system shuts down. 

There are two kinds of electrostatic unbalancing by ground- 
ing one conductor: first, by a continuous ground or dead ground; 
secondly, by an intermittent or oscillatory ground, as an arcing 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1633 


ground or spark discharge. The electrostatic unbalancing due 
to the continuous or permanent ground on one phase leads to 
a higher potential difference between the other two phases and 
the ground. This may be serious in a system of very high 
potential, as 100,000 volts. As a rule it would not be serious, 
but should be well within the margin of insulation safety of an 
ordinary medium or high-voltage system. The effect of this 
unbalancing is that lightning-arresters discharge when set close 
to the normal voltage, so as to afford efficient protection, because 
during ground they are receiving 73 per cent. more voltage, 
the full delta voltage instead of the Y voltage. In an un- 
grounded system, then, the precaution must be taken to arrange 
a number of additional spark-gaps so that they are automatically 
thrown into the lightning-arrester circuit, to raise the discharge 
voltage up to the voltage which in this case exists between line 
and ground. This can easily be taken care of automatically, 
as by a fuse shunting these auxiliary spark-gaps, the fuse 
- opening when at the higher voltage the arrester begins to dis- 
charge continuously. 
There is also to be considered the electrostatic induction from 
the unbalanced high-potential circuit to lower potential circuits, 
related to them by step-up or step-down transformers, which 
may give very serious potential differences; fcr instance, be- 
tween the low-potential generator circuit and ground, thus 
leading to a breakdown in the generator system, or in a primary 
distribution system, at 2200 volts, fed by the high-potential 
line. Protective devices are therefore required on these low- 
potential systems; but aside from this the continuous ground 
seems to be of minor importance, different from the intermittent 
or oscillatory ground. ‘The latter leads to serious high-potential, 
high-frequency disturbances, which may cause rapid destruc- 
tion. I believe that these are the main causes of the break- 
downs in ungrounded underground cable systems where the 
operation has not been quite successful. Here again is seen 
the great difference between the high-resistance, long-distance 
transmission line in which the oscillating discharge over an 
arcing ground is of very limited volume, due to the high resist- 
ance of the line, and the condition in an underground cable 
system of negligible resistance, where the volume of this high- 
frequency oscillation is such as to lead to rapid destruction. 
In an overhead line this oscillation may finally lead to a 
permanent ground, while in a cable system it would lead to a 
short-circuit between the phases. Those arguments against 
using isolated systems, because such an oscillating arc would 
lead to a short-circuit between phases, apply only to the under- 
ground cable system and not to the overhead line. Where, 
therefore, such an oscillating ground leads to dangerous re- 
sults in a high-potential system, it is advisable to ground 
e neutral. 
os Wherever it 1s not necessary to have more than one ground 


1634 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


on the system, it is desirable to ground the neutral at one place 
only. Several grounds are necessary where the circuit extends 
over so long a distance that the inductance between the 
ends of the circuit is too large for the ground on one end to 
safeguard the electrostatic balance against a high-frequency 
disturbance at the other end of the circuit. In this case both 
ends of the transmission line must be grounded. Otherwise 
multiple grounding is undesirable, since it introduces the danger 
of currents passing over the ground through the neutral, thus 
leading to electrodynamic induction, as on telephone circuits, 
to overloading and heating of apparatus by ground currents, and 
other troubles. Since no apparatus is in circuit at all times, 
with one ground only some method of switching the ground, 
or the use of a grounding bus-bar, is necessary to insure one 
ground being on the system. If it is desired to use the ground 
as an emergency return circuit, naturally grounds on both ends 
of the lines are needed, but I do not believe this practice is to 
be recommended, except for very low power in rather less im- 
portant lines. 

4. Whenever it is not safe to ground without resistance, resistance 
should be used in the ground circuit. Grounding without resist- 
ance becomes unsafe in a system of large power, for there would 
be a severe shock on a system with a grounded neutral if one 
phase grounds, resulting in a short-circuit. Furthermore, there 
is the possibility of an electromotive force of treble frequency 
appearing between the ground and the line, which with a dead- 
grounded neutral is liable to give rise to serious surges in the 
system between lines and ground, which are overcome by a re- 
sistance in the ground circuit. Therefore, to guard against 
surges between lines and ground, resistance is desirable in the 
ground circuit; occasionally it is absolutely necessary. In this 
case a single resistance is sufficient to dampen and so make 
harmless an oscillation between lines and ground. 

To limit the cross-currents between the grounds of different 
generators, or generators and transformers, a number of resist- 
ances are necessary, one in each generatot or transformer 
neutral. The resistance should be as high as possible so as 
to produce but little disturbance or shock on the system, and 
rapidly to damp any oscillation that may arise from a grounded 
neutral. The resistance should be low enough to act as a 
ground; that is, to insure a flow of current large enough to open 
the heaviest circuit-breaker, and thus cut off the damaged part 
of the system. 

Obviously, the resistance should be non-inductive and should 
be permanent; that is, should withstand excessive overloads, 
because the current which flows over the resistance in normal 
operation is insignificant compared with the current which flows 
in the case of an emergency as a ground on one line. I believe 
this fairly excludes the use of wire-wound resistances as liable 
to be inductive, and it also excludes the use of such mixtures 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1635 


of clay and graphite as have been mentioned, which are very 
inconstant in their resistance when exposed to high tempera- 
tures and excessive overloads. The requirements, however, 
seem to point especially to that class of resistances which de- 
crease in resistance with increase of current, the pyro-electrolytes, 
because such materials would permit the use of a rather high 
resistance between ground and neutral, thus passing very little 
current at normal operation; while in case of a short-circuit 
by a ground on one line, they rise in temperature and decrease 
in resistance rapidly and then pass a current amply large to 
open the circuit-breaker and cut out the disabled feeder. That 
would also give the advantage of introducing a time-limit into 
the operation of the resistance. 

5. I desire to draw attention to a general principle based 
on human nature, though it has some exceptions. Where the 
trend of the times is very strong in one direction; for instance, 
in favor of using induction motors instead of synchronous 
‘motors, or vice versa, or grounded neutrals instead of un- 
grounded neutrals; wherever a case occurs in which it is doubtful 
whether one should do one thing or the other, it is usually 
safe to decide against the favored practice, for the reason that 
no one can remain entirely unbiased in his judgment if the 
general trend of sentiment is in a certain direction. Where 
one therefore thinks the advantages about equal, in most cases 
he unintentionally favors that side which is the fad of the time, 
and the impartisan argument therefore would be more in favor 
of the other side. 

Frank G. Baum (by letter): The advantages of the grounded 
star connection over delta for high-voltage transmission (from 
60,000 upwards) are as follows: 


ene . : 1 
1. The transformer potential is reduced in the ratio of [7735 


= T 2 and for very high potentials the transformers may be 
designed for reinforced insulation on one end of the transformer 
only, making them safer and cheaper. 

2. The maximum potential on all insulators, switches, etc., 
is 42.2% lower than with delta connection under normal or 
abnormal conditions. 

3. The station wiring is simpler. 

4. Small consumers may be supplied with one or two trans- 
formers. tes 

A number of years’ experience with several large transmission 
systems operating at voltages from 10,000 to 75,000, both delta 
and star, demonstrate that where the systems are properly in- 
stalled there is no more difficulty in operating one than the 
other. Most of the troubles of the early transmission systems 
came from lack of insulation; with improvement in insulation 


1636 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL 


De Sabla 


NORTHERN CALIFORNIA. Centerville 
POWER CO'SLINE { 


Chids—~ Jf 


e. 


Durham *%._ 
. 


‘ 
‘ 


Ovoyille ule Yuba 
16,000 voLTs y 


Colgate Ry 
, south Yulee { 
S5/23,000 A 
Zubs2.BS Nevada’P. H, 
/Grass Vulley 


F Alta 


BY ae a 


Colusa 


A £%. ot R. 
oo" tm 


2 Folsom 


. Sacramento R. 
Santa Rosa 


Sebastapol 


Dixons 


Amador 
Vacaville 


Sutter Cr, 2009 


aoe “ad Scsase eee 
J 


San Andreas ; 


~ & Cement 
= ay ment 
N J >> 

~\\ “PCovdelia 
re * N.Tieerca Nox 

gS = be Soa ‘ 2 ngels 

San Rafiel FRTower| %, %, o, Antioch 2 

. » OF Magn “ee 
Richmond, “iy, is ny in 0 iw 

E val ©o, On, ° 

ya 2 sx lemescal Pen 6 a 


Saukalito Piedmout 
we % 


Pry e Ist & Grove 
San Pranflecgy ys Elmhurst Hurdlyn 


> Martinek stanislous 
Q ( \ 


Petaluma 


& 


QS; PNA Dn aS 


Twolumne R. 


Mtn. View 
* San Jose 


SWITCHING ARRANGEMENT 
OF 


TRANSMISSION LINES 


CALIFORNIA GAS AND ELECTRIC CORPORATION 


/ Davenport 
oSanta Cruz From Colgate to North Tower is 117 Miles. 
From Electra and Mission San Jose 95.5 Miles, 
ue “San Francisco 145 


Fic, 1—All lines not otherwise marked are at 60,000 volts. 


1907] ; DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1637 


there disappeared nearly all the troubles variously ascribed to 
static charges”’, “lightning ’’, ‘‘ ground currents ’’, ‘ tele- 
phone and telegraphic interference ”’, etc. 

Fig. 1 indicates the area covered by the California Gas & 
Electric Corporation. On this system theré are now operating 
about 75,000 kilowatts in water-power units, and about 30,000 
kilowatts in engine units. The generators are star and delta 
connected, about equally divided. The star-connected gener- 
ators are not grounded. 

Most. of the lines are star-connected for 60,000 volts, but 
other lines are operated delta-connected from the same gen- 
erators. There are about 1000 miles of circuit at 60,000 volts; 
250 miles at 10,000 to 40,000, and 125 miles from 4000 to 10,000 
volts. The distributing lines are star or delta, as desired. 
There are over 100 sub-stations connected to the lines, a great 
many of them without operators. 

The entire system is operated in parallel as a unit, and all 
the 60,000-volt lines are in parallel. The lines, transformers, 
etc., are switched in and out of service under any condition of 
load or short-circuit, and are handled in every respect in switch- 
ing as though they were 2300-volt lines. 

For very high voltage systems I see no reason for adopting 
anything but a star connection. 

O. S. Lyford, Jr. (by letter): This is a subject which has 
as many sides as there are people interested in it. The grounded 
neutral is a sort of antitoxin administered, not to prevent 
‘initial distemper, but to keep it from spreading. The danger 
is that the remedy may prove more serious than the disease, or 
that the handicap to the general elasticity of the system may 
be greater than the immunity obtained. 

When the neutral ground is adopted, its group of evils is 
accepted as the lesser of two. There is greater flexibility and 
greater convenience in the use of apparatus if the system is 
ungrounded. I refer particularly to the use of transformers 
in delta and the ability to operate with only two of the three. 
This advantage has led to the use of delta-connected trans- 
formers in the great majority of transmission systems, and this 
grouping of transformers prohibits the use of a neutral ground 
except by adding more transformers from which a neutral 
connection may be brought out. 

As has been stated, the grounding of the neutral does not 
decrease the normal working strains or reduce the number of 
initial disturbances; furthermore, it does not prevent the first 
surges which may follow an insulation failure. When used, it 
is generally in the hope that it will minimize the abnormal 
voltage between line and ground and insure prompt action of 
the automatic circuit-breakers which will cut off the defective 
circuit before the damage is extended or the system as a whole 
shut down. 

There are many cases where even the subsequent troubles 


1638 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL , [Oct. 11 


may not be prevented by a grounded neutral. Last year a 
case in point was reported which affords an illustration with 
a ludicrous side. A high-voltage line in Montana, having a 
pole spacing of 200 feet, lost a pole. Asa result the wire cross- 
ing a cattle ranch hung about four feet from the ground. A 
steer came along to investigate, put his head over the wire and 
‘got it in the neck’? literally. Steer No. 2 came along, took 
a smell of No. 1 and fell dead. Steer No. 3 smelled of No. 2 
with corresponding effect. Nos. 4, 5, etc., did likewise until 
there were half a dozen or more lying dead in a row. 

A grounded neutral would not have reduced the amount of 
fresh beef materially, for even if the circuit-breakers had opened 
after each smell the operator would have had no alternative but 
to close the breaker again, making everything ready for the 
next. With a long line extending across the country the prin- 
cipal problem is not how quickly can one cut off a defective 
line, but how quickly can the defect be removed and to what 
extent can one operate until the defect is removed. 

We had one case where one wire of a 15,000-volt three-phase 
transmission line operating a number of converter sub-stations 
broke and one end laid on the ground all day without causing 
any interruption of the service until the next morning when 
attempt was made to start up the system and it was discovered 
that only one phase was operative. This would not have been 
possible with a grounded neutral. We had another case, on 
the system to which Mr. Clark refers in his paper, where the 
object of the grounded neutral was defeated in a very fortunate 
way. The poles of the 11,000-volt trunk line of this system 
- are of steel and are carefully grounded. The cross-arms, how- 
ever, are of wood. In this case lightning struck the line, shat- 
tered some of the insulators and at least one of the wires was 
left lying on the cross-arm. The current was put back on this 
circuit and operation continued for some hours until repairs 
could be made conveniently. 

All of this does not prové that the grounded neutral should 
not be used, but that it is by no means a cure-all; many 
times it is a positive detriment. 

Referring to Mr. Lincoln’s list of advantages and dis- 
advantages, there is not much weight to advantages a, b, 
and c. Although a slight reduction in first cost of equip- 
ment may be effected by using weaker insulation, this insula- 
tion must be sufficient to resist lightning strains which are 
g.eater than any due to a ground on one leg. Static induction 
in neighboring circuits is seldom a serious matter and can 
usually be taken care of in some other way. The regular use 
of the ground as a conductor is a practice that can be adopted 
in only a certain few instances. 

Advantage d is the main one, and on the other hand the 
principal disadvantage, although referred to later in Mr. Lin- 
coln’s paper, is not mentioned in the list; namely, the increased 


bes 


BA ab Ni ct OOS ri tS a a er ee ha eee eet 


1907) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1639 


damage which may result to the generating »ppore?us and in 
some instances to the transmission system i 

Referring now to the use of a resistance in the ground con- 
nection of the system; this is really a compromise. With a 
neutral dead-grounded, any insulation failure in or near the 
power house means a practically dead short-circuit on the 
generators. Such a shock to the system is a serious matter 
which must be avoided as far as possible. It is inevitable with 
a short-circuit between phases, but there are few such short- 
circuits compared with the number of grounds, and one hesitates 
to adopt a measure which makes these grounds equivalent to 
short-circuits. The seriousness of these shocks develops, even 
if the short-circuit is of very short duration. Even fuse-testing 
in the immediate vicinity of the power station has caused dis- 
placement of the generator armature coils. Turbo-generators of 
high potential are peculiarly vulnerable in this particular. 

In the case referred to by Mr. Clark, the neutral ground was 
adopted principally because of the unusual arrangement of 
overhead and underground circuits with many possible combina- 
tions which may tend to resonance. The object desired was 
to cut off a defective circuit before such a result should tollow. 
The resistance was placed in the neutral circuit to minimize 
the shock to the system. This system is laid out with the 
expectation that there will eventually be 38,000 kw. of generating 
capacity in the present station, (or possibly double this amount), 
another power station operating in parallel with this, and a 
greatly extended underground and overhead transmission system. 

As the ultimate conditions are approached, the advantage 
of limiting the current in the neutral circuit will increase. As 
matters now stand, the combination of equipment is such that 
we might expect very satisfactory results with either an un- 
grounded system, a dead-grounded neutral or a neutral grounded 


through resistance. There would undoubtedly have been fewer 


short-circuits, if there had been no neutral ground; on the other 
hand the character of the protective devices as a whole is such 
that very few of the interruptions have materially affected the 
service. As Mr. Clark points out, out of the 70-odd disturb- 
ances two would have been handled better with a dead grounded 
neutral. Neither of these two were very serious, however, 
and they do not in themselves prove that a change to one of 
the other combinations is preferable. Damage to the power 
station equipment by the surges which might occur without a 
neutral ground or by the shocks which might occur with a dead 
grounded neutral would result much more seriously. 

It is an interesting fact that three of the most important 
systems, one of which was started without a neutral ground, 
and two of which were started with neutral dead-grounded, have 
for different reasons subsequently adopted a neutrai ground 
through a resistance or resistances. d 

For the general case, it may be said that the ungrounded 


1640 THE GROUNDED NEUTRAL [Oct. 11 


system is preferable, the exception being where there are special 
conditions which make an interruption of service on a particular 
circuit of less importance than the consequences if the,defective 
circuit is not immediately cut off. If the system is a large one 
and conditions necessitate a neutral ground, present experience 
indicates that there should be a resistance in the neutral circuit. 

George I. Rhodes (by letter): There were one or two questions 
asked during the discussion which I did not care to answer 
without looking further into the facts. 

Mr. Torchio remarked that no mention whatever was made 
of troubles inside the power and sub-stations which were in- 
creased by, or the result of, the grounded neutral. The reason 
for the apparent omission is that there have been absolutely 
no station troubles which would not have occurred with equally 
bad results had the neutral of the system been insulated. 

The only possible station troubles that can be increased or 
affected in any way by the presence of the grounded neutral 
are grounds on the station bus-bars, wiring, or transformers. 
Let us consider the effect of a ground on the power station 
bus-bar under the conditions of operation described in the 
writer’s paper. If but a single generator is in operation, the 
station will be shut down. If more than one is on the line, 
that machine whose neutral is grounded will be removed from 
service, the remaining generators carrying the load. Even 
with but two generators in operation the remaining machine 
can easily carry the 100% overload for the short time necessary 
to get another machine into service. After changing over to 
the auxiliary bus-bar, the neutral of one machine can again 
-be grounded and condition of normal operation resumed without 
interruption of service. 

With a ground on the sub-station bus-bar, the sub-station 
will be shut down if the total current required to operate the 
relays is less than the maximum possible current to ground. 
If the relays require more current than this, the sub-station 
will continue in operation, but the generator whose neutral is 
grounded may be shut down. If a ground occurs on the sub- 
station bus-bar when the neutral is insulated, it will be im- 
possible to remove this grouna without first shutting down the 
sub-station on account of the large current flowing to ground 
(about 160 amperes). 

It is to be seen; then, that with the neutral grounded, grounds 
in the power and sub-stations may seriously affect the continuity 
of service only when a single generator is running. 

Mr. Taylor called attention to the fact that since the neutral 
of the system has been grounded, the burn-outs per year per 
mile of cable have been more frequent than before. He sug- 
gested that perhaps this was due to the large amount of new 
cable installed. This is undoubtedly true to a certain extent, 
but it must be remembered that the amount of new cable in 
the original installation was almost as great. He also suggested 


ch a 


PO ee ERE eM ENTE OP ore erate 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1641 


that the time was so short that the element of chance was not 
removed. I fully agree with this. 

However, I have made a further study of the burn-outs 
occurring before and after the grounding of the neutral. In 
the original paper the writer gave a number of distinct operating 
burn-outs—12 before grounding and 16 after. Of these, there 
are known to be due directly to severe external mechanical 
injury, one before grounding, and seven since. Eliminating the 
latter, there are left 11 burn-outs before the grounding, and 
9 after, which were due to internal causes. The writer believes 
that these burn-outs alone should be used in determining 
whether or not grounding the neutral has increased the number. 
Previous to grounding there were operated approximately 620 
year-miles of cable, and since then there have been 660 year- 
miles. This gives the burn-outs per year per mile of cable due 
to internal causes 0.018 before, and 0.014 since the grounding. 
It thus appears that the grounded neutral has actually reduced 
the number of burn-outs that are not traceable directly to 
mechanical injury. 


A paper presented at the 222d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, New York, November 8, 1907. 


Copyright, 1907. By A.I. E. BE. 


COMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE OF STEAM AND ELEC- 
TRIC LOCOMOTIVES 


BY ALBERT H. ARMSTRONG 


So many excellent papers bearing upon the subject of steam 
road electrification have recently been presented to the engineer- 
ing public that the writer hesitates to add to theirnumber. Inthe 
hope, however, of offering a somewhat clearer insight into the 
fundamental reasons underlying the electrification movement, 
this paper is written from the standpoint of a technical com- 
parison of the performance of steam and electric locomotives. 

Among the many electrification projects now in course of 
construction, nearly all were inspired by such motives as cleanli- 
ness, smokelessness, convenience, etc., but few indeed have been 
considered strictly from the standpoint of direct financial bene- 
fits to be obtained. The improvements in and around New York 
City terminals, the various tunnel projects such as the early 
Baltimore and Ohio installation, and later the Sarnia, Detroit 
River, and Cascade Tunnel projects—all are examples of steam 
road electrification in which there were distinct reasons for dis- 
placing steam as a motive power, but there are other sections of 
our steam lines where these same reasons do not apply with equal 
force, and benefits of a more far-reaching nature must be made 
evident before such electiifications can be considered as necessary 
or desirable. It is concerning these other sections of steam lines 
demanding other reasons for electrification that this paper is 
written, and the best means to be employed in getting a thorough 
grasp on the subject seems to lie in an investigation into the com- 
parative inherent qualities of steam and electric locomotives. 

Before considering the electric locomotive, much the simpler 
of the two, it is advisable to dete: mine the general characteristics 

1643 


1644 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


and limitations of the steam locomotive viewed from the stand- 
point of the electrical engineer, in order that the scope of the 
problem may be thoroughly understood and the lines of con- 
trast be sharply drawn 

This preliminary study of the steam locomotive is made neces- 
sary by the fact that railroad practice to-day is essentially 
steam railroad practice and is hedged about by practices and 
methods of operation demanded by the use of the steam loco- 
motive as a type of motive power. Viewed in the light of 
greatest benefits to be secured, the coming of the electric loco- 
motive is not due to petty economies affected in coal consumption 
and cost of locomotive repairs; indeed, with coal as a common 
source of power, little gain in efficiency is secured through 
burning the same grade of fuel under stationary boilers over the 
excellent results obtained with the highly perfected modern com- 
pound locomotive. As will be discussed later, there exist certain 
fundamental relations between thecost of producing a horse power 
at the drivers of a steam locomotive burning its fuel on the st1uc- 
ture, and a ho1se power at the drivers of an electric locomotive 
deriving its energy from a distant stationary power house via a 
distribution system. The use of water power, or of a cheaper 
grade of fuel than can be burned on a steam locomotive, will in 
many cases afford a means of reducing the fucl cost well below 
the present cost of high-grade coal required for successful loco- 
motive operation; but in general the fuel item reduction does 
not in itself offer a sufficient saving to pay an adequate return 
on the large investment required for electrification. 

It is necessary, therefore, to look for more far-reaching benefits, 
and, not considering the reasons governing the introduction of 
the electric locomotives at terminals and in tunnels, we find in 
a comparison of the characteristics of the steam and electric 
locomotives a contrast so marked that it shows not only the 
superiority of the electric locomotive for general railway con- 
ditions but it also suggests changes of a fundamental nature in 
present methods of operation now necessary with steam loco- 
motives. And these benefits to be secured occur not only in the 
operation of passenger trains, but are felt to an even greater 
degree in the haulage of the heaviest freight trains, a field sup- 
posedly the exclusive domain of the steam locomotive. 

The steam locomotive has two component. parts, the boiler 
and the engine, both of which have their own individual charac- 
teristics; and the relation between the two is generally deter- 


5 Ae Pr 


Nh a eB wl us 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1645 


mined by the character of the service for which the locomotive 
is desired. 

The steam locomotive boiler is universally of the fire-tube 
type, though experiments with water-tube boilers point to cer- 
tain possibilities in this direction. Owing to the restrictions of 
width and length available, the locomotive boiler must of ne- 
cessity be worked to its limits in order to generate the greatest 
amount of steam possible. It is not the purpose of this paper, 
nor is it necessary, to go into a detailed discussion of the proper 
relation between grate, area and heating surface, fire-box con- 
struction, length of tubes, diameter, etc., all constituting im- 
provements in locomotive design directed to the better evapora- 
tion of water per pound of coal burned and the greater capacity 
of a boiler built within the space allowed. It suffices to use 
values of water evaporation, coal consumption and general 
boiler performance as obtained in experimental tests, and 
modify these “ best performance ”’ values by the knowledge of 
conditions obtaining in practical service. 

The locomotive engine is distinct from the locomotive boiler, 
and when supplied with unlimited steam at constant pressure 
it has its own characteristics and maximum output both in trac- 
tive effort and horse power. Engines are of two general types, 
simple and compound, the latter being introduced in order to 
affect a saving in the large steam consumption inherent to non- 
condensing engine operation. The success of the compound 
locomotive is very much a matter of discussion among railroad 
men, but it seems to have found a permanent foothold upon easy- 
grade lines although its use is still open to serious question upon 
the heavy mountain-grade divisions. In general, the electric 
locomotive must compete with the compound steam locomotive 
on level divisions and the simple engine on heavy grade divi- 
sions, although the Mallet compound has lately been introduced 
with some success in this latter class of work. 

The general shape of the steam locomotive characteristic is 
given in Fig. 1, which shows the relation between the speed and 
tractive effort of a simple consolidation locomotive designed for 
heavy freight service. Owing to clearances it is seldom that a. 
locomotive can work at more than 90 per cent. of the theoretical 
full stroke, and hence the maximum tractive effort at starting 
with lever in the corner will not be much greater than 88 per 
cent. of the theoretical tractive effort available with gauge 
pressure in the cylinders. An inspection of Fig. 1 shows that 


1646 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


the steam locomotive is limited as to maximum tractive effort 
by its engine design, and limited as to the speed at which this 
tractive effort is available by the capacity of the boiler to supply 
steam. Thus, assuming that the locomotive will give 88 per 
cent. of its theoretical tractive effort when starting, it is capable 
of providing but 80 per cent. tractive effort at a speed of 10.6 
miles per hour (with the constants of the particular locomotive 


PER CENT TRACTIVE EFFORT 


0 1 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 
SPEED MILES PER HOUR 


Fic. 1.—Typical steam locomotive characteristic (simple) 


chosen for illustration) at which the boiler is giving its full output. 
Hence higher speeds can only be reached with a lesser cut off 
and a consequent reduction in mean effective pressure and 
tractive effort. Locomotive engines are generally designed to 
give their maximum tractive effort at 90 per cent. theoretical 
cut-off at a point corresponding to a coefficient of adhesion of 
approximately 22 per cent. of the weight upon the drivers; that 
is, at about slipping point of steam locomotives with good rail 


1907] . ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1647 


conditions. It is immediately evident therefore, that the 
tonnage rating of the locomotive on ruling grade must be so 
proportioned that the maximum tractive effort called for will 
be less than the available tractive effort of the locomotive in 
- order to provide a small percentage, say 10 or 15 per cent., 
for possible starting under maximum grade and load conditions. 
In other words, as the steam locomotive is designed so that the 
maximum tractive effort is delivered at a point not greater than 
22 per cent. of the weight upon the drivers, it is not possible to 
take advantage of possible abnormally good rail conditions 
(either natural or made abnormal by the use of sand) as the 
engine itself will fail to deliver any excess tractive effort thus 
made available with increased coefficient of adhesion. 

On the other hand, the tractive effort of the electric locomotive 
is limited only by the adhesion between driving wheels and rail, 
and aside from some 15 per cent. greater adhesion possible with 
the uniform tractive effort provided by the electric locomotive, 
it is possible with this type of motive power to take momentary 
advantage of abnormally good rail conditions or to derive full 
benefit from the use of sand; indeed, tests have been taken with 
electric locomotives showing as high as 35 per cent. coefficient 
of adhesion between driving wheels and rail. This point is em- 
phasized as with the greater tractive effort of the electric loco- 
motive it becomes possible to give them a higher tonnage rating 
for the same weight upon the drivers than would be possible 
with steam locomotives operating over the same track profile. 

There is a marked difference in the speed characteristics of the 
steam and electric locomotive, and indeed there is also amarked 
difference in the speed characteristics of different types of electric 
locomotives. Although this paper is not intended to enter into 
any discussion of the relative merits of different types of electric 
locomotives, there is so striking a difference in the several speed 
characteristics, each of which possess special advantages for 
certain operating conditions, that Fig. 2 has been prepared con- 
trasting the characteristics of the steam locomotive and the 
direct-current gearless, alternating-current single-phase geared, 
and alternating-current three-phase geared electriclocomotives. 
As all types of motive power share in common the fact of a cer- 
tain critical speed beyond which full tractive effort cannot be 
maintained, the curves in Fig. 2 have been prepared on the basis 
of showing the relation between percentage of maximum tractive 
effort available at speeds higher than the critical speed, ordinates 


1648 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


being tractive effort and abscissas percentage of critical speed to 
running speed. 

A more familiar presentation is given in Fig. 3, showing a 
concrete case of a 22 by 30 steam locomotive of the simple type 
equipped with 57-inch drivers, contrasted with both an alter- 
nating-current geared and a direct-current gearless electric loco- 
motive designed for the same tractive effort both maximum and 
running, but for a higher speed. The contrast of these different 


PER CENT OF TRACTIVE EFFORT AT CRITICAL SPEED 


0 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 
: PER CENT OF CRITICAL TO RUNNING SPEED 


Fic. 2.—Typical characteristics of steam and electric locomotives 


speed characteristics brings out sharply the small speed variation 
with different tractive efforts delivered by the electric loco- 
motives, this small variation being even more marked in the 
case of the direct-current gearless than in the case of the alter- 
nating-current geared motor working at a lower iron saturation 
and thus affording a more sloping speed characteristic. 
The steam locomotive chosen is typical of those in general use 
upon our mountain-grade divisions, thetonnage rating in operation 


1907.] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 


LOMB UES SGP 


1649 


of this particular locomotive being such as to call for a tractive 
effort of 25,600 pounds on average grade and 33,200 pounds on 
the maximum ruling grade occurring on a certain engine division, 
thus leaving a margin of 6,300 pounds above the demands of 


7\ 
‘ oa al 2800 
c L Ae. ee 
/ 
~ = ME 7 iE 2800 
/ 
l W711 oe 
} ak 
48000 = Bie 2) 2400 
are) 7m 
A; 14. 
7 Nal Tar 
= = 
a2 000) i yaa 2200 
vi Ya ‘3 e, 
nn 
7 fe) 19 i] HORSE POWER ON 
40 000 — —/——! a 15 No AVERAGE, GRADE |g 
ei oa ee at A eee | 
OCC ee : 
vi B 1% [o} ui 
36000 ae / ANS Ve \e 1800 = 
Ve 
y | ‘G 13 a ‘< a 
\C AZ wu 
8 32000 fa Tair S 1600 6 
5 y Yel @ Xz s 
Fs) | ‘az x = 
is . 
a 28 000 a) 7- i \ NS \ 1400 k 
a f ;FRACTIVE EFRORT1ON AVERAGEIGRADE— Ns : « 
: f . N% \i—11200 = 
© 24000 ; Xe. " 5 
ic { NA 4% X a 
ui i HORSE POWER \ Sl ne 
1 (STEAM 7m 1000 2 
2 20000 7 } aS 2 
FE J if Las \ Sit ee 
g oy SS 
Ts Y aN — 800 
E 16000 > : N = 
4 aes > 
N 
87 &, 
12000 ; P 5 yc] 600 
=i! 
100 
4000 1 | Q 
zl IL 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 


SPEED IN MILES PER HOUR 


Fic. 3.—Steam and electric locomotive characteristics. 


maximum tonnage on maximum ruling grade for starting the 
train from rest. : 

The maximum speed available at the different tractive efforts 
is a matter of boiler capacity, condition of boiler, quality of coal, 
and efficiency of fireman. The first of these factors, the boiler 
capacity, can be controlled by properly proportioning the design 


1650 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


of the boiler to engine capacity, but there are three other factors 
which the locomotive manufacturer cannot control and two of 
these factors constitute sufficient cause to warrant a considerable 
reduction in the theoretical rated capacity of the boiler. Thus, 
referring to Fig. 1, such a locomotive in prime condition care- 
fully fired with the best coal (approximating 14,000 B.t.u.’s) 
should be able to deliver full tractive effort at 10.6 miles per hour, 
but in practice it has been found that the average condition of 
boilers and the average firing provided by the none too con- 
scientious or diligent fireman, cuts the sustained boiler output 
down to not much greater than 75 per cent. of its output under 
what must be considered exceptionally or momentary conditions, 
By sustained “‘ output ’’ is meant the output required while 
ascending the continuous up grades met with on our western 
mountain divisions, Though full boiler capacity may be at- 
tained for short periods, the average performance of all the 
locomotives on the division on the average up grade will show: 
a marked reduction in capacity from the results obtained ina 
stationary test or single experimental test runs. 

The locomotive characteristic in Fig. 3, has been prepared on 
the basis of 75 per cent. of the possible boiler capacity in the 
following manner: 


GENERAL CONSTANTS OF SIMPLE CONSOLIDATION LOCOMOTIVE 


Diametersof cevlinderst ae se ier fice eee 22 in. 
Lensth oMstrokeGactird ies: iioct a ktch oct hee 30its 
Diameteriofidrivers suse: tuarmcieciaaice eae eee enee Dilaus 
Heating, sur‘ace. thine. ate.4 w aiitiaie t's: oieis cus ee ri ah BAO BGs 
Total weight of locomotive.......................103.5 tons 
Weight 'on driverss ic. v'divs%< vues eatin eee eae 93 - 
Weight of tenderiv.s. \ 01.2 -04 Geena ee et eee Gik5, = 
Total weight locomotive and tender...............165 * 


This parcicular locomotive has been chosen forillustration as 
it is the type in daily use on the mountain division of one of 
the largest Western roads. 

Under the above conditions, the theoretical tractive effort 
is 49,500 pounds, of which 39,600 pounds is available at 90 per 
cent. cut-off. The contents of each cylinder is approximately 
6.6 cu. ft. and with four cylinders of steam per revolution and 
with steam weighing 0.41 pounds per cu. ft. at 170 pounds 
cylinder pressure, each revolution requires 10.85 pounds steam, 
With 3397 sq. ft. of heating surface there is a possibility of 
evaporating six pounds of water per pound of coal when burning 


CRRA AE Sacre Mee AD 


lie Ba he ly el 


et 


ee a Re Ne ee eee ee ee ee ee le ee he 


a.) La ee 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1651 


two pounds of coal per sq. ft. of heating surface, thus giving an 
available supply of 40,700 pounds of steam per hour when work- 
ing boilers in prime condition at the full output resulting from 
perfect firing with good quality of coal. In practice, however, 
the available steam for sustained output would not be greater 
than 75 per cent. or 30,500 pounds per hour, thus giving full 
tractive effort at 46.8 revolutions of the drivers corresponding 
to 7.93 miles per hour on a 57-inch driver. The ‘‘critical speed ”’ 
of the locomotive is therefore 7.93 miles per hour when working 
at 75 per cent. of full attainable boiler capacity, and the coal 
consumed under such circumstances will be 4,360 pounds per 
hour, corresponding to 1.28 pounds of coal burned per sq. ft. 


@ 


) 


= 


~ 


POUNDS OF WATER PER POUND OF COAL 


LES Se ae ee ae ee ee 
POUNDS OF COAL PER SQUARE FOOT OF HEATING SURFACE 
Fic. 4.—Rate of evaporation 


of heating surface, at which rate we would expect an evaporation 
of approximately seven pounds of water per pound of coal. 

What might be termed the “performance capacity” of a 
steam locomotive may be worked out from the speed and tractive 
effort characteristics given in Fig. 3, using as a basis the 1000 
ton-miles trailing load moved per hour on a level or any gradient 
selected. The prevalence of 2.2 per cent. ruling grade on many 
of our Western roads perhaps justifies the selection of that figure 
for demonstration purposes; and the coal consumed; crew wages, 
and maintenance charges, may all be worked out from the basis 
of continuous operation per 1000 ton-miles trailing load on 2.2 
per cent, grade, these results being shown in Fig. 5. 


1652 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


Certain assumptions are necessary and are as follows: 


Cost of ‘coaliis,. 2.0; See ree eee $3.00 per 2000 Ib. 
Engineer wages pemhours..ciyser jock eee ee $0.50 
Fireman ‘s . t) BS BIG RO eee eee 0.35 
Conductor ; velak ” Thegeinsigckslecas cae cae 0.40 
Three brakemen “ Sea og cet ada tes Cane eee Seka 0.90 
Total crewiides tess dhere occ siete eee so On ee 2515 


Average mileage per locomotive per year, 36,500. 

Total maintenance including round house charges, $5,000.00. 
Maintenance per locomotive mile actually run, 13.7 cents. 
General locomotive constants are the same as previously given. 


He 


cS) 
S 
SS 


= 
o 
aD fee ee + 
—_——— oy a 


| 


CENTS PER 1000 TON-MILES 
w t9 
Oo o 


s 


0 5000 * 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000 
TRACTIVE EFFORT IN POUNDS 


Fic. 5.—Performance capacity steam locomotive (simple) grade 2.2% (up) 


Having broadly outlined the performance characteristics of 
the simple consolidation engine frequently met with in heavy 
grade operation, it becomes necessary so to proportion the con- 
stants of the electric locomotive, assumed to replace it, so as to 
gain the greatest benefit from the different inherent charac- 
teristics of the latter type of motive power. 

Referring to Fig. 2, it is evident that with the small speed 
variation of the electric locomotive, and due to the fact that its 
motive power is separate from its unlimited source of power 
generation, it is possible to consider radical changes in the method 
of moving freight, more especially on mountain-grade divisions, 


Fe RPT Ree PATS ORY ONG 


aie Oe 1 Ws Le 


PN EN ee TN Ne Ne ee ee Ne TON Sy ee eT NN TY a ey NUON 


1907.] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1653 


It has become a partly accepted fact that the electric locomotive 
characteristic should be so proportioned as to enable it to operate 
trains at a high rate of speed on level track and at a much slower 
speed on grades, in fact conforming with present steam practice 


-in this respect. The writer would again point out that steam 


railroading to-day is in reality steam locomotive practicein that 
the speed possibilities of different track divisions are restricted 
to a large extent by the limitations of the steam locomotive. 
In other words, the only reason why it is common practice to 
run at very low speeds on mountain-grade divisions instead of 
continuing the high speeds in vogue on more level portions, is 
because’a steam locomotive cannot be built powerful enough to 
supply the heavy tractive effort required at any higher speeds 
than those now in vogue. 

_ Railway economies teach us that the lowest cost per 1000 ton- 
miles is obtained when operating the greatest train weight at the 
highest speeds, and Mr. J. J. Hill’s well known saying to the 
effect that “‘ Expenses are per train-mile and receipts per ton- 
mile ’’, is only partly true, as the time consumed in hauling 
the train one mile enters as a most vital factor. 

Considered broadly, the one expense in train operation that is 
fundamental is the cost of fuel, this factor being influenced only 
by the economy of the fuel-burning plant. Other expenses, such 
as locomotive maintenance, crew wages, etc., are affected en- 
tirely by the method of operation, and no radical departure from 
present methods is to be looked for until the coming of a type 
of motive power which offers possibilities not equally enjoyed 
by the steam locomotive. 

This point is further illustrated by reference to the operating 
sheet of one of our greatest Western roads using the simple con- 
solidation locomotive previously described. 


SPEED RELATIONS. Roap ‘A’? MountTAIN DIVISION 


UP GRADE DOWN GRADE 
Schedulespeed.anuc. cams es 7.385 miles per hr. 12.5 miles per hr. 
Average speed while running....12.1 “ “ “ 20.0 vo eXgooe, 
Number stops per mile......... OT oe WE A ee ogee nes 


The average schedule speed of a number of trains, including all 
layovers due to the despatcher or failure of motive power, as obtain- 
ing on another mountain division of a different road, showed 
values as low as 6.7 milesperhourup grade. In general it may 
be stated that the freight movement over mountain divisions 
is effected at very low schedule speeds, and the cause is evident 


1654 ' ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND (Nov. 8 


from an inspection of the steam locomotive characteristic. 
Except for the fact that curves are usually of shorter radius on 
heavy grades than on levels, there is no reason for the slower 
speed of trains, provided a type of motive power is available 
that is capable of supplying great draw-bar pulls at high speeds. 
It is just this characteristic which the electric locomotive pos- 
sesses to an almost unlimited extent, and such locomotives can 
be built which are even more powerful and operate at higher 
speed than can be utilized at present. 

For example, the simple consolidation locomotive considered is 
capable of sustaining a tractive effort of 25,6001b. at a maximum 
speed of 15.4 miles per hour, and weighs 165 tons with tender, 
while a single New York Central electric locomotive of the 6000 
type is capable of delivering the same tractive effort at ap- 
proximately 37 miles per hour, and the weight is only 100 tons. 
The Central locomotive is of course designed for moderate speed 
passenger service and could not be run continuously at such a 
large output, but it is cited only as an example of a well-known 
electric locomotive having an enormous horse power capacity, 
although in this respect it is but the forerunner of other electric 
locomotives having still greater outputs. Owing to the fact that 
such units may be run in groups of two or more and still be per- 
fectly under the control of a single operator, the advantage of 
very large single units is somewhat modified, and the intro- 
duction of the electric locomotive may also introduce new ideas 
as to the size and construction of single hauling units. 

The electric locomotive may be equipped with motors of several 
different types each having characteristics best qualifying it for 
certain classes of work. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 illustrate the usual 
speed, torque, and efficiency curves of two typical motors, the 
direct-current gearless and the alternating-current single-phase 
geared type. The type of motor to be adopted is a matter 
requiring full local knowledge of the conditions obtaining in 
each individual instance before a proper selection can be made. 
All three of the available motors—direct current; alternating 
current single-phase; and alternating current three-phase, 
possess the one needed characteristic of great output per pound 
and hence the arguments advanced for the substitution of the 
electric for the steam locomotive are general in character and 
do not apply strictly to locomotives equipped with any one 
type of motor to the exclusion of all others. As the direct-cur- 
rent gearless motor can be built in the largest sizes, is the best. 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1655 


understood, and is in successful operation upon a very importat 
division of one of the largest steam roads, it is here chosen as the 
equipment of a typical electric locomotive. 

The large output, 840 h.p. for one hour and 400 h.p. con- 
tinu-us, shown in Fig. 6, illustrates what can be accomplished 
wit his type of motor. The output of the complete locomo- 
tiv... dependent upon the number of motors permitted with the 
construction adopted. Thus, such a four-motor equipment is 
capable of delivering a tractive effort of 56,800 lb. at a speed of 


WwW = 
Ss < zeae 
o 3 6 Foz &) 
tloz Fe Rate oie) 
= a Cua O 
uO ti FE a 
aes =a 14000 : 
i 2 2 A [e) 
se: 6 el a. 
mS s ce} 12000 w 
me 3S 'e oc} cc 
WwW -E| a o 
ae i Ot of x 
ae aul it 
50 100 Sy = 10000 1000 
Ty EFFICIENCY Oj 
90 21 
Oy 
40 80 Z/ 1 8000 800 
Et \ 
BS at -! 
O| KS 
30 60 H 6000 600 
i 
. | | 
| 
20 40 1 4000 400 
30 4 H 
1 ' 
10 20 rs 2000 200 
10 i 
0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 


AMPERES INPUT. 
Fic. 6.—Direct-current gearless motor characteristics, 1200 volts 


23 miles per hour approximate (depending upon the voltage) 
while the efficiency of conversion at this output would be 87 
per cent., rising to a maximum of 93 per cent. at higher speeds 
and lower tractive effort. Another form of construction, say 
one similar to that employed in the largest Mallet compound. 
would permit the use of two four-axle articulated trucks, pro- 
viding an equipment of eight motors and an output of 113,600 Ib, 
at a speed of 23 miles per hour. 

The same motors could readily be rewound to give the same 
tractive effort at considerably increased speeds if desired, without 


1656 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


materially increasing the internal losses of conversion. Bearing 
fully in mind the fact that a single operator has this enormous 
energy under perfect control, and that such a locomotive could 
do the work of two or more Mallet compounds and several loco- 
motives of the simple consolidation type, and it becomes evident 
that in the electric locomotive there are tremendous possibilities 
of improving present methods of railway operation as now con- 
ducted with the steam locomotive. Carrying the thought a step 
further and appreciating that several such electric locomotive 


5 
one 2 
we Z = 
=>; Gi = 2 
=o 6 eek 
ne pee ° fod 
mpd TT] ae > 
wu Riel 
a® wz a 
o Zz >2 1 
30 wl -O w 
12) of oO 
c 5 itemes 
a E = 
25 100) 20000 500 
90 
I 
20 80 15 16000 400 
70 Ie 
‘oO 
15 60 Mo 12000 300 
50 i2 
kK 
10 40 tz 8000 200 
30 HS 
ea 
5 20 I 4000 100 
10 tf 


0 600 800 1000 =: 1200 
AMPERES INPUT 


Fic. 7.—Alternating-current single-phase motor characteristics, 25 cycles, 
375 volts 


units may be operated in a group forming a combined unit, it 
becomes evident that in the electric locomotive we have a type 
of motive power capable of furnishing any output in tractive 
effort and speed that present or future operating conditions 
may demand. 

Returning to the direct comparison of the simple consolidation 
and electric locomotive, Fig. 3, was plotted on the basis of a 
speed of 30 miles per hour for the electric and 15.4 miles per 
hour for the steam locomotive, giving in each instance a tractive 
effort of 25,600 lb. at the rim of the drivers. Though the elec- 


1907.] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1657 


tric locomotive could very readily be designed to give the same 
tractive effort at a higher speed, 30 miles per hour was assumed 
as the highest speed permissible due to the alignment ot the 
track on heavy grades. 

To plot a performance capacity curve for the electric locomo- 
tive, certain further assumptions are necessary. 


Type of equipment, direct-current gearless motors. 


Wicio tits Of tocalelocomotivers sac. mits cecos oe oe « 125 tons 
‘ OUIMCLTLV ETS rerio aten ane <hesees eevee svie/e bs /eclem ote ae 100“ 
Engineer Wicd CDESmMeI MOU cine siereon hie ee $0.50 
Conductor ‘ MRE sta SE ore Stes a RN ts, scat 0.40 
Three brakemen “ a hl Suc Ramanathan WORE 0.90 
photalwacesnortcreWiaeimbese ams pote eee Sees oa 1.80 


Efficiency of transmission rail to bus-bar, 70 per cent. 
Maintenance of locomotive, 5 cents per mile run. 


The train crew is so divided as to permit the location of a 
brakeman in the engineer’s operating cab. 

The cost of .electrical power must in this instance be most 
arbitrarily assumed, owing to the widely different cost of coal, 
possibility of water power, etc., obtaining in different localities. 
As the cost of coal for steam locomotives will also vary greatly 
as to price and quality, it has been assumed at $3.00 per 2000 
pounds, and a cost for electric power of one-half cent per kilowatt- 
hour is based upon using*the same price and quality of coal. 
As it is further assumed that an entire engine division of say 
150 miles is to be electrified, it gives promise of a 24-hour load- 
factor of 50 per cent. and this figure has been taken. Approxi- 
mating the first cost of installation of the generating station at 
$100.00 per kilowatt, and allowing ten per cent. per year for in- 
terest and other fixed charges, the cost of power is brought up to 
possibly $0.0075 per kilowatt-hour at the station bus-bar. Other 
conditions obtaining will in a given instance modify the figures 
arrived at, but for purposes of demonstration $0.0075 is a con- 
servative estimate, and such a figure is needed to compare the 
cost of power with the fuel item in steam-locomotive performance. 

The effect of increased speed on cost of operation is clearly 
snown by comparing the performance capacity curves of the 
steam and electric locomotives, Figs. 5 and 9. 

It will be observed that the reduction in the operating ex- 
per.ses is effected in the two items of crew wages and mainten- 
ance of locomotives, and that the cost of fuel remains practically 


1658 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8. 


unchanged. This is as it should be, as the cost of fuel in the case 
of steam locomotives or power with electric locomotives is the 
only fundamentally necessary expense in train movement. 
Overcoming train friction and raising a train up grade against 
gravity represents useful work performed, and this work is ac- 
complished at an expenditure of approximately four pounds of coal 
per horse power-hour at the drivers with simple engines and 2.66 
pounds of coal per horse power-hour at the drivers with electric 
locomotives,.including all intervening losses between rail and 


100 


80 


> 
i=) 


_ 
o 


PER CENT EFFICIENCY 


20 


0 20 40 60 80 160 
PER CENT OF FULL LOAD 


Fic. 8.—Efficiency of distribution generator to rail 


generating station bus-bar. The speed at which this work is 
performed, therefore, does not affect the cost of fuel or power, it 
being assumed that the motive power for the various speeds is so 
proportioned as to operate at the point of greatest economy. 
Thus with coal at $3.00 per 2000 pounds in each case, the 
steam locomotive can generate a horse power at the drivers at 
an expenditure of $0.006 as against $0.0039 for fuel alone with 
the electric. The two figures are not directly comparable, as 


to the cost of fuel for steam locomotive operation must be. 


— 


CENTS PER 1000 TON-MILES 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1659 - 


added the extra cost of hauling, which on grade divisions may 
constitute a large percentage of its original cost; and the waste 
incident to handling and storing in many bunkers along the 
tracks. In addition, there is a considerable quantity of coal 
burned under the boilers of steam locomotives standing idle or 
coasting down grades, which will be shown later, may equal ten 
per cent. of the total consumption in main line freight movement 
and much more in the case of helpers and switching engines. - 
If, therefore, coal be delivered at the engine division terminal 


0 - 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 ig* 30000 35000 40000 , 
TRACTIVE EFFORT IN POUNDS 


Fic. 9.-—Performance capacity electric locomotive (Direct-current gear- 
less) grade 2.2% (up) 


at $3.00 per ton, the actual cost on the tender will be considerably 
in excess of this figure, and due allowance must also be made 
for the coal wasted, burned or otherwise, and not producing 
useful brake horse power-hours at the rim of the drivers. 

In the electric system also, besides the allowance made in dis- 
tribution losses in arriving at 2.66 pounds coal burned per horse 
power-hour at the rim of the drivers, there will be an additional 
charge for labor and fixed expenses incident to power-house 
operation and first cost. The electric system, however, is not. 


1660 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


restricted to the use of high-grade fuel and coal of an inferior 
quality, and much lower cost, such as lignite, can be utilized, 
besides the large opportunities for cheap power presented by the 
water powers generally available on mountain divisions. 

The saving or deficit in the power item with electric as con- 
trasted with the fuel item of steam locomotive operation must, 
therefore, be largely determined by the local factors entering 
into the case. A common cost of $3.00 per 2000 pounds for coal 
is taken in this discussion; it is rather favorable than otherwise 
to steam locomotive operation, as coal can be dropped into the 
bin of a power house located at a division terminal at less 
expense than it can be hauled up a severe long grade and dis- 
tributed in several pockets along the route. 

It is evident that the cost of fuel or power, being fundamental, 
constitutes a fixed item in the total cost of operation while the 
other two items, crew wages and maintenance expenses, will be 
determined solely by the method of operation and the excellence 
of motive power used. We have become so accustomed to con- 
sider that fuel, crew wages, and engine maintenance each con- 
stitute approximately ten per cent. of the total cost of operating 
a railway that we rather lose sight of the fact that two of these 
items are a theoretically needless expense and subject to con- 
siderable modification in practice with the adoption of another 
type of motive power possessing characteristics which will per- 
mit making radical changes in operating methods. 

While the figures shown in Figs. 5 and 9 indicate a certain 
relation among the three items of fuel, crew, and maintenance 
expense, this is not the true relation obtaining in practical 
operation for the reason that the values given in the curves 
assume continuous operation up grade under the conditions out- 
lined. Unfortunately, train crews must be paid full value per 
mile whether the mile be up grade or down, and with steam loco- 
motives there is also a considerable loss in fuel resulting from 
engines standing or running light which must be also taken into 
account; hence it becomes necessary to modify the figures ar- 
rived at, and for this purpose certain references must be made 
to current railroad practice on mountain-grade divisions in order 
to arrive at the proper tonnage relations, schedule speeds, etc., 
obtaining in up-grade and down-grade operation. 

Previous figures have been given showing that the schedule 
speed on several mountain divisions is approximately 50 per 
cent. of the average running speed and this figure is assumed in 


1907.] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1661 


the following statement of cost of operating 1000 ton-miles with 
steam locomotives, averaging the cost of up- and down-grade 
running. Owing to the higher schedule speed of electrically 
operated trains, resulting in fewer meeting points with the same 
tonnage handled, and due to the absence of forced stops to take 
on fuel and water, etc., it is assumed that with electric motive 
power the schedule speed may be 60 per cent. of the running 
speed. 

With the electric locomotive standing, or coasting down grade, 
there is no demand whatever made upon the generating station, 
and hence the only expense carried through these periods is 
that for train crew and acertain amount for maintenance. On the 
other hand, with the steam locomotive there is a considerable 
amount of fuel burned and water wasted when standing at sidings 
and when coasting. In the case of mountain railroading with 
its frequent and prolonged delays, this waste may reach con- 
siderable proportions. 

The following results of a carefully conducted series of tests 
will illustrate this point. Two test locomotives and trains 
were operated over a ‘mountain division under regular 
service conditions—steam and fuel consumption, duration of 
delays, etc., being carefully noted. The total work ex- 
pended up grade was 5700 horse power-hours at the rim of 
the drivers including allowance for 1.54 per cent. average 
grade and seven pounds per ton track and curve friction. The 
total water evaporated on the trip divided by the total 
horse power-hours gave a steam consumption of 36 pounds per 
brake horse power-hour at the rim of the drivers. Indicator 
cards taken upon the engine in question at all cut-offs up to 90 
per cent. showed that the greatest steam consumption did not 
exceed 32 pounds per indicated horse power-hour, or 35.5 pounds 
per brake horse power-hour, allowing ten per cent. internal 
engine friction. Values as low as 23 pounds of steam per 
indicated horse power-hour or 25.5 pounds per brake horse 
power-hour were recorded for the average cut-off of 40 to 50 
per cent. used throughout the run. A third and fourth series 
of tests conducted up the same grade gave similar results, 
except that the values were slightly higher than those quoted, 
showing that there was a considerable loss of water unaccounted 
for by indicator cards and useful work performed. 

Operating down | grade, it was necessary to accomplish 1110 
horse power-hours on account of the somewhat broken profile, 


1662 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


and again the water consumption showed on two trips 57.7 pounds 
of steam per brake horse power-hour, and on two subsequent 
trips 66.5 pounds, values entirely unaccountable on the basis 
of useful work performed. 

During all tests the usual service delays occurred, and as the 
traffic on the road in question was very much congested, these 
delays constituted a considerable proportion of the total elapsed 
time. In fact during the runs up grade the trains were in motion 
but 66 per cent. of the total elapsed time, and down grade the 
trains were in motion from 52 per cent. down to 40 per cent. of 
the total elapsed time. As these delays were frequent and un- 
determined, it was necessary to maintain full steam pressure 
while waiting for the momentarily expected release from the 
block, hence the waste of fuel and water was considerable. 
Averaging this waste at 400 pounds per hour, at which low 
rate of consumption the water evaporation would approximate 
ten pounds of water per pound of coal burned, or 4000 pounds 
of water evaporated per hour, and reducing the total water 
consumption measured by the waste losses thus obtained, the 
steam consumption in eight different tests up and down grade 
ranged 34.7 pounds, 32.4 pounds, 28.1 pounds and 25.3 pounds, 
etc., water per brake horse power-hour. These values are fairly 
commensurate with results of indicator cards taken, and, with 
the type of engine used and under the operating conditions 
obtaining, an allowance of 400 pounds of coal stand-by losses per 
idle locomotive-hour seemed not too great a value to allow, 
and this figure has been taken in subsequent calculations. 

Locomotive performance capacity curves may therefore be 
plotted which will show approximately the true relation be- 
tween the several items-of fuel, crew wages, and motive power 
maintenance, by adhering to the following assumptions: 


Ratio schedule to running speed up-grade steam locomotive, 
50 per cent. 


“ “ “ “ “ 


electrics * 60 per cent. 
Schedule speed down-grade steam...............15 miles per hour. 
: . m4 “ electric..............18 miles per hour. 
CORE OE COR ii as a's dS ye EER Oa ot Oe ee $3.00 per 2000 Ib. 
or reectricspower. ./F Devan was ced are 0.0075 per kw-hr. 
Efficiency of distribution.......................70 per cent. 
Crew wages per hour steam..........¢...00000% $2.15 
2 % Fo mse, + Clectriegd <4, Aieuk eden eee $1.80 
Maintenance locomotive steam..................$0.137 per mile. 
é " electric 


satin © Cay A $0.05 per mile. 
Fuel waste per idle hour steam................. 400 lb. 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1663 


An inspection of the performance curves shows that in prac- 
tical operation the fuel expense approaches more nearly to the 
value of the other items considered, instead of being greatly in 
excess of them as indicated in the theoretical performance 


CENTS PER 1000 TON—MILES 


Se ee 


1 


CENTS PER 1000 TON—MILES 


—— +—-—-f— —- 


0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 385000 40000 
TRACTIVE EFFORT IN POUNDS ‘ 


Fic. 10.—Tractive effort in pounds. Service capacity steam and electric 
locomotives average of up and down 2.2% grade 


curves, Figs. 5 and 9, showing up-grade operation only. _ For 
operation on lesser grades than 2.2 per cent., all items are re- 
duced and the total and subdivided comparative costs are given 
in the following table and in Fig. 11. 


1664 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


COMPARATIVE OPERATING EXPENSES PER 1000 Ton-MiLEs STEAM (SIM- 
PLE) AND ELectric LOCOMOTIVES 


AVERAGE OF Up- AND DowN-GRADE OPERATION 


Steam Locomotives 


Gradeé.u3...cieee ie ee 4% 1% 14% 2% 
Coal ooo. c.csccsm.riectwtistievnete LOiny CENTS 20,0) CONte moo Con berm po Comte 
CHEW ss hs eee ene Sseye eens 24 . oOo in | eae 
Maintenance). set! oe lO {7-Saere 26m. live 
Total ecu cte eee oe > C738) = LOO 139. 
Electric Locomotives 
Grade sin somber ees 4% 1% 14% 2% 
POWEt seca a eee enlarge ae 20 cents 35.5 cents 50.5 cents 66 cents. 
CTEW. ocbe mene te ota mtn ee (ere y 1 18 re 24. = 
Maintenance... «0. nha ee 36 OA 507. Teo SS 
Total vate ee eee 30 Sua Do 00a Tie) ee ELOISE 
Saving effected by electric operation 
Gradéscio- ab eee ae 4% 1% 14% 2% 


8.2 cents 13.4 cents 22.5 cents 37.1 cents 


A study of the above table is most instructive, as it shows that 
while the percentage saving with electric operation is approxi- 
mately the same whatever the ruling grade, yet the actual money 
saving is much greater on the heaviest grades. As about the 
same investment must be made in each case for distribution 
system including third-rail or overhead trolley, sub-stations, 
etc., the inference must be drawn that heavy-grade divisions 
present a more attractive field for electrification than level 
sections when considered from the purely economic standpoint. 
There are other items of saving and other reasons for electrifica- 
tion which may be more or less controlling in individual cases, but 
it seems possible to make the broad statement that the mountain- 
grade division offers a particularly attractive field for the elec- 


tric locomotive, and its introduction should be the means of . 


affecting such economies in both freight and passenger trans- 
portation as to pay a satisfactory return upon the investment 
required. 

So far, the matter has been viewed from the standpoint of com- 
parative operating expenses for a given tonnage moved. There 
is another argument for electrification which may in certain in- 
stances be of a much more controlling nature. Most of our 
mountain roads are single track and transcontinental tonnage 
has so increased as seriously to congest these mountain divisions. 
The heavy trains of the plains, weighing 2000 to 3000 tons, must 
be split up into units of about 1000 tons in order that the present 
steam engines, operating double and even triple, may haul them 


1907.] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1665 


over the heaviest grades. The slow speed obtainable makes 
the number of trains on a mountain division large, the meeting 
points frequent, and hence, however good the despatching sys- 
tem employed, there will of necessity be a considerable amount 
of lost time introduced. Add to this the failures of motive 
power being worked to its limit, and there is reason for the claim 


CENTS PER 1000 TON-MILES 


1.2 1.6 


PER CENT GRADE 


Fic. 11.—Service capacity of steam and electric locomotives average both 
directions and any gradient 


that the tonnage capacity of the division will be greatly increased 
by the introduction of electrically hauled trains. 

Lest the writer be accused of unfairness in selecting the simple 
engine for comparison, it is proper to touch upon the economies 
effected with the use of the compound locomotive and also by the 
introdtction of such coal-saving devices as superheaters and 
feed-water heaters. 


1666 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


Reference to Fig. 13, shows a saving in water consumption 
per horse power of approximately 20 per cent. with the com- 
pound locomotive, but in spite of this generally accepted saving 
the simple locomotive still rules the mountain division after 
repeated trials of the compound. Not being an ardent supporter 
of either type of locomotive, the writer leaves the battle of the 
simple and compound to their enthusiasts, commenting only 
upon the fact that, except in the case of the Mallet compound, 
the arguments for the compound are based upon fuel economy 
only. 


TON-MILES PER HOUR 


0 8000 16000 24000 82000 40600 
TRACTIVE EFFORT IN POUNDS 


Fic. 12.—Hourly tonnage capacity of steam and electric locomotives up 
2.2% gradient 


The latest Mallet compound, weighing 413,000 pounds, is the 
largest steam locomotive yet built, and is of particular interest 
owing to the enormous boiler which such a construction permits. 
With a total heating surface of 5300 sq. ft. we should expect an 
evaporation of 63,600 pounds of water for a short period and 
possibly 48,000 pounds. water continuously. With a possible 
evaporation of six pounds of water per pound of coal, this would 
necessitate the burning of 8,000 pounds of coal per hour, re- 


1907] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES | 1667 


quiring the best efforts of two firemen if maintained for several 
hours. Assuming a steam consumption of 22 pounds per brake 
horse power-hour, such a locomotive should give a sustained 
output of 2180 horse power at the rim of the drivers, and this 
with a weight with tender of approximately 300 tons, or three 
times the weight of an electric locomotive of the New York 
Central 6000 type giving the same horse-power output. 

The two locomotives are, of course, designed for entirely 


or 
o 


§ 


co 
Oo 


~ 
o 


POUNDS STEAM PER BRAKE HORSE POWER-HOUR 


10 


0 20 40 60 80 100 
PER CENT CUT OFF 


Fic. 13.—Steam consumption simple and compound 


dissimilar classes of work; but it is not unfair to compare them 
‘on a horse-power basis as it is the huge boiler of the Mallet that 
is remarkable, and upon this basis the selling price of the two 
machines is approximately the same. 

The comparative cost of electric and steam locomotives is 
generally considered as very favorable to the steam units, but 
reversing the usual methods and comparing the cost of the elec- 
tric with that of the steam locomotive or locomotives required 
to replace it, may reverse the relations. The electric locomo- 


1668 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND {[Nov. 8 


tive requires no more than casual inspection, can be side-tracked 
indefinitely and still be ready for instant operation at full 
capacity, can run 24 hours without a stop, if necessary, and all 
these advantages and others offers a guarantee for a much 
greater annual mileage than is possible with its steam competitor. 
Then, too, compare the cost of a group of steam locomotives (no 
single unit could be designed to give the output) capable of 
delivering even 4000 h.p. continuously with a single electric 
unit of this output, and the difference in cost is not great. It 
may be stated broadly that for a given gross annual ton-mileage 
moved, the cost of steam locomotives may be even greater than 
the cost of the electric units replacing them. 

The term ‘‘ horse power ” is perhaps not fully appreciated by 
the steam railway fraternity. When the statement is made 
that a certain electric locomotive is rated at so many horse power 
output, it does not leave the impression it should. The horse 
power output of a locomotive is a direct measure of its capacity 
to do work, and while the tractive effort available governs the 
tonnage of the trailing load, it is the product of the tractive 
effort times the speed at which it is available, or in other words, 
the horse power output, that measures the hourly tonnage ca- 
pacity of the locomotive upon which the crew expenses of the 
entire train depends. Hence the great claim for recognition of 
the electric locomotive lies in its great horse power output, that 
is, its ability to carry full tractive effort or to slip its wheels at 
speeds two or three times greater than can be done with any 
steam locomotive yet built. 

Superheating promises something in fuel economy as does the 
introduction of feed-water heaters. Such improvements, to- 
gether with the adoption of the four-cylinder locomotive, either 
compound or simple, must necessarily call for more expense to 
maintain and less reliability in operation. In fact, superheating 
in stationary boiler plants has given much trouble, and excessive 
superheating has not been a complete success even when used 
with turbines, with which superheating has given the best’ 
results. Judged from stationary engine practice, it seems fair 
to assume that the amount of superheat in locomotive practice 
must be moderate and result in small benefits to be secured. 

The feed-water heater is also a coal-saving device and should 
prove to be worth its added complication as soon as it is com- 
mercially developed. 

\s against the reduction in fuel expenses promised by the use 


ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1669 


1907.] 


2dA1 Z-f-F-Z PATJOUIOIOT yYSIAI7 o1joeJe Teo1dA— "FT ‘org 


. 
I ee a y NVd6 ‘NINO Sipe 
be a a St Saves ee ksaronat baron SL aan MORON OT! = eae ee UG) ee es === eee Me Te) EEN 
F SSS = Se Bs = — DRO Te, Bae BONGO HEON STUNG Cig 9 GS — ee a ee cet mee ee oe eee eee > 
---7----- BSVE133HM WLOd ‘NI O “La 68— —— — —— a Tee ee ne ee SS SS SS eee —+-—-—-—-4a ‘ 
| es a0 YH I2-————-—-}4 k- — — — — 38v8733HM GIDIY "NI O 1d ib LL —--— 
/ JOS as BS Ae SS ee 
v ! 
: =, — tes e : wil vant 
rh Se SNC eS te Le =aw. io #1 | 
| =A in| iO} 5 } [4 ie PA iS Diy ! Bar 
2 /o | Wl HONG, 6 e IA) Tht - ~ i BS 
pd Saeco fe | Wt " Nob . co My =p | / --| ] L i woe 
= --- == = - Ly At & = =e! 2 
h lonlerea 00 -O! O15. ty Ae i ° 1 10 Ris 
Aal lor 28 K 1S8] — 1) = — at ear seb = Se D l= 
loyfe) - = = = = = = - a = fe = z (i 9.9 4a? 
= : i ci 2 by 
| ( ‘ine 5 A \ Gi aL set eC S i wrk | 
= 
i ' 
i = zeae SEN 
T =r : = a 3NI7 YOOTS 
Sg | G d) seeSesebeeesast THESE = 
be 2. 3 FS eee 4 
of — a O3| =o a 
Hy exe Zz EB = BITES 
stzesty (ES EEE: { 
12 ‘ 
| ° I2 
2 x 
h ol. 1g 1 
Zin le 
Z)? - 
' ols re ————WHO4LV1d 40 HLON3T IVLOL “NI ? ‘La ay 
7 
'2 
pes is = | 
r —< 
' 
i 


Seek 0°95 9 ¥ UL "9g ee 


~~~ =U} 0°95 OF X "UE 9 “J gJ---—---~-- sla 0°93 9 X “UT 0 “9J 6---— 
5 I 


> 


| 


1670 ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


of the compound locomotive fitted with superheaters and feed- 
water heaters, the electrical engineer has up his sleeve the great 
possibilities offered by regeneration of power while electrically 
braking on mountain-grade divisions. The amount of power 
saved by this means may in certain installations amount to as 
great a percentage of the total as is the saving affected in coal 
expenditure with steam locomotive by compounding and pro- 
viding superheaters and feed-water heaters. Such an electrical 
saving is of course restricted to heavy-grade divisions, but the 
feasibility of electric braking by regeneration is unquestioned. 
Indeed with three-phase induction motors regeneration is 
automatic, the motors being petfectly reversible and returning 
energy when operating down grade with no change whatever 
in their connections. Other types of motors may be adapted 
for regeneration with slight modifications in the control system. 

The chief advantage of regeneration les in the assurance it 
offers of greater safety in operating on heavy grades. The present 
method of braking, by friction between wheel and shoe, results 
in overheated parts, breakages resulting therefrom and conse- 
quent danger of derailment. The descent of a long heavy 
mountain grade is accompanied by the shoes and wheel rims be- 
coming heated to a dull red, while the introduction of the electric 
locomotive offers an opportunity of holding the train in whole 
or in part by means of the same motors used to haul it up grade, 
and thus eliminating one of the greatest sources of danger in 
mountain railroading. 

All of our railway managements have felt the need of estab- 
lishing a so-called express freight service comprising a light 
train operating at much higher speed than is the case with the 
bulk of the freight movement. It is well known that the cost 
per 1000 ton-miles for moving express freight is very much 
higher than in the case of low-speed freight. An inspection 
of Fig. 3, illustrates the reason for this. The steam locomotive 
is essentially a slow-speed unit when delivering its full tractive 
effort; that is, a tractive effort equal to 22 per cent. of the 
weight upon the drivers, and high speed is only obtained at the 
sacrifice of tractive effort. Hence a high-speed freight train is 
of necessity a lighter train than could be handled over the same 
profile by a given locomotive, and the crew and maintenance 
expense is therefore large. That such a class of service is never- 
theless profitable or at least necessary is evidenced by the con- 
tinuance of the practice and the proposed introduction of elec- 


167 


ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 


1907] 


PATLOUIOIO] OLIy0e[9 Jasuessed poeds-ysty eodAT—e{ “org 
ee Byes ba e a ————AWYusNSGNN 40 HLONST “NI HfL “13 oe — = _—- - 4 


le ner ae -—-——— —— —-— -—— 4344N@ Y3AO “NI O “Ld 6e- ~ _ 
~- —— -—— = 3THONN AGISNEOL 3GISNI “NIOL “14 8¢ - 
ver: —————{ ay 0°93 6I- = =--5 

je —--— —~~--— —-_-——- Ss era p v2¢-————— -—-— — = ——— == >| 
‘ | ' “UL” “93 €L- 

| —— OL 3} F-— Se = — 0 OL seo “3 7-— ; 


SEL 7 
Aiee 


all 


abd At 


F 
— ia 
oe S 


=a oa 
I n 
f ee | 
am o+) Fz — = 
| 2 = aaa 
‘ . aE Ae =) | Si MY 
| | ~~ §30HS LOVLNOO avaHyaAO ie "0 YO4 NOILISOd G3LOVYLaY 
fen. OT “33 @——-—— SS eee “UIQ “9 OL X “UT O “YW de ger aa = ee bau “Ut0 “45 9 KUL OL WY 4 


| 


mee * 


ARMSTRONG: STEAM AND [Nov. 8 


1672 


? 
le ee ee 31AONNY SQISNI OL ZGISNI “NI 9 “44 96-— —,, ~—- —§ ~~ —— — — — — — — — 


oo a re ee ae ee ee ee ae = 
We AW ls 
in 


so ree a ee oak NIdaMM IVLOG NT 9a hd OR 
apnea tae 2 
res em ral dy LT ; Tit 
Ley maT ] 
: z seg 


i} he eae 
tort se fel = ee 


ae & 


are 


asi 


SONuVaO Aa canyv soppy ae 


== 


yoy! ani1 
‘aio | 
: ne 
ad 
= | ~ 
"eee 0 QD F 3 5 ee 5 
eb is i ] 
> = Hy 
ee Z| is | EN : he 
bs a m : 
j 2 ‘ ge 13 | 
i 23 
| : a: | 
| a |3 
aoe ts 
PH 538 | 
‘ ies Iz i 
“ay'L te 
| in OHS 1Ov4,NOO QV3HYSAO “O°G JO NOILISOd GaL0 i 13u | 
| | | 5 | 
|. -— smo arex-oro "WW 6-—--— Maa a "G0 43 OL = “Ul “SF QE --——————-— >{----UT 0° 9X “UT 0 “36 ———— ~ 


1907 ] ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES 1673 


tric locomotives, in effect, makes all trains fast freights, gaining 
the benefits of such a service without incurring the penalty of 
increased operating expenses inherent to steam operation. 

In this paper the writer has attempted to outline some of 
the fundamental reasons for the «lectrification of steam roads; 
the figures submitted are used for illustrative purposes only and 
are not intended as being directly ~pplicable to any concrete 
case. Many of the points touched upon, such as steam locomo- 
tive improvements, compound versus th. simple, and the com- 
parative advantages of different types of electric locomotives, 
etc., could all be treated in separcte papers by themselves, so 
replete with interest are the different points raised. Rather 
than befog the main question at issue, which is the electrification 
of steam roads, detailed proof of many statements made has not 


_ been attempted, as the introduction of such proof would un- 


necessarily extend a paper already too long. Nor does the writer 
believe that the time is ripe for the electrification of steam roads 
at large; indeed, the electrical enthusiasts would be hard put to it 
if called upon to show reason for the electrification of many 
branch steam lines carrying a small tonnage at infrequent in- 
tervals. There are, however, certain divisions of our steam rail- 
ways which, either on account of their broken profile or heavy 
traffic, offer an opportunity to introduce a superior type of mo- 
tive power which will effect such economies in operation as to 
provide adequate return on the investment required for the 
electrification. There are still other divisions where a much 
desired increase in the track-tonnage capacity can only be 
effected by double tracking so long as the steam locomotive is 
adhered to as the type of motive power used. Double tracking 
a mountain-grade division is often a matter of enormous expense, 
and electrification of the single track may relieve the present 
traffic congestion at a moderate cost. 

On mountain-grade divisions the subject of regeneration with 
electric locomotives should receive very careful consideration, 
not so much on account of the saving in power which it may 
effect, but rather on account of the greater safety of operation 
which it guarantees by eliminating the serious defects of holding 
trains on heavy grades by wheel and shoe friction. Finally, there 
are the many incidental advantages to be gained with electrifica- 
tion which cannot be predicted with any accuracy, as they result 
from changes in operating methods sure to follow the introduc- 
tion of a type of motive power not subject to the service limita- 


1674 ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


tions of the steam locomotive. No attempt has been made 
even to approximate the saving effected in engine supplies, round- 
house expenses, elimination of water supply with its often 
attendent expensive purifying outfit, and the many items inci- 
dent to steam locomotive operation. These items are inci- 
dental and seldom assume an importance sufficiently great to 
class them as fundamental, though the difficulty of procuring 
good water, even with purifying plants, may approach very 
closely to being a controlling factor in certain cases. 

The freight-car shortage problem itself is a very serious one 
at certain times of the year on some roads, and as the total freight- 
car mileage can be increased with the higher speeds provided 
with electric locomotives, it should result in the saving of a 
considerable expense now incurred for rental of foreign cars, or 
even increase the gross receipts by the movement of tonnage 
which more available cars would make possible. 

The subject of the electrification of steam roads is, therefore, a 
very broad one, and while this paper has been devoted largely to a 
discussion of operating expenses as affected by the different 
characteristics of the two types of locomotives, it has been 
done to illustrate the advantages resulting from increased 
* locomotive capacity. The keynote of electrification is capacity; 
by approaching the problem from this standpoint only can full 
benefits be obtained. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1675 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘COMPARATIVE P&RFORMANCE OF STEAM AND 
Evectric Locomotives’, at NEw York, NovEMBER 8, 1907. 


William J. Wilgus: Instead of apologizing for adding to the 
number of papers on the electrification of steam railroads, the 
author should feel entitled to congratulations for calling atten- 
tion to many of the advantages of the electric locomotive that 
have heretofore escaped analysis. In my judgment the 
cause is injured rather than benefited by arguments for the 
wholesale application of electricity to steam railroads, and it 
is pleasing to note the increasing tendency in our technical 
societies to sane discussions that will really enlighten the rail- 
road officer anxious to be in the van of progress. 

Unquestionably, electricity in heavy traction work has come 
to stay. As the author states, until now the reasons that have 
lead to the principal changes of motive power are entirely apart 
from questions of economy in operation. Conservative advo- 
cates of heavy electric traction, while urging its self-evident 
advantages in the abolition of the products of combustion in 
tunnels and cities, the increasing of terminal capacities, and 
opportunities for growth of traffic, have refrained from dwelling 
too strongly on saving money. They have been contented with 
the belief that more money could be made. The burden of 
additional interest charges, taxes, maintenance and depreciation 
attendant upon the substitution of electricity for the old form 
of motive power has very properly caused the careful engineer - 
to pause in admitting even to himself that in addition to increased 
capacity to handle traffic, there might be a net saving in cost 
of operation. This cautiousness has sprung from the absence, 
until recently, of any actual data on the cost of heavy electric 
traction operation. 

The pioneer electrical installation in heavy trunk-line service, 
on the New York Central & Hudson River Railroad, has now 
been in complete and successful operation since July 1, 1907, 
the gradual change from steam power having commenced in 
December, 1906. The working side by side of both kinds of 
motive power has given unsurpassed opportunities for the ob- 
servation of their comparative capacity and efficiency. The 
results are even more gratifying than were expected; and sub- 
stantiate many of the author’s claims of superior capacity of 
electric equipment, although the conditions differ widely from 
those that he has assumed. 

At this point it may be well to venture a word of caution on 
the subject of costs. Comparisons are worthless unless all 
elements of expense that will affect the results, are included. 
For instance, the cost of current delivered at the contact 
shoes should include not only costs of operation and mainte- 
nance, interest, depreciation, taxes and insurance on the power 
station, but likewise on the entire distributing system. If this 
is properly done, the real cost of current, as finally delivered 


1676 | STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES (Nov. 8 


at the electric equipment, will be found very largely to exceed 
the usual assumptions. The author’s cost of current seems 
to me to be considerably too low. 

On the other hand, the cost of maintenance and care of equip- 
ment should embrace not only wages and supplies, but also inter- 
est, taxes, insurance, maintenance and depreciation on the 
structures and real estate required to house and repair the 
equipment. Steam locomotives require extensive engine-houses, 
coal and water stations, ash-pits and appurtenances, often on 
very expensive lands, whereas electric equipment needs the 
simplest form of inspection sheds occupying limited areas cf 
land. Also steam locomotives require extensive and compli- 
cated heavy-repair shops, usually at far distant points, that 
necessitate costly dead mileage and lengthy idle periods, while 
electric equipment because of its simplicity can be much more 
quickly repaired in nearby shops and returned to service. 
Many of these features have been mentioned by the author, 
but possibly their importance can be emphasized by giving 
some concrete examples from actual practice on the New York 
Central. 


Because of less cost of maintenance of electrical equipment,’ 


and less idle time in shops, the greater cost of interest charges 
and depreciation is not only neutralized, but a net saving in 
repairs and fixed charges over steam equipment is effected 
of 19 per cent. 

Electric locomotive inspection and light repairs, as com- 
pared with coaling, watering, drawing fires, repairs, etc., of 
steam locomotives show a saving in time in favor of the former 
of over 4 hours per day, equal to 18 per cent. 

The electric locomotive, while busy, is a much more nimble 
and efficient machine than the steam locomotive, showing an 
increase in daily ton-mileage of 25 per cent. 

While not so important in freight service, the question of 
locomotive weight is a large factor in a comparison of the rel- 
ative economy of handling passenger traffic by steam and elec- 
tricity. For instance, in switching service at the Grand Central 
terminal, 65 per cent. of the total steam ton-mileage is due to 
locomotive or “dead” weight, while the electric locomotive 
percentage is but 54 per cent., a saving for the latter of 11 per 
cent. 

In the regular schedule service, the steam locomotive shows 
51 per cent. dead ton-mileage as against 35 per cent. for the elec- 
tric equipment, a saving for the latter of 16 per cent. When 
we realize that this saving of ‘‘ dead” ton-mileage has a direct 
proportionate effect on the cost of fuel and current, and an in- 
oe effect on wages and fixed charges, its importance is mani- 

est. 

The author calls attention to the speed advantage of electric 
over steam locomotives in mountain-grade operation. This 
is strikingly apparent in the New York Central installation, 


a 


—~—— 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1677 


where the increase in coal consumption for car ton-mileage in 
high-speed service as compared with slow-speed service, is shown 
to be 165 per cent., whereas under exactly the same conditions 
the increased consumption of current for electrical equipment 
is but 18 per cent., a difference in favor of electrical operation 
of 147 per cent. 

The net result of all of the economical advantages of electric 
operation, over steam, for the conditions existing on the New 
York Central, after including all elements of cost of additional 
plant, shows a saving in summer months of from 12 per cent. 
to 27 per cent., depending on the character of service. A larger 
saving may be expected under winter conditions. 

In addition to this saving, the nuisances and dangers from 
smoke and gas in the Park Avenue tunnel have been eliminated, 
and the capacity of the Grand Central terminal has been increased 
about one-third. . Later when the New Haven Company effects 
its change of power, complete electrical operation in the tunnel 
will permit the use of shorter blocks, and correspondingly 
increase the capacity of the four-track main-line entrance to the 
terminal. 

I feel sure that the author will be pleased to know of this 
actual demonstration of the correctness of many of his views, and 
that the members of the Institute, regardless of their advocacy 
of rival systems of electrification, will take pride in the success- 
ful inauguration of this pioneer trunk-line installation, on such 
a large and complicated scale. 

It might be well to add to the author’s keynote capacity, the 
equally important one of efficiency, as the two combined, ap- 
plied to the problem under consideration, will demonstrate 
whether or not the adoption of electricity is justifiable from the 
standpoint of economics. 

Cary T. Hutchinson: I think that Mr. Armstrong gives the 
clearest statement of the capacity of steam and electric loco- 
motives that I have seen. I agree with Mr. Armstrong that no 
project of electrification of trunk lines has up to the present 
been undertaken from an economical point of view. The matter 
has so far been determined by special considerations, such as the 
terminal problem in New York City, or the mountain-grade 
problem, or something similar. J doubt whether there are suffi- 
cient data on hand to permit the making of an accurate estimate 
of the total annual cost of electrical operation of any steam road; 
all data on the subject that I have seen are subject to criticism 
from one point of view or another. hs 

Mr. Armstrong considers especially two points; the relative 
capacity of steam and electric locomotives as machines, and the 
relative cost of operating the two. I think, however, that he 
. does not emphasize strongly enough one feature of the capacity 
of electric locomotives, that is the capacity in continuous service. 

Regardless of the type of motive power, the design of a loco- 
motive is limited to a certain weight on each driving axle, the 


16/8 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


maximum being about 50,000 pounds; the coefficient of ad- 
hesion, as Mr. Armstrong states, in steam locomotive practice 
is taken at about 22 per cent. Each driving axle will then be 
able to deliver a tractive effort of 11,000 pounds, and a draw- 
bar-pull of, say, 9,000 pounds. A steam locomotive can exert 
this draw-bar pull continuously, up to a certain speed determined 
by the capacity of its boiler, which for the sake of illustration 
may be taken at eight miles per hour, so that in freight service 
each driving axle will give a continuous duty of 9,000 pounds. 
Owing to the limitations of space, no electric locomotive can 
be built to deliver continuously a draw-bar pull of 9,000 pounds 
per driving axle; probably 5,000 pounds is the maximum that 
can be obtained; that is to say, an electric locomotive cannot 
work continuously at a coefficient of adhesion greater than about 
12 per cent. Therefore, for continuous service at low speeds a 
steam locomotive, for the same weight on drivers, can pull from 
60 to 100 per cent. greater load than an electric locomotive. 

The electric locomotive can, however, deliver this draw-bar 
pull at any speed that it is practicable to use, the limitation being 
fixed by the equipment and the track, and not by the locomotive. 
The draw-bar pull of the steam locomotive falls off from the critical 
speed of, say, eight miles per hour, as is well brought out by Mr. 
Armstrong in the paper, whereas an electric locomotive, de- 
signed for the purpose, will give its continuous drawbar pull at 
any practicable speed; hence, at a certain higher speed the two 
locomotives will pull equal loads continuously, at say about 16 
miles per hour. At all higher speeds the electric locomotive 
will have the advantage. 

The size of an electric motor is determined principally by the 
torque that it must exert and not by the speed at which it must 
exert this torque; hence a locomotive designed for 10 miles per 
hour and a draw-bar pull of say 5,000 pounds per axle, can, by 
changes in the windings, which will not change the size or weight 
of the motors, exert a draw-bar pull of 5,000 pounds at 40 miles 
per hour, or any other practicable speed. This is the great ad- 
vantage of electric as compared with steam locomotives. 

Another way of looking at the matter is that electric loco- 
motives are designed for the average work to be done, steam 
locomotives for the maximum work, since an_ electric 
locomotive designed for the average work will under all condi- 
tions easily be able to handle the maximum work. The use 
of the electric locomotive then makes it unnecessary to consider 
the ruling grade as a limiting feature to the capacity of the 
locomotive, whereas it must always be the limiting feature to 
the capacity of a steam locomotive. An illustration may make 
this clearer. 

The six-axle Mallet compound locomotive used by one of 
the railways will pull, on the mountain division, having a grade 
of 2.2 per cent., an average of about 800 tons at a speed of 8.5 
miles per hour, delivering therefore about 1,200 horse power at 


1907] DISCUSSION AT. NEW YORK 1679 


the driving wheel. The locomotive weighs 250 tons with tender; 
the output is equal to 4.8 horse power per ton total weight. 
An electric locomotive weighing 100 tons, all on the drivers, 
will haul the same load up the same grade at 15 miles per hour 
and will develop approximately 1,800 horse power, equal to 18 
horse power perton. In other words, the power developed per 
ton on drivers in the electric locomotive is four times as great 
as in the steam locomotive. 

Moreover, an electric locomotive could easily be designed to 
exert the same draw-bar pull at a speed of 20 to 25 miles per 
hour, and have no greater weight, than for 15 miles per hour. 
This Mallet locomotive will pull a load of only 530 tons up the 
grade at a speed of 15 miles per hour, using Mr. Armstrong’s 
curves as a basis. The comparison on a basis of 15 miles per 
hour is then: 


MALLET, 
PMO GANG FENCEL. kine 0, oe vv sis ....260 tons 
4 ORT. WSR PN acl aN Sed ately ate 330 tons 
Total 580 tons 
ELECTRIC 
Beemie: 2.0% Pete ee cree ce ee 100 tons 
Peat eee hate See a te os) Beers 800 tons . 
ee Oba eee SORE Fe 900 tons 


or the useful load at this speed is 2.4 times as great. This is 
merely another way of saying that steam service is incapable 
of handling heavy loads at high speeds. 

The great advantage of the electric locomotive is, therefore, in 
the much higher speed possible. There is no inherent reason 
why a freight train should run at a lower speed than a 
passenger train; they do run at lower speeds simply because loco- 
motives can not be built to haul them at the higher speeds, but the 
electric locomotive will probably change this and the speed of 
the freight service will be increased very greatly. 

Another point should be noted in the above comparison. The 
steam locomotive weighs 150 tons more than the electric loco- 
motive; assuming a duty of 100 miles per day, there are 15,000 ton- 
miles daily dead haul, which at the rate of 2 mills per ton mile 
amounts to about $30 per day,or say $10,000 per year. This 
is a.clear saving in favor of electric locomotives. It can also 
be viewed as permitting an increase of 150 tons in the possible 
train load, and from this point of view the net earnings of an 
electric locomotive would be greater than that of a steam loco- 
motive by the 150 tons extra load. 

Something has been said by Mr. Armstrong about three- 

phase locomotives. I have recently decided to use the three- 
-phase locomotives for the Cascade Mountain grade of the Great 


1680 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


Northern Railway, and among the reasons leading to this de- 
cision was the fact that the locomotive would have a fixed speed 
and could not be operated at a greater speed on the down grade. 
This equipment is for the freight service of the road only, at a 
place where much trouble has been caused by trains running 
away on the down grades. 

Another reason leading to this decision was the recuperation 
on the down grade; this is valuable, not so much in the saving of 
energy, for in this case the additional energy, being supplied 
from a water power plant, would cost nothing, as in lessening 
considerably the capacity of power house required for any 
particular service. Two tons going down the grade will pull 
one ton up the grade; it is therefore necessary only to supply 
power for the tonnage up grade in excess of the down grade 
tonnage; with a system of train dispatching having this in view, 
a material saving can be made. 

W. S. Murray: Law or economy brings electrification of 
railroads. It is peculiarly interesting, too, to note how economy 
hugs up to law, if law has been the cause. After law has had its 
turn, then comes the turn of the engineer. Such conditions may 
be levied by the law as to make impossible the operation of a 
certain piece of railroad mileage as economically by electricity 
as by steam. It is the duty of the electrical engineer to choose 
such a system consistent with safety and the guarantee of con- 
tinuity ‘of service, whicn will increase to a minimum amount 
the original operating expense. When economy dictates the 
electrification, again it is the duty of the electrical engineer to 
elect a system consistent with safety and continuity of service, 
which will decrease to a maximum extent the original operating 
expense. 

The closing sentence of Mr. Armstrong’s paper is: 

The keynote of electrification is capacity; by approaching the prob- 
lem from this standpoint only can full benefits be obtained. 

I am in full agreement with Mr. Armstrong on this score, 
except I feel that while he has furnished the horse, there 
has been no mention of the carriage and what the carriage 
contains; in short, I should have said the keynote of electrifica- 
tion is ‘“‘ton-miles’’, then capacity to handle it. The track 
capacity of a railroad is tremendously enhanced by electrifica- 
tion, but ton-miles must be on hand to make necessary the in- 
creased locomotive capacity. 

I cannot escape a decided exception to Mr. Armstrong’s 
reference, “‘ Petty economies effected in coal consumption and 
cost of locomotive repairs’. Examining the principal heads under 
operating expense, we find ‘“‘ maintenance of way and structures’, 
“maintenance of equipment’, ‘conducting transportation ’’ and 
“general expenses’. There is little choice in this list that 
electrification can detach upon which to practise its economies 
other than fuel and locomotive repairs. Of course the inference 
concerning the generalincrease of track capacity and operating fa- 


oe 


ti eigsitliiatnl 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1681 


cility, together with the fact that electrified lines offer more induce- 
ment for traffic in general, is not lost, but I cannot withhold 
figures that have come within my personal observation and keep- 
ing, which have a value keenly important rather than “ petty ”’ 
and, indeed, point directly to and are a demonstration of the 
keynote to electrification; namely, ton-miles. 

In a previous contribution to the Institute’s TRANSACTIONS 
in connection with the Stillwell-Putnam paper on the substitu- 
tion of the electric motor for the steam locomotive, I presented 
figures that were worked out ina faithful effort by all concerned 
in it to secure what could be absolutely relied upon as the resist- 
ance of the main line of the New York, New Haven & Hartford 
Railroad Company between New Haven and Woodlawn, I shall 
briefly say in regard to this work, that after days of careful indi- 
cation of steam locomotives on east-and west-bound runs with 
trains of varying weight for express and local-express service, 
the resistance for these several conditions was obtained, and 
_the real relations between the ton-mile, the pounds of coal per 
ton-mile, and the horse-power-hours per ton-mile, were established 
in figures, upon which has been based the power house capac- 
ity necessary to operate the electric trains of the New Haven 
road. This effort was made to secure the actual service con- 
ditions rather than to depend on hypothetical resistance curves, 
the opinions on which are conspicuous for their wideness of varia- 
tion. 

Generating, transmission line, and railway equipment effi- 
ciencies are too well known not to be able, having determined 
the rim horse power required for propelling trains, to figure 
back to the power house the amount of the kilowatt capacity 
required to operate a predetermined schedule of trains. We 
cannot afford to quarrel with the machine efficiency of the steam 
locomotive. It is the equal of the machine efficiency of the elec- 
tric motor morning, noon, and night. We shall take issue, 
however, on the efficiency which lies behind the two engines, viz: 
the generation of steam in the boiler of the locomotive versus 
its generation at the power station with its attendant transmis- 
sion and conversion into electricity for application to the motors 
driving the locomotive. é 

The following table shows the saving of fuel which will be 
effected on the New York division when all freight and pas- 
senger trains, now operated by steam, receive their draw-bar 
pull by the electric method of traction. 


Tons of |Tons of | Cost of | Cost of | Saving of 
Ton-miles coal coal coal coal jelectric over 
per steam | electric | steam | electric steam 
annum traction |traction |traction /traction traction 
Bisaet.t 8 592,240,000} 57,447 | 29,870 | $183,830) $89,620 $94,210 
Lote tae dhrcness 348,000,000] 58,300 | 28,600 | 186,560) 85,800 100,760 
Freight..............|2,223,000,000| 187,844 | 139,010 | 563,530) 417,030 146,500 


3,163,240,000 ~ $341,470 


1682 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


In connection with the work done in the field to secure the 
data as compiled in the table just read, a diagrammatic tabula- 
tion of the observations considered pertinent to the test wasmade, 


Average cut-off variation 
Boiler pressure variation 

SHowinc 4 Water consumption 
Indicated horse power 
Grade profile. 


Ten locomotives were included in this test, and eighteen days 
of consecutive observation of performance were utilized. 

Briefly, this diagram indicates that in express work 2055 
indicated horse-power-hours are developed in the evaporation 
of 57,594 pounds of water, giving an average, therefore, of 
28 pounds of water per indicated horse-power-hour; and 
on local trains this figure is slightly increased, the evapora- 
tion being 42,987 pounds of water for 1435 horse-power-hours, 
making the rate, 30 pounds of water per indicated horse-power- 


hour. I mention these figures, as we are all familiar with the © 


turbine guarantees of 20 pounds of water, including auxiliaries, 
per kilowatt-hour at the switchboard. which, reduced to a 
horse power basis, would be 15 pounds of water as measured 
at the switchboard. Remembering the ratio of 7 to 10 in the 
evaporation of locomotive vs. stationary boilers per pound of 
coal, it is not a stretch of conscience to concede that twice the 
draw-bar pull can be developed by the electric method of trac- 
tion for coal burned under the boilers of stationary plants vs. 
coal burned in the fire-boxes of locomotives. 

In that contribution, I also submitted figures bearing on the 
cost of repairs and maintenance of 20 steam, freight, and pass- 
enger locomotives; these have been kept most carefully over a 
period of one year and show 8.1 cents per locomotive-mile for 
freight engines and 5.6 cents per locomotive-mile for passenger 
engines. The engine mileage of the New York division of the 
New Haven road amounts to about 4,836,992 miles. This mileage 
is divided for passenger and freight service into 2,993,328 and 
1,843,664 miles, respectively. These figures were based on week 
ending October 25, 1907, and it is to be noted that it will, there- 
fore, be below the average, on account of the summer months 
bringing the heaviest traffic. This means an operating cost of 
$316,962.00 per annum, for the maintenance and repairing of 
engines, 

The average figures that I have been able to secure on-electrie 
engine repairs per locomotive-mile are about 2 cents. Increasing 
this figure 25 per cent. for safety and assuming the same number 
of electric engines replacing steam locomotives, (as a matter ot 
fact there would be less electric engines required-on account 
of the greater mileage per diem derived from electric locomotives) 
the total would be $120,924.00 per annum, showing a saving 


over steam locomotives of $196,038.00. Therefore, the. net 


= 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1683 


saving on fuel and locomotive repairs in favor of electrification 
gives a round sum of $562,470.00 per annum. This, upon a 
capital basis with money at 5 per cent represents $11,249,400.00, a 
rather effective credit on the expense necessary to invest. 

Messrs, Stillwell and Putnam’s exhaustive and comprehensive 
analysis of the statistics of railroads for 1904, compiled by the 
Interstate Commerce Commission, and proof sheets of the 
report of the Commission for the.year 1905, give the undeni- 
able records of railroads of this country; and the averages for 
over five years, as shown in the paper read by them before this 
Institute, show fairly and honestly, where and where not 
economies may be effected. Of the four principal headings of 
operating expense as mentioned before, two of tiem, viz.: ‘““main- 
tenance of way and structures’ and ‘‘ general expenses’’ may 
be equated. Of the remaining two, viz.: the ‘‘maintenance of 
equipment”’ and the ‘‘conducting of transportation,” the first of 
these indicates that operation could be effected by electricity 
at an expense of about 63 per cent. of that of steam; and of the 
of per cent. saved, 75 per cent. of this is on account of the 
economies in the repairs of electric vs. steam locomotives. Our 
steam experience, to date, enables me to confirm these figures 
of Messrs, Stillwell and Putnam. 

Concerning the second item, viz: the conducting of trans- 
portation, which is generally the largest item in the operating 
expense of any railroad, it is to be noted that the estimated 
cost of operation by electricity is 79 per cent. of that of steam; 
and it is safe to consider that of the 21 per cent. saved, 90 per 
cent. of this is on account of fuel and round-house expenses. 
These figures are confirmed by the practical investigation which 
I have been conducting in an effort to secure the relative 
operating costs of the New York Division by electricity vs. steam. 

Mr. Armstrong’s paper is full of a most interesting line of 
initiative, and is particularly attractive to me on account of 
the broad scope in which he has handled this subject. The 
matter of fuel and locomotive repairs, has been one of such 
interest to me that I must ask the indulgence of the Institute 
in having dwelt with such length on these two details, from a 
paper which has covered so much other ground. 

I may say that I almost regret to see the disappearance of 
the steam locomotive from the electric zone of the New York, 
New Haven & Hartford Railroad, as contrasts in operation 
are never better seen than when they are almost inseparately 
attached to each other. 

In closing, I would refer to two details in operation, which 
unquestionably increase the capacity of a given trackage for 
trains operated by electricity, viz: yard switching, and turning 
of engines at terminals. I believe it is safe to say that our 
experience, to date, has demonstrated that in the first instance 
double the amount can be accomplished in the same time; and 
in the latter, electric engines are ready to make their reverse 


1684 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


train movement in 25 per cent. of the time required by steam 
locomotives, assuming that the water-tanks, ash-dumps and turn- 
tables, are within the yard limits of the terminal. 

Wm. McClellan: We shall not be able to state positively what 
basis there is for electrification on the score of reduction in opera- 
ting charges until we have a complete engine stage equipped 
electrically, with no steam locomotive shops, no steam repairs, 
no unnecessary buildings, but everything equipped to handle 
electrical equipment only, in the most economical manner. For 
this reason I think that the speaker of the evening has taken 
the proper view, when he bases his whole argument on capacity. 
He believes that heavy grades will prove the most fruitful field 
in which to start, and we must agree with him very heartily. 
It cannot be gainsaid that he has proved his case so far as this 
point is concerned in this paper. It should not be forgotten 
that all electrification to date has included a very great change 
in operating conditions and frequency of train service. As a 
result, electrification has been charged with many expenses which 
properly belong to amplification of the service and not to elec- 
trification proper. To get a just comparison in such cases it 
would be better to estimate what it would cost to give the in- 
creased service, both in quantity and quality, by steam loco- 
motives, and compare this with the estimate required to do 
the same work by electric locomotives. In most cases I be- 
lieve it would present the case for electrification in a much 
more favorable light than the way it is usually done. 

I must also agree with the author that the electrification 
problem is not a substitution problem. It involves taking 
the traffic problem of the railroad and solving it along wholly 
different lines, from wholly different points of view. An electric 
locomotive is not something that is designed to replace a steam 
locomotive taken off rails. It has different capabilities,different 
possibilities, and these must be considered as influencing the 
whole traffic problem. The very greatest stress should be 
laid on this point in discussing the matter with our steam loco- 
motive friends. 

C. L. de Muralt: My belief is that, when one or two of the 
large railroads have been electrified, we shall find economies 
in operation to have slipped in, with or without intention. But 
the largest electrification work in the near future will likely be 
done for the reason that very much more traffic can be handled 
over existing tracks with electric locomotives than with steam 
locomotives. My office has recently had occasion to work out 
a problem where a road with something like eighty miles of 
double track was actually nearing the end of its ability to handle 
traffic with steam locomotives. The question came up of adding 
new tracks to increase its capacity. In this case, there would 
have been two additional tracks which would have cost some- 
thing like $15,000,000. On the other hand, a complete electric 
equipment for the old tracks, comprising power stations, dis- 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1685 


tributing system, and locomotives, will cost only about $3,000,000. 
The handling of the present amount of traffic by electricity will 
Save in operating expenses something like $200,000 out of 
$800,000 and with the electric equipment pushed a little harder, 
there will be a chance to increase traffic forty to fifty per cent. 
over what the tracks will stand under steam. Here, therefore, 
is a case where electricity should be used and electric equipment 
installed just as soon as the $3,000,000 can be raised. 

Mr. Armstrong has not only reaffirmed that increase in 
capacity is the keynote, he has also shown us what he 
understands by capacity and what we should all understand 
by that term. It is a pity that so many engineers, who 
have to draw comparisons between electric and steam loco- 
motives, are not quite clear on this point, and that compari- 
sons have been made which are really quite a little misleading. 
It is not so much the tractive effort or the draw-bar pull which 
a locomotive can give, but the speed at which that draw-bar pull 
can be developed, which is important. And that is what Mr. 
Armstrong so nicely points out, when he defines as capacity, not 
merely draw-bar pull, but the product of draw-bar pull times speed. 
From this viewpoint Dr. Hutchinson’s statement will look 
different. If I understand him correctly, he believes that 
steam locomotives could give about 9000 lb. draw-bar pull per 
axle, while no electric locomotive could be built to do the same. 
Personally, I am absolutely convinced that electric locomotives 
can do better than that. But, even if an electric locomotive 
could give only 4000 or 5000 lb. draw-bar pull per axle, but can 
carry that 4000 or 5000 lb. up to three or four times the speed 
at which the steam locomotive can develop 9000 lb. draw-bar 
pull, cannot the electric locomotive handle more traffic? In 
other words, is not its actual capacity much larger than that 
of the steam locomotive? As an illustration I have in mind 
a high-speed steam locomotive of the New York Central Atlantic 
type, which weighs about 160 tons, and develops a tractive 
effort at 45. miles per hour of about 13,000 lb., while the 
New York Central continuous-current locomotive weighs about 95 
tons, and will carry at the same speed of 45 miles an hour a 
tractive effort of about 14,000 lb. In the one case about 80 
Ib. per ton, and in the other about 150. A European type of 
three-phase electric locomotive weighs about 70 tons and will 
carry at 45 miles an hour about 23,000 lb. of tractive effort, 
which is a still better showing. In short, I believe the question 
raised by Mr. Armstrong, and the solution offered by him, both 
show clearly what we are likely to come to: those lines will 
probably first be electrified which, with steam as motive power, 
are now at the limit of their traffic capacity. Electricity will 

show that for a comparatively small expenditure of money we 
' ean increase the traffic of such lines considerably, and I think 
we may look to an early use of electric locomotives for such 
purposes. That type of electric locomotive will in the end 


8 ee eet aren 


1686 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


prove to be the most useful, which in a given unit weight is able 
to concentrate the greatest amount of tractive power. 

W. N. Smith: There is very little to add to what may be 
called the statistical feature of Mr. Armstrong’s paper. He 
has had exceptional opportunity to go into such parts of the 
relative costs as are covered by the scope of his paper. But 
the problem is so complicated that the part of it which 
has here. been covered in some detail does not cover the whole 
‘question. I agree fully with those who have remarked that 
the items which he has called petty or incidental are of consider- 
able importance. They depend, of course, on the conditions 
of the particular road which the engineer may be called upon 
to investigate. A mountain road, or a road with a continuous 
long pull of 20 or 30 miles up-grade, is a different condition from 
a broken profile, or a level profile, such as the road from which 
Mr. Murray has given some figures. It is a very interesting 
proposition to consider the total resistance to be overcome in 
drawing a train over a line, and it is a relatively easy matter 
to consider it from that standpoint when the road -is almost 
absolutely level; but when a large amount of drifting comes into 
play, with long down-grades, or with a broken profile, the prob- 
lem becomes somewhat more complicated. It is very true that 
the whole question focuses upon capacity; but there are several 
different ways of looking at capacity, and one of the aspects 
that has not to my knowledge been given very much considera- 
tion in most of the communications on the subject, is the capac- 
ity for train movement of any given piece of single-track rail- 
road. This is really a deep question. It is one that railroad 
operating men are daily in contact with, and it is to them 
that any question of capacity must appeal first. They are the 
men whom, first of all, you have to convince that you can 
increase the capacity of a piece of track, and while the possi- 
bilities of double track, as to increase, are considerable, the 
possibilities of single track are considerably less, particularly 
if the profile is undulating and operating conditions generally 
are difficult. It is quite conceivable that it would be found 
impracticable to get as many trains over a given piece of single 
‘track as would be required to make it a financial object to 
electrify that particular section. In such a case, of course, 
electrification would be reduced to an absurdity. 

I mention this simply as a possibility. I have not had oppor- 
tunity to examine a particular instance of this type carefully 
enough to define where it would begin to be an absurdity, but 
I know that such a consideration is apt to be present, and cannot 
be left out of the calculation. The operating man’s standpoint is 
of the greatest importance, and it is one, I fear, to which many 
electrical engineers have not hitherto given sufficient considera- 
tion. The general trunk line electrification work of the future, 
however, must be considered from that standpoint. 

I suppose that considerably more than 75 per cent. of the 


inet LE a toed 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1687 


mileage-of the railroads of the United States is single track, and 
the cost of increasing the capacity of these roads by double 
tracking them, in order to enable a much greater number of trains 
to be run over the road in both directions, would stagger the’ 
imagination if it were estimated. Electrification is in some 
respects a simpler proposition to estimate on, in so far as cost 
is concerned, but there is no use trying to figure out how to run 
more trains. over a piece of road than the road will accommodate. 
The questions of block signaling, turn-outs, and train-dispatching 
must enter into the problem first of all. 

The capacity of the steam locomotive has been mentioned 
as being in some instances greater than could possibly be ob- 
tained continuously from an electric locomotive, but it occurs 
to me that this will depend to some extent on the conditions 
under which the steam locomotive is to operate. We know 
that up-grades of 30 miles or longer actually exist where a steam 
locomotive working at full power has to stop for water on the 
way up; of course it can go right along again at its maximum 
capacity after it has filled its tender, but when it has worked up 
to the point where all its water is exhausted, the locomotive 
must stop to have the supply replenished; and to that extent 
there must be .some qualification to statements regarding the 
uniformly high capacity of a steam locomotive. 

The question of load-factor has not been touched upon in 
the discussion of the cost of power. I will not undertake to 
discuss it, except to state that it seems to me rather an import- 
ant matter to consider in making an estimate of what the cost 
of power will be in predicting the economic performance of an 
electrified section. Of course it goes without saying if the 
section isecongested the load-factor will be high, but if the trains 
are few it will not be high and the cost per kilowatt will run up. 

The weight of the tender has been mentioned, and any one who 
will examine the general data of the heaviest steam locomotives 
now being turned out will perhaps be somewhat surprised at 
the enormous weight of the tender, a dead weight, which, though 
a part of the motive power, cannot produce any tractive effort. 

It is probable that a comparison with the consolidation type 
of steam locomotive will show a greater economy for electric 
power than will a comparison with the Mallet type of locomotive, 
which is said to be very successful in mountain work. 

The various items of cost, even those called “‘ petty’’, which 
enter into locomotive operation and maintenance, whether steam 
or electrical, are so variable that differences of a comparatively 
small number of cents per locomotive mile in a few items 
may make a large difference in the showing that the final tabu- 
lation will produce, and may throw the balance one way or the 
other, and every possible item of expense must be taken into 
consideration in making a comparison that will pass as valid 
when presented’to the practical railroad operating man. . 

Chas. P. Steinmetz: The leading conclusion of Mr, Armstrong’s 


1688 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


paper seems to be that the advantage resulting from electrifica- 
tion is to be found in the increased capacity; that is, the ability 
of the road with the same trackage to handle a greater amount 
‘of traffic. This, however, means that the change from steam 
power to electric power is not a mere substitution of the electric 
locomotive for the steam locomotive, but a readjustment of 
the ways of operation; that is, an increase of the speed of opera- 
tion of freight service by taking advantage of the feature of the 
electric locomotive to be able to carry its draw-bar pull up to 
a higher speed. We usually find, when introducing a more ad- 
vanced way of doing a thing, that we have not a mere substitu- 
tion, but to get the greatest benefit from the change, the 
method of operation must be rearranged. Nearly a century 
ago when the stage coach was replaced by the steam engine, the 
first attempts to attach the steam engine to the stage coach and 
pull it over the country roads came to naught, and steam pro- 
pulsion became successful only by putting the locomotive on 
the railway track. A characteristic of the steam locomotive is 
that it is essentially a constant power motor. It gives approxi- 
mately the same power whether running at high or low speed. 
The draw-bar pull, therefore, does not tell the whole story, but 
the limit is the steaming capacity of the boiler, and the faster 
you move the oftener you fill the cylinders, and since you can- 
not for a long time exceed the ability of the boiler to produce 
steam, you have to cut off earlier, and so get less draw-bar pull. 
Not so in the electric motor; in this the limitation essentially 
consists in the constant loss of power. The limit of the electric 
locomotive is that it must lose only so much power in the motor, 
in the general average, as to be within safe heating limits. 
Since efficiency rapidly increases with the speed, it means you 
can get more power out of it at higher speeds, up to a certain 
limit, and therefore the electric locomotive is best at higher 
speeds than the steam locomotive, and we have to take advan- 
tage of this feature if we desire to show the best results. It, 
therefore, as you see, does not mean a mere substitution, but 
also means a readjustment especially of the most important 
part of the railway service, the freight traffic, for higher speed. 
Higher speeds necessarily mean increased capacity of the sys- 
tem, even without any increased draw-bar pull, even with less 
draw-bar pull, and in this feature I believe lies the main advan- 
tage of electric traction; but it makes it necessary to readjust 
the method of operation to the changed condition of railroad 
motive power, to get the best results of the electric locomotive. 
You may merely substitute, but you get better results by not 
merely substituting, but also by increasing the speed to operate 
at the most economical speed of the electric locomotive, and 
this in general is higher than the most economical speed of the 
steam locomotive. 

A. H. Armstrong: In working up the comparison of the perform- 
ance of the steam and electric locomotive I was impressed with the 


») <6 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1689 


fact that the greatest benefit to be secured seemed to lie in the 
electrification of mountain-grade divisions. That is, the great- 
est necessity for electrification as well as the greatest return 
for the money invested are met with on heavy grades, and I am, 
therefore, very much pleased to find that the economy figures 
. given by Mr. Wilgus as obtained in actual service on the New 
York Central check up in some degree the final results I have 
arrived at by calculation. Also that the calculated figures by Mr. 
Murray for another section of a level road, New York, New Haven 
& Hartford Railroad, indicate a comfortable return upon 
the capital required for electrifying the New York division of 
that road. With these figures for level operation it would 
seem as if my general conclusions for the electric operation of 
mountain-grade divisions were very conservatively arrived at. 

In regard to the remarks of Dr. Hutchinson, that a total 
draw-bar pull or tractive effort of 9000 pounds could not be 
continuously sustained by an electric locomotive, I have only 
to point out two or three facts of operation which may perhaps 
have been overlooked by him in making the statement. With 
50,000 pounds per axle and a tractive effort of 20 per cent., 
which is conservative for average conditons of track, 10,000 
pounds of tractive effort is available. In practice, however, 
it is not possible to work any locomotive at this tractive effort 
continuously irrespective of its type of motive power, owing 
to the broken character of all profiles, as even on mountain-grade 
sections crossing a continental divide the grades are not uniform, 
but the average grade is seldom more than 60 per cent. of the 
maximum or ruling grade. For example, the greatest extent 
of continuous grade in this country is on the Sacramento Divi- 
sion of the Southern Pacific system, which has a 1.54 per cent. 
average grade for 83 miles with a ruling grade of 2.2 per cent. 
In other words, during the rise of 7000 feet in 83 miles the aver- 
age grade is 70 per cent. of the ruling grade. A locomotive 
operating over this division will be called upon to sustain, say, 
60 per cent. of its maximum tractive effort, thus leaving a margin 
of 10 per cent. over the demands of the ruling grade in order 
to start up the train on maximum load and grade conditions. 
Under these conditions the electric locomotive would not in any 
way suffer in comparison with the steam locomotive, as the 
heating of the motive power would not in any way prohibit 
the delivery of 6000 pounds per axle at any speed that may be 
safe in operation. Furthermore, it is necessary to take into ac- 
count the very serious delays occurring on single-track roads 
where the traffic may be heavy; so that all operating conditions 
considered, I see no reason why it should not be possible to 
keep the temperature rise of the electric motive power well with- 
in safe limits in practice. 

In choosing the word ‘‘ petty ”’ I seem to have been parti- 
cularly fortunate in irritating Mr. Murray into giving some 
very valuable data pertaining to tests made by him on the 


1690 STEAM AND ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES [Nov. 8 


New York, New Haven & Hartford tracks with steam loco- 
motives. Mr. Murray’s figures are going to prove very interest- 
ing reading when we have a chance to go into them in detail 
at greater leisure, but I am surprised to see that such a low 
steam consumption (28 to 30 pounds per i-h.p. hour) was 
arrived at in actual tests. This steam consumption could be 
looked for by indicator, but it seems rather low if it includes 
all the stand-by losses of the locomotive not in actual operation. 

In dealing with steam locomotive statistics I have found it 
necessary to divide the determination of coal and water con- 
sumption into two parts. First, that required for the actual 
hauling of the train; secondly, that lost while coasting or stand- 
ing still. For instance, I show in the paper that on a certain 
road there are some 400 pounds of coal and 4000 pounds of steam 
used per hour while locomotives are idle at terminals, turn-outs, 
or coasting down grades, while the performance of this simple 
consolidation engine when actually hauling a train corresponded 
to a steam consumption of 28 to 30 pounds per boiler horse-power- 
hour with an evaporation of approximately six pounds of water per 
pound of coal. The Mallet Compound requires more coal than 
this chargeable to stand-by losses, and further requires the ad- 
mission of steam in order to coast down grade at a speed much 
higher than 10 or 12 miles an hour. All of these losses in steam 
locomotive operation amount up to a grand total that in many 
cases will show a considerable excess cost over the cost of elec- 
tric power for hauling the same tonnage with electric locomotives. 
Hence my feeling that the figures submitted by Mr. Murray are 
somewhat low for the total coal and water consumption of the 
locomotive for twenty-four hours in regular service. 

I must adhere to my position taken in the paper that econ- 
omy of operation as regards coal consumption does not constitute 
any sufficient cause for electrification in the great majority of 
cases, and I think we cannot bring out this fact too strongly. It 
is not sufficient to show the management of steam roads that 
they can get a return of 10 per cent. or even 20 per cent. upon 
$10,000,000 or more required for electrification, as they are 
not looking for investments of this character. Careful considera- 
tion, however, will be given to any report showing means of in- 
creasing gross receipts or that will offer a reliable substitute for 
the double tracking that may be necessary to provide for a 
rapidly increasing tonnage. I must adhere, therefore, to the 
idea that the main reason for electrification of roads other 
than terminals, tunnels, etc., is embodied in the increased ca- 
pacity of the electric locomotive, providing increased tonnage 
capacity of the tracks, decreased running time, etc.—all of which 
guarantee an increase in gross’ receipts and a possible saving 
in expenditure for additional tracks, reducing ruling grade, etc. 
That this electrification will be accompanied with a gratifying 
reduction in operating expenses is a still further argument 
for replacing the steam locomotive, but it is not of sufficient 


1907] DISCUSSION AT:NEW YORK 1691 


importance in itself in the majority of cases, to encourage 
electrification. 

I note the doubt expressed by Mr. Smith as to the saving 
effected in the electrification of single track roads, and would 
state that it is on just such roads as these where the greatest 
saving can be effected both in cost of electrification and in opera- 
ting expense. A large volume of traffic is carried over a single- 
track road under the greatest difficulty and at considerable 
expense. This applies especially to trains hauled by steam 
locomotives which are capable of only six or seven miles per 
hour schedule speed up severe grades, and add considerably to 
the number of signal stops by reason of their limited radius of 
-action with their coal and water supply. For instance, a steam 
locomotive working at an average of 75 per cent. of its full 
boiler capacity on a mountain grade cannot cover more than 
15 to 20 miles without taking on more water, in this respect 
very much resembling the electric automobile forced to return 
_ frequently to its charging station for the material for a fresh 
start. It is entirely safe to say, therefore, that the total tonnage 
capacity of a single track will be very much increased with 
the adoption of the electric locomotive, and the cost of such 
electrification in some cases may be considerably less than 
the capital required to double track or duplicate the single track 
already installed. In other words, where a mountain-grade 
division has reached the maximum tonnage capacity possible with 
single track, and it becomes a question of double tracking with 
steam locomotives, a careful analysis of the conditions may 
show that electrification of the present single track may be 
accomplished with a lesser expenditure and be followed with a 
greater return upon the money invested. 

I agree with Dr. Steinmetz in the views expressed by him 
and would draw the attention of the members to the entire 
revolution in methods of handling short-haul passenger traffic 
by the introduction of the electric motor. I believe also that 
the introduction of the electric locomotive will bring about 
fundamental changes in the method of handling freight traffic 
by reason of the many inherent advantages enjoyed by the 
electric locomotive and not shared by its steam competitor. 

“W.S. Murray (by letter): In answer to Mr. Armstrong’s 
question as to whether the coal measurement was made for the 
full 24-hour day, including the hours during which the engine 
was not doing revenue work, such as time spent in the round- 
house, over ash-pits, cleaning fires, etc., I would say that this 
was the case; the idea not being simply to get the rate of coal 
per horse-power-hour whiie the engine was making its revenue 
runs, but to secure the real commercial rate or day consump- 
tion, which governs the bill the railroad company pays. 


— nie 


A paper presented at a meeting of the Ithaca 
Section of the American Institute of Hlectrical 
Engineers, Ithaca, N. Y., Dec. €, 190%. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E.E 


PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF STEAM RAILROAD ELECTRIFI- 
CATION 


BY W. N. SMITH 


In view of the extended treatment which has already been 
accorded to this subject on the floor of the Institute, and else- 
where by distinguished engineers during recent years, it is 
difficult and in fact hardly necessary to add anything to the 
electrotechnical side of the subject. So many are the electrical 
schemes proposed for the accomplishment of the various ends 
that it now seems desirable to examine the subject from stand- 
points other than electrical, in order to facilitate intelligent 
consideration of the problem as a whole. 

The trend of some of the papers that have recently been pre- 
sented, and the discussions that have accompanied them, convey 
the impression that electric railway engineers are ready to apply 
anv one of several well developed systems of electrical propulsion 
to any railroad, and attempt to make it pay. Although much 
has been published, most of it is of so general a nature that it is 
only partly convincing; and while it doubtless stirs up profes- 
sional enthusiasm and tends to keep up active emulation in de- 
vising attractive schemes and systems, the railroad man with a 
particular problem to solve is almost as much in the dark as 
ever as to the practical value of the new motive power for his 
particular conditions. 

Although at first sight ther2 would seem to be as many 
different types of problem as there are railroads to be electrified, 
the writer believes that some general classification is possible; 
and while it might be further specialized by paying especial 
attention to topographical and transportation features, which 

1693 


1694 SMITH ; RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


may be distinctly peculiar to each individual case, the writer 
thinks that railroads in general could be classified as follows: 

1. Suburban lines or sections. 

2. Tunnel and terminal sections. 

3. Heavy trunk lines with low grades, dense traffic, and more 
than two tracks. 

4. Double-track trunk lines with grades under one per cent. 

5. Single-track trunk lines with grades under one per cent. 

6. Mountain railroads with single or double track, with long 
grades steeper than one per cent. 

7. Single-track branch lines or feeders. 

It would seem that a large proportion of the railroad mileage 
of the country could be included in some one of the above 
classes, and there are individual railroad companies which have 
mileage under all of them. 

The question of density of traffic is often brought up in dis- 
cussions of steam railroad electrification, and it is generally 
admitted that the problem deals with the economic effect of 
increasing the train movement; but the physical features in- 
volved in the study of train movement are so difficult to define 
in general terms, and the number of concrete cases is so infinitely 
great, that very little information has been gathered or classified 
that will enable general rules to be made for determining where, 
so far as train movements are concerned, it becomes economical 
to abandon steam in favor of electric motive power. It seems 
to the writer that this very complicated subject must be ap-_ 
proached by degrees, and upon the basis of concrete illustration 
drawn from examples of conditions as classified under the above 
suggested headings. Such a treatment of the problem in 
general would make it more attractive to those charged with the 
practical management of railroads—the men to whom general 
curve sheets, which appeal to theoretical electrical considerations, 
are apt to be meaningless unless accompanied by voluminous 
explanation. As generalities, solutions by curve sheets are 
usually of very limited application. 

The fact has recently been emphasized that hitherto steam 
railroad electrification has been carried out only in very special 
problems, coming mostly under the headings: (1) Suburban, (2) 
Terminal, and (3) Heavy trunk lines, in the above classification, 
but only for relatively short sections. Considerable attention 
is now being given to problems of the class under (6) Mountain- 
grade division, and one such project is actually under way in 
this country. 


1907] SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1695 


The electrification of a portion of the Erie Railroad Com- 
pany’s Rochester Division, could properly be classed as that of 
a feeder or branch line under (7), but even that, as at present 
constituted, is only a partial electrification, as only passenger 
traffic of the suburban or interurban type is handled electrically 
at the present time, steam power still being used for through 
passenger and for all freight service. The West Jersey and Sea 
Shore electrification should also be put in this class, though an 
enormous summer excursion business is its principal justification. 

Furthermore, the writer believes that in discussing a problem 
of such tremendous proportions, the matter of the particular 
electric system to be employed should not necessarily be placed 
foremost, but that practical railroad operating conditions must 
be regarded as of paramount importance. It is, of course, im- 
possible to cover the whole field in a paper as short as this is in- 
tended to be, but it is certainly in order to get a larger perspective 
upon the activities of the railroad as a whole, rather than to keep 
our attention focused upon the purely electrical part of it. 

The fields of activity concerned in the electrification of a 
steam road may be subdivided into two broad divisions. 

1. The electrification project, as it calls for the services of the 
manufacturer and the engineer. 

2. Railroad operation, which in this connection may be con- 
sidered as threefold: 

a. Financial or economic, 

b, Railroad construction or standardization, and 

c. Transportation or operative. 

Reviewing these divisions, the electric railway industry oc- 
cupies a peculiar position as compared with the general trade in 
railway appliances. 

A practical monopoly of electric propulsion apparatus is 
divided among a very few large companies. This is somewhat 
similar to the general situation as regards steel rails, and steam 
locomotives, both of which commodities are produced by a 
relatively small number of manufacturers. Until recently 
the steel-rail situation was kept very close to a uniform standard 
in quality of product, as well as in price, but there having been a 
strong protest by the railroads against the defects that have been 
developed in quality, this feature is now undergoing revision by 
the steel companies. With respect to locomotives, however, 
more liberty of action is preserved by the railroad companies. 
The requirements of the motive-power departments of different 


1696 SMITH : RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


railroads are so diverse as to afford little opportunity for whole- 
sale standardization, which is a matter that is left entirely in 
the hands of the railroad customers rather than with the manu- 
facturers. There are certain tendencies toward standardization 
on a large scale, such as that made possible by the associated 
Southern Pacific, Union Pacific, and allied lines east and west of 
the Mississippi, for the sake of securing economy in maintenance 
and operation, but such attempts as have been made toward 
standardization on the part of the locomotive manufacturers seem 
to have pertained more to certain interchangeable parts of the 
locomotives, than to types which have usually been developed 
by the needs of individual roads. With electrical motive power 
apparatus, however, the art is relatively much newer, and the 
number of trained specialists is fewer, and mostly concentrated at 
the manufacturers’ shops so that the opportunity afforded the 
manufacturers to inspire and direct the formation of their 
customers’ ideas on electric propulsion has not been neglected. 
It has had a great effect upon the development of the industry. 

This does not mean that the manufacturing engineers’ judg- 
ment may not be excellent concerning questions pertaining 
solely to the design of the apparatus intended to meet particular 
conditions. It can hardly be expected, however, that manu- 
facturing engineers can always look upon their apparatus in any 
other light than that of a special commercial product, the re- 
sponsibility for whose performance comes home to themselves 
in particular, they are therefore prone to consider the various 
conditions of construction and operation from the standpoint 
of the effect of railroad conditions upon their apparatus as more 
important than the sum total of effects of the apparatus upon the 
railroad problem as a whole. 

In general, standardization of any railroad equipment on the 
part of manufacturers is more usual in commodities which the 
railroad companies cannot or do not ordinarily manufacture 
themselves in their own shops. Railroad companies have been 
compelled to leave to steel mills the work of making the rails, 
but they have frequently made a practice of building locomotives 
in their own shops. Their necessary repair-shop facilities place 
them in a position to furnish for their own locomotives and cars 
whatever equipment a locomotive manufacturer or car builder 
may decline to furnish. It is quite possible that some years 
hence railroads will devise their own systems, and build their 
own electric motors and locomotives. There is even now a 


1907] SMITH; RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1697 


tendency in this direction by the large trolley railway companies 
who make many of their own electrical repair parts. The 
Standardization Committee of the American Street and In- 
terurban Railway Association has made an excellent beginning 
along the same general lines as have been: followed in years 
past by the Master Mechanics’ and Master Car Builders’ As- 
sociations of the steam railroads; and in the course of time it 
will undoubtedly come to pass that advances in standardization 
will emanate not so much from manufacturers’ engineers as 
from the railroad companies’ own electrical engineers, who will 
be held directly responsible for the results. 

By the time that twenty or thirty roads have electrified 
their lines, wholly or in part, the attitude of their operating 
and maintenance engineering forces may become an important 
factor in the situation; and the commercial rivalry now shown 
in devising and perpetuating electric systems will then be 
diverted from its present tendencies, toward the more natural 
function of competing to furnish apparatus as specified by the 
railroads. 

The consulting engineer’s standpoint at the present time is 
that of an interpreter between the manufacturer and the rail- 
road. He has to translate the limitations of the electrical 
apparatus in terms easily understood by railroad officials, who 
generally do not pretend to be electrical experts; and he must be 
sufficiently familiar with railroad standards and practice to in- 
sist that the electrical manufacturer shows due regard for the 
general fitness of his apparatus to railroad purposes, both in 
design and reliability. He is frequently charged with a very 
grave responsibility in aiding the railroads to decide some very 
fundamental and perplexing question arising from the relation- 
ship between the old art and the new. Although he may write 
new and complete specifications for all the parts of manufactured 
apparatus involved, he is generally not called upon to design it 
in detail, as that function is still practically monopolized by the 
manufacturing companies, though subject in some degree to 
the consulting engineer’s control. He has not only to act as 
mediator between the railroads and the manufacturing com- 
panies, but he must also secure coéperation between the various 
departments of the railroad itself which are intimately concerned 
with the work he is doing; that is to say, the construction, main- 
tenance, mechanical, and transportation departments—all of 
which, in many instances, have to be consulted with reference to 


1698 SMITH : RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


a single detail. The pioneer engineering work of steam railroad 
electrification up to the present time, has largely been done on 
the initiative and with the aid of consulting engineers, whose 
usefulness té the railroad in the above described capacities has 
been very notably demonstrated. 

The standpoint of the railroad management as above suggested 
comes under three general heads; the financial or economic, the 
constructive and maintenance, and transportation. 

The control of a railroad being in the hands of those who 
represent the investors, the financial aspect of any improvement 
is the first to receive consideration. The financier looks upon 
the problem of railroad motive power as only one of a large num- 
ber to be solved from the standpoint of the maximum possible 
return for every dollar invested, whether it be for the purpose of 
reducing the cost of conducting the existing business, or of largely 
increasing that business. A project for the electrification of a 
railroad is usually attractive, because of the increased amount 
of traffic it becomes possible to handle in proportion to the ex- 
pense of handling it. This is usually directly accomplished by 
increasing the speed of revenue train-movement over a given 
piece of track, and by reducing the amount of non-revenue train- 
movement. 

Such questions are, of course, most pressing where conditions 
of traffic congestion are most severe; and for that reason most of 
the heavy railroad electrification has hitherto been worked out 
in and near New York City, where the maximum movement of 
passenger trains is required in the minimum amount of area 
available for terminal facilities. The electrification, first of the 
Baltimore & Ohio tunnel, then the Long Island Railroad, the 
New York Central Railroad, the New Haven Railroad, and the 
Pennsylvania Railroad’s New York terminal now under con- 
struction, was called into being, first of all by public necessity, 
and secondly by the desire of each railroad company to place 
itself in a position where it could handle at its terminal the maxi- 
mum traffic that its lines and territory could develop, steam 
motive power having for one reason or another reached its limit. 
These installations are distinctly special in character and can 
hardly be taken as representative of the general railroad electrifi- 
cation problem, although the general principle of increasing net 
earnings by increasing capacity is of universal application. In 
much of the work referred to about New York City, the prospect 
of immediate returns upon the investment had to be considered 


1907] SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1699 


as of secondary importance. But in proportion to the total 
mileage of the country which may ultimately prove fit for elec- 
trification, territory of such a character is relatively small in 
extent. Tunnels and terminals like those mentioned have been 
electrified simply because of the physical impossibility of meeting 
the business and public necessities in any other way. 

The more general cases, however, are not likely to be regarded 
by the financier in quite the same light, although it is believed 
that they can be more convincingly solved on their financial 
merits alone than is possible in the case of expensive metropolitan 
terminals. Each case that is brought up for solution must, through 
careful detailed estimates, justify itself on its own merits, as 
affording facilities for making transportation more profitable. — 

When the railroad man is looking at a transportation problem 
from the constructive and maintenance standpoint, he has in 
mind the crystallized experience of some 70 years of steam rail- 
road practice that has resulted in the development of railroad 
equipment along certain lines, which, generally speaking, are 
rather conservatively maintained. It may be well to recall the 
fact that the steam locomotive of the present day is in its 
essentials practically the same machine that was developed by 
George Stephenson; that is, it comprises a horizontal multi- 
tubular boiler with a fire-box at the rear and smoke-stack at the 
front, and the wheels are propelled by a direct-coupled, high- 
pressure engine, which increases the rate of combustion of the 
fuel by discharging its exhaust into the smoke-stack. Simi- 
larly, the passenger car has been developed from the old omnibus. 
A departure from some previously recognized form is often found 
good, but there is nevertheless considerable resistance to change. 
In justice to steam railroad men, however, perhaps it should be 
said that opposition to new forms is not likely to be so great 
because of radical difference in themselves, as because of the 
great cost of keeping on hand a line of repair parts entirely 
different from those which their present historic equipment 
obliges them to carry in stock. This, of course, pertains more 
especially to rolling stock and track material. Most railroads 
have worked up a line of standard parts of equipment, and the 
Master Mechanics’ and Car Builders’ Associations have codéper- 
ated extensively to promote the use of these standards upon all 
the railroads, and there will naturally be considerable opposition 
to any disturbance of such standards. Although the electrical 
equipment will necessitate, for its own maintenance, the addition 


1700 SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


of a considerable quantity of repair stock, it should not without 
good reason be permitted to change any previously existing 
standard that it is desirable to keep. On the other hand, there 
may be some very fundamental reasons for changing existing 
standards in order better to accommodate certain electrical 
features. An instance of this upon a certain railroad was the 
adoption of a new shape of splice-bar, specially rolled, to ac- 
commodate a heavy rail-bond underneath it, upon a section where 
some new track was to be laid; while the objection of another 
railroad to increasing the diameter of a motor-car wheel on ac- 
count of the additional size of tire that would have to be carried 
in stock eventually resulted in the retention of an electric motor 
originally adopted for a lighter car. At first the motor had been 
thought too small for the increased duty which was to be im- 
posed upon it, but was found to be adequate when fitted with 
suitable means for increasing its capacity, thus satisfying the 
desire of the railroad for the maintaining of standards in its 
equipment and at lower cost. 

The question of clearances has often been most perplexing, 
particularly as regards the location of either third-rail or over- 
head trolley construction. The stationary features pertaining 
to the right of way, and the dimensions of moving equipment, 
must not be allowed to interfere with each other. The third- 
rail sometimes conflicts with bridge-gussets on the one hand, or 
with hopper-bottom coal-cars on the other. The use of third- 
rail also makes more necessary the elimination of highway grade- 
crossings, and requires careful attention to the protection of the 
public at station platforms. Low overhead bridges conflict 
seriously with trolley construction, particularly when high 
voltage is desired. 

High-tension trolley construction introduces, among other 
problems, the purely mechanical one of providing suitable warn- 
ing signs or ticklers for trainmen on the tops of freight cars: 
these must not only be light enough not to injure brakemen, nor 
damage the trolley mechanism on moving equipment, but must 
also be heavy enough to withstand the blows they receive from 
the trolley without being broken or rendered useless. 

Either type of construction may require special and often ex- 
pensive arrangements at drawbridges. The civil authorities in 
cities sometimes arbitrarily insist upon placing high-tension 
lines underground, which is always expensive. Telegraph and 
telephone lines have to be protected from mechanical and 


1907] SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1701 


electrical interference. These are a few of the characteristic 
problems that arise with each electrification scheme, but solu- 
tions of them do not appear on the mathematical curve sheets 
with which professional papers are sometimes illustrated. 

Looking again at cars and locomotives, the steam railroad man 
will commonly take his standard coach as the point of departure, 
and suggest at the outset that it be equipped electrically prac- 
tically as it stands. Here it isentirely in order to remark that the 
main object of electrification is to facilitate traffic. The car 
bodies themselves should be built with that end in view, in order 
to get the full benefit of the superior type of power. The object 
to be attained affects the dimensions of the vestibules, doors, and 
seats, as well as the length of the car, and even the form of roof 
of the car may be altered from standard types without detri- 
ment to passengers, if external conditions make it desirable. 
Suburban service is the type of service that admits of the 
greatest modifications in this respect; and that car is likely to be 
the most popular with the patrons of the road which is so built 
as to enable freer ingress and egress of passengers, a matter 
which should not be lost sight of where there is competition be- 
tween different lines to be taken into account. It is no little 
tax upon the engineer’s ingenuity to get the best results in a new 
development, and still conform to the general lines of conven- 
tional car designs, some features of which have been based upon 
rules and practices primarily imposed for the greater safety of 
the traveling public. 

Coming now to locomotive design, perhaps the most funda- 
mental advantage which an electric locomotive has over its steam 
predecessor is greater mechanical simplicity, particularly as 
regards translation of the tractive effort from the motor to the 
wheel-rim. The absence of reciprocating parts is advantageous 
to a high-speed electric locomotive for passenger service, because 
of the lessened vibration of the locomotive itself, and the greater 
diminished wear and tear on the track. In the case of a slow- 
speed electric freight locomotive, the uniformity of tractive 
effort in hauling heavy train loads is a very desirable feature, 
particularly at starting. The tendency towards simplification 
_and elimination of reciprocating parts has caused the concentra- 
tion of great weight at a less height above the rail than is usual 
for a steam locomotive of equivalent power; and this lowering 
of the center of gravity is not without its effect in running con- 
ditions at high speed, particularly upon a curved track. Steam 


1702 SMITH : RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


locomotive men regard a high center of gravity as advantageous 
rather than detrimental, because its longer leverage from the 
top of the rail, which is the fulcrum, eases the side-thrust against 
the rails, due to whatever centrifugal force or lateral vibration 
there may be. So confident are steam engineers that this is a 
cardinal point of superiority that they express a desire to see 
electric locomotives so built that the essential difference between 
a steam and electric locomotive will consist in the replacement 
of the boiler upon the locomotive frame by an electric motcr, 
in order to keep the center of gravity at something like its present 
height. If electric locomotive designers in this country keep as 
clear of the use of side-rods in the future as they have in the 
past, there does not seem to be much chance for increasing the 
distance of the center of gravity from the track to the height it 
frequently reaches with a steam locomotive; but in Europe some 
of the latest and most successful electric locomotive designs 
show a tendency to set the motors above the driving wheels, 
two motors being used to drive three axles through side-rods. 
The mechanical excellence of workmanship of these locomotives 
has been attested by some of the foremost electrical engineers 
of this country who have seen them. Whether or not the tend- 
ency of this design will persist, will depend upon how applicable 
this method of coupling proves to be to the loads and speeds met 
with in this country. 

The latest developments in American locomotive practice 
as exemplified by machines actually in commerical operation or 
under test show three types: first, that of which the driving- 
wheel base is rigid, as in the case of the New York Central and 
the St. Clair tunnel locomotive units, the former having pony 
wheels, the latter none; secondly, the articulated or bogie-truck 
type, with two large driving trucks pivoted to the locomotive 
body, each truck carrying a large motor on each axle; and a 
third type, now being tested by the Pennsylvania Railroad, which 
is built upon a locomotive frame of standard type, borne at the 
rear upon the outside journals of two large driving axles, each 
carrying a 500-h.p. motor, the forward end of the frame being 
carried upon a four-wheeled bogie truck generally similar to that 
commonly used with the American or Atlantic type of steam loco- 
motive. This particular sample is designed primarily for single- — 
phase traction, and a transformer is carried over the bogie truck 
but not at a relatively great height above the rails, The super- 
structure of each of these locomotives is a steel-plate cab or 


1907) SMITH; RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1703 


enclosure housing the engineman and the control apparatus, 
but in no way approaching the weight of the boiler mounted upon 
the frame of the steam locomotive. The third type above de- 
scribed has appealed to steam locomotive men as conforming 
more nearly to their preconceived ideas of locomotive construc- 
tion, but it remains to be seen whether American designers will 
work out any method that will result in further lifting the center 
of gravity along the lines followed by the latest European prac- 
tice. 

Railroad electrification invariably raises questions of safety 
to the traveling public. Both the third-rail and the trolley are 
frequently described in the daily press as ‘‘ deadly”. The fact 
that on a third-rail system a bad short-circuit can take place 
without blowing the station circuit-breakers, which have to be 
set for heavy overloads, sometimes results in serious blockades. 
When the damage is done it is usually expensive, and takes 
time to repair. In the case of a high-tension trolley system only 
a small leak is sufficient to cause a short-circuit, and the amount 
of actual damage done thereby is trifling. Such troubles as may 
be developed by short-circuits are generally not of long duration; 
whatever wires or cables are burned in two are burned quickly, 
and clear themselves promptly. With a high-tension system 
there is no possibility of confusion between an overload and a 
short-circuit. 

Another feature of the question of safety involved is the de- 
pendence of a large number of electrical transportation units 
upon one power stacion as opposed, in the case of steam trans- 
portation, to an equivalent number of entirely independent units. 
It is perfectly possible for a disabled electric train to ground or 
short-circuit the line in its own vicinity in a manner that will 
prevent other trains from approaching. This is not the case with 
steam locomotive trains, as the terrible record of steam train 
collisions bears witness. Generally speaking, the combination 
of electric propulsion with the block-signal system for protecting 
trains has not been developed, though in the early days of the 
art the matter was occasionally brought forward as additional 
argument in behalf of electrification. The paramount desire to 
keep all traffic in motion has militated against the idea of per- 
mitting the disabled train or line-section to hamper in any way 
the movement of other trains on other sections. It is evident 
that there are possibilities along this line, particularly in the 
case of high-tension systems, that can justly receive further con- 


X 


1704 SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRI::ICATION [Dec. 6 


sideration, because with the smaller currents flowing in high- 
tension systems, control of them at a distance is relatively easier 
than in the case of the heavier currents in low-tension systems. 

We now come to a phase of the question which in the writer’s 
opinion is probably the most complicated and least understood of 
all; namely, the standpoint of the railroad operator or trans- 
portation superintendent, and his organization, upon whom 
the railroad depends for maintaining its earning power. It 
hardly need be said that the transportation man has it in his 
power either to make or mar the earning capacity of a railroad, 
and no matter what facilities for increasing transportation ca- 
pacity are furnished by the management, the duty of making 
them pay dividends devolves upon the operating department. 
The business of a railroad being primarily transportation, and 
transportation being the special function of the operating de- 
partment, we here come in contact with the highly trained 
specialist, upon whom falls the burden of getting the traffic over 
the road whether it be level or hilly, straight or crooked, single 
or double track. 

It is conceded by all, that the great thing to be desired in a 
railroad of given proportions is capacity for train-movement. 
The capacity of a double-track road is stated to be in general, 
about four times that of a single-track road, general conditions 
as to grade and location being equal; but as more than seventy- 
per cent. of the railroad mileage of the country is single track, 
the most universal problem of increasing track capacity by 
electrification will apply to single-track rather than to double- 
track lines. This, of course, excepts terminal and suburban con- 
ditions, but includes the majority of mountain railroad conditions 
where double-tracking is sometimes a physical impossibility. 

On the greater proportion of single-track railroad mileage, 
trains are handled by the telegraphic train-order system under 
the control of train dispatchers. On some railroads, however, 
block-signal systems are installed to facilitate the movement 
of trains, as much time is thereby saved by each train in getting 
the right to pass from one block to the next. According to a 
report by the Interstate Commerce Commission, published about 
March 1, 1907, the total number of miles of railroad lines which’ 
had any block-signal system at all was 143,615, of which 48,743 
miles was actually equipped and operated by some form of 
block-signal system. Of this 48,743 miles, 6,826 were operated 
by the automatic system and 41,916 by one of the several forms 


1907] SMITH ; RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1705 


of non-automatic system. Of the mileage controlled by the auto- 
matic system, 2,032, or somewhat under one-third, was single track. 
Of the lines controlled by non-automatic signals, 33,585 miles 
were single-track lines, making a total of 35,617 miles of single- 
track railroad in the United States controlled by some form of 
block signal. The total mileage of single-track lines in the 
United States is estimated at about 200,000, so that about 17.5 
per cent of the total single-track mileage is controlled by block 
signals at the present time. Inasmuch as the operation and 
maintenance of a block-signal system is undoubtedly cheaper 
per mile of road than the total annual cost that would be incurred 
by electrifying, it would appear that the first step in increasing 
the capacity of a road is to establish a suitable block-signal 
system. Thus from a practical standpoint the mileage of 
track where electrification could profitably be considered under 
present conditions would be greaty reduced; but when the in- 
creased capacity created in any instance by a block system has 
been fully utilized, a further increase is still possible by the use 
of electric motive power. 

Engineers familiar with the interurban trolley development 
of the past ten years are aware that most lines of this type dispatch 
their trains very largely by the telephone system. Generally 
speaking this method works very well, though on the more highly 
developed systems it is combined with some of the features that 
have been standardized by the rules of the American Railway 
Association, and adopted by practically all the steam railroads. 
It must be remembered, however, that conditions on trolley 
roads are somewhat different from those on steam roads. The 
vast majority of the trains are light passenger trains of one car 
each, stops aré of shorter duration, and the speed of all trains 
is more nearly uniform. The distance between turnouts is less. 
The penalty of a wreck due to misunderstanding or miscarriage 
of orders is, generally speaking, much less with the average 
interurban trolley road than with the average steam railroad; 
and trolley railroad operators are correspondingly more willing 
to run the risks incidental to dispensing with the system of trans- 
mission of train orders, which experience has shown to be neces- 
sary on steam railroads. The meeting points are generally much 
nearer together, and a block system of any kind would cost rel- 
atively more to maintain and operate in proportion to the busi- 
ness done than is the case with steam railroads. At least there 
seems to be some such motive preventing the universal adoption 


1706 SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION [Dec. 6 


of signal systems by trolley roads. In any event, it is not at 
all convincing to a steam railroad man to point out to him the 
apparent ease with which trains at frequent headway in opposite 
directions are handled with single-track trolley roads, as a reason 
why the same course should be adopted by steam railroads in 
order to increase the rapidity of train movements. Although it is 
undoubtedly true that the telephone is used extensively as an 
adjunct to standard methods of dispatching steam-railroad 
trains, railroad managers generally do not seem disposed to 
supersede the method developed by the use of the télegraph, 
except in the relatively small amount of mileage protected by 
automatic block signals. f 

Whether the telegraphic train-order system or one of the other 
systems of block signals be used, the rules governing the operation 
of trains on steam railroads are very rigid. The telegraphic 
train orders, emanating from the train dispatchers’ office, must 
be signed by the recipient and the signature telegraphed back 
to the dispatcher, who then replies ‘‘ complete ”’ to the various 
operators to whom he has sent the message as fast as their 
replies come in. An order restricting the rights of a superior 
train is more rigidly safeguarded in this respect than an order 
increasing the rights of an inferior train; and a superior train 
must receive and reply to its orders before any can be given to 
the inferior train. Much time may be and often is thus con- 
sumed, which may restrict considerably the capacity of a line 
to handle traffic. Another rigid type of rule is that requiring 
an inferior train to clear the time of a superior train at a meeting 
or passing point by not less than five minutes. This holds 
whether a train-order system or a block-signal system be used. 
This five minutes’ clearance is frequently, for special reasons, in- 
creased to ten minutes and often to twenty minutes, thus 
placing the inferior trains at a still greater disadvantage. In- 
stances of this kind occur when some especially fast express 
train is operated, where, to insure the greatest possible degree 
of safety, twenty minutes clearance is provided. The fastest 
high-speed “* flyers ”’ of the present day are thus protected, to the 
greater safety of the passengers, but to the disadvantage of 
freight trains: Two such flyers, one in each direction overa 
road per day, will thus cut down the current of slower traffic 
over the whole road to the extent of at least forty minutes per 
day, and frequently more. If an inferior train cannot make 
an intended siding in time to allow for the required clearance it is 


1907] SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION 1707 


obliged to wait on a nearer siding and lose the time required 
for the superior train to cover the distance between the two 
sidings, plus any extra time which the superior train may have 
been delayed. One such delay is more than likely to lead to 
another, and so the delays pile up into hours during the run 
intended to be made in ten or twelve hours. If traffic is dense, 
and sidings far apart, such delays become very serious, and be- 
sides the delay to freight, and disappointment and inconvenience 
to shippers and per diem charges on cars, there is added the 
overtime due to the employes, which increases the operating 
expenses. It seems to the writer that conditions of this character 
are not taken into sufficient account as having a bearing on 
the subject of electrification for increase of track capacity; and 
something more than the ability to accelerate rapidly and main- 
tain higher speeds must be given consideration in estimating 
the increase in the net schedule speed of train movement that 
at first sight may seem directly to result from the substitution 
of electricity for steam. 

One item peculiar to steam operation which causes delays is 
the stopping for water. The frequency for such stops will de- 
pend both upon the weight of the train, and the grade of the road. 
Stopping for water sometimes adds to the delays from other 
causes that have previously held up a train; but for any par- 
ticular problem the effects of stops for water should be con- 
sidered separately from stops for other purposes. Where 
combined with a stop for some other purpose, no marked gain 
is effected by eliminating the necessity for taking water, unless 
perhaps three or four engines were to take water in succession. 

A case was recently cited of a single-track road in a moun- 
tainous country where double tracking would be a very expen- 
sive proposition, this road having a heavy traffic in both direc- 
tions, loaded ore cars coming down and empties going up. It 
was found in operation that the easiest way to get the traffic over 
the road was to make every siding a meeting point, that 
is to say, the road was practically full of trains. The only way 
of increasing traffic on such a line other than by double-tracking 
would be to increase the speed of all trains in the same proportion. 
This might seem feasible enough by electric motive power, but 
then arises the question whether the increase in speed that could 
be thus obtained would be sufficient to enable an increase in the 
daily traffic that would pay a dividend on the total cost of electri- 
fication, This would be an excellent instance of a concrete case 


1708 SMITH: RAILROAD ELECTRIFICATION Dec. 6 


in which other things than motive power costs alone, of steam 
and electricity, would have to be considered. In a case of this 
kind, the capacity of a single-track road would be limited by 
the speed of the slowest train. 

The task of working out the results in such a case is neces- 
sarily complicated and would require nothing less than a close 
study of all the conditions on the ground. The fact that it is 
impossible to generalize upon the capacity of single-track roads 
for train movement, renders it equally impossible to generalize 
upon the applicability of electric motive power thereto in com- 
parison with steam. It is necessary to pick out a concrete case 
and estimate all the features in detail, just as it is in order to 
properly gauge the economic value of any other engineering 
enterprise. It is obviously unscientific to advocate wholesale 
electrification as a means of increasing capacity, when the capac- 
ity can be increased more cheaply, as it sometimes can, by the 
introduction of a block-signal system, or when the capacity of a 
piece of road even when equipped with a block-signal system, 
could not be increased in practical operation to a point that 
would enable enough more ton-miles per day to be run off ata 
lower cost per ton-mile, to show a saving in total annual cost. 

The writer is a firm believer in the value of electric motive power 
as a means of increasing a railroad’s earning capacity, but begs 
to suggest that in the future more professional papers be devot- 
ed toward giving concrete illustrations in a manner that will 
carry some conviction to the minds of the progressive and highly 
trained specialists in transportation, who are doubtless willing 
to be convinced if the subject can be dealt with in a manner 
that appeals to their practical experience in the operation of 
trains. 


A paper presented at the 223rd Mecting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, December 13, 1907. 


Copyright 1907, By A. I. E. E. 


THE RATIO OF HEATING SURFACE TO GRATE SUR- 
FACE AS A FACTOR IN POWER PLANT DESIGN 


BY WALTER S. FINLAY, JR. 

Power plant design, in its modern development, is controlled 
solely by the specific application of general laws modified and 
moulded to suit special requirements. To attempt the con- 
struction of a comprehensive ruling from the results of a par- 
ticular line of investigation in some particular plant, and then 
to advise the general use of such ruling as conducive to econom- 
ical operation, would cause confusion, possibly resulting in a 
wholesale rejection of the good with the bad. However, the 
value of specific results and their publication lie in the opening 
up of a line of technical thought, or in adding information to 
some subject, from which specific deductions or particular ap- 
plication may be made. 

The results obtained in the investigation, which was primarily 
the foundation of this paper, should be looked upon merely as 
specific, but whose bearing upon the general subject by means 
of a general development, may be of value, particularly in 
certain new phases of plant design. 

As a fundamental and almost initial point of attack in the 
comprehensive subject of steam power-plant design, the ratio, 


heating surface 
grate surface 


has been a value fixed from the beginning of results of com- 
mercial usage, and the expression of the same in empyrical 
formulas or figures suited to the requirements of this or that 
designer, builder, or manufacturer. ; 
A summation of practice from early engineering times to 
1709 


1710 FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


values developed by the most modern idea, gives a great range 
to this ratio; namely, from the extreme value as advised by 
Dalton in 1839 of ten to one, to modern values up to seventy 
to one used, not only in locomotive, but even in power-plant 
practice. Of course the primary object in view has been 
the adaptation of values to produce the maximum useful effect . 
but the question now arises as to whether or not “ max- 
imum useful effect ’”’ is not being interpreted as maximum eco- 
nomical efficiency with reference to fuel only, as a primary 
consideration, and with an undue subordination of total plant 
costs. By total plant costs are meant, of course, the combined 
fixed charges resulting from interest on plant investment, de- 
preciation, taxes, etc., and operation and maintenance charges. 

Properly to investigate the subject in its particular applica- 
tions would require an extremely tedious and complicated 
study of innumerable individual requirements; but for a general 
survey assumptions based upon commonly accepted values will 
suffice to direct the attention to the point involved. 

Assuming a plant first cost of $125.00 per kilowatt; the equip- 
ment, including turbo-generators, boilers equipped with stokers, 
with, say, sixty to one ratio, the following relative costs may 
be assumed : 


Total. cost per slo Wath ...:0%c\is dum $125.00 100 % 
Building “ See Te eee: fe 43.75 35. .% 
Boilers Ms ee ei Pre 6.875 5.5 % 
Grates “ ME OTR re ee bee 1.75 1.4% 
Piping 5 oy Maks ct elt 5.625 4.5% 
Coal-handling apparatus per kilowatt..... 2.30 1.84% 
Balance OL ECUNMeEOt oes cls dace gives 64.70 ; 


The value of the building as assumed might be considered 
low, particularly in the case of a turbine plant; the boiler cost 
is, possibly, average; grates high—a stoker valuation; the piping 
value is about average. 

Assuming as a fair value for determining fixed charges: 
interest on investment, 5%; depreciation, 6%; taxes and in- 
surance, 1%, then the total fixed-charge rate would equal 12%. 

Upon bases of load-factor and charges, a curve has been 
drawn showing the relative value of the fixed charges over a 
range of factor variation from approximately 3% to 100%, 
in the case of the plant as assumed. (Curve A, Fig. 1.) 

To determine total charges, the variation of maintenance and 


1907] FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE le7atal 


operation charges, relative to load-factor, must also be con- 
sidered. It is rather difficult to assume this curve, as condi- 
tions in this respect vary rather widely. However, Curve C, 
Fig. 1, has been drawn through points located by comparative 


FIG. 4. 
' 
ee CURVES OF FIXED CHARGE WITH 
VARYING LOAD FACTOR 
PLANT cost*\25¢ PER KW. 
04) A- Single Grate Equipment. 
B- Double Grate Equipment. 
5 
0) 
: z| r] 
03 
3 
xX 
i 
02 
” 
- 
iS ull 
r) 
[ay A 
01 
B 
| 
jo o LOAP FAcror, -per Cent. Vol 
976 1752 3504 -Hours 52ase 7008 Cre 
01 
c 
L CURVE OF OPERATING & MAINTENANCE 
3 7 CHARGE WITH VARYING LOAD FACTOR 
ag 
02 iH 
3 
BS 
L 
y 
a 
.03 
: a 
io) 
ray 
_— 


Ga 


results obtained in actual cases of operation. The shape of 
the curve will practically be constant for any figure which 
may be assumed, and its relation to the general results will be 
such that the value of the principle involved will be unaffected. 


1712 FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


The sum of the ordinates between the two curves gives total 
charges per kilowatt-hour. 
In a reconsideration of the plant design as affecting first 


FIG.2. 
1 


CURVES OF FIXED CHARGE WITH 
VARVING LOAD FACTOR. 

PLANT COSsT,*150°° PER KW 
A- Single Grate Equipment. 
B~- Double Grate Equipment. 


20 LOAO FacrorR 4.-per Cent 


3504 - Hours: 


CURVE OF OPERATING & MAINTENANC 
CHARGE WITH VARYING LOAD FACTOR, 


& Dollars & per Kw. 


aide dott il 


Fic. 2 


cost, the natural method of procedure is to consider separately 
each item involved. 

1. Building. In turbo-generator plant design, it is a gen- 
erally accepted rule that total plant dimensions are controlled 
by boiler-room dimensions; that, for instance, a diminution in 


1907} FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE 1713 


the actual size of the boiler room may be accompanied by a 
proportional diminution in the size of the turbine-room, the 
output remaining the same. The methods of accomplishing 
such results are perhaps various; change in size of units, differ- 
ence in type, closer grouping of units, etc. 

2. Bowlers. The consideration of this feature is naturally 
interlinked with the subject of “Grates”’ and the two would 
better be discussed together. 

Rules of boiler-practice have been derived chiefly, if not 
entirely, by experiment and investigation; and only those 


CURVES SHOWING RELATION OF 

DRAUGHT AND CAPACITY :- 

A- DOUBLE STOKER BOILER. 
7 B- SINGLE STOKER BOILER. 


Bower. 


> 
o 
a 
Ww 
a 
G. 
y 
Ww 
ie) 
a 
x 
a 


DRAUGHT IN FLUE:-iINCHES OF are 
FIG. 3 


rules validated by general acceptance can be quoted as bases 
for argument. Such a law is the following one: 

All other conditions remaining constant, capacity developed 
is, with slight modifications, in direct ratio to the area of the 
active grate surface. An increase in capacity—heating surface 
remaining constant—caused by an increase in grate area, is ac- 
companied by a loss in economical evaporation, due to the in- 
creased temperature of the escaping gases. 

This loss in economy is the fundamental factor which must 
necessarily be the object of a careful study, involving the com- 
plete investigation of the heat interchanges taking place in a 


1714 FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


boiler. The research work of such men as Newton, Péclet, 
Joule, and Rankine, together with recent investigation, has 
not, as yet, produced sufficiently definite and authoritative 
results, which may be used as bases of rational calculation in 
this regard. Under normal conditions of present boiler-practice, 
estimates of loss vary from practically zero to as much as 15% 
fuel economy for an increase of 100% in boiler capacity. 

- Lately, however, the opinion has been advanced that con- 
siderable increase in capacity can, without great sacrifice in 
economy, be obtained by proportional increase in crate area. 
This idea is based upon the possibility that combustion and 


CURVES SHOWING RELATIVE VALUES 
*or ECONOMICAL EVAPORATION AND 
B.H.P DEVELOPED IN:- 

(A) SINGLE STOKER BOILER AND 
(B) DOUBLE STOKER BOILER. 


a 
o 
Vv 
> 
Li 
5 
0 
: 
ra 
w 
a 
ue 
; 
N 
N 
rt 
& 
Q 
7 
4 
i 
i 
5 
i 
ae 
z 
w 
z 
> 
5 
a 
w 


heat distribution and transfer could be much improved under 
the new conditions, when in increasing the grate area careful 
attention is given to details of design most conducive to these 
features. Other conditions being favorable, and with a belief 
in the correctness of this theory, a change was made in the 
design of eighteen of the boiler furnaces in the Fifty-ninth street 
plant of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company. See Fig. 7. 
Such a design gave the possibility of operating within the range 
of the original single-stoker boiler together with the higher 
range of the double stoker. ; 
The second stoker installed; that is, the one beneath the 


1907] FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE 1715 


mud-drum as shown in Fig. 7, has an area of 80% of that of the 
original stoker. Certain features in the construction of the 
plant prevented installation of a larger size. A detailed de- 
scription of points in the design are unnecessary, save to call 
attention to the fact that the lower stoker is constructed prac- 
tically within a so-called ‘‘ Dutch oven ” and whatever is con- 
ducive to good combustion is provided for therein. The curve 
shown on Fig. 8 is given as corroborating this fact. Opera- 
tion of these stokers has shown that such is practically done with 
but little more complication than existed in the single type. 
Tests to determine the comparative economical operation of 


i620 w&— CURVE SHOWING RELATION OF CAPACITIES A SSteen es 
wu OF SINGLE ANU DOUBLE STOKER BOILERS 


WHEN OPERATING WITH EQUIVALENT 
~> ECONOMICAL EVAPORATION. 


ere eee ee a 
EE 
regan Os | 2 | haan 
Ie Se ee be Pa e *1/2 fy | 
bel ie Lees ae 


BWR DEVELOPED BY DOUBLE STOKER BOILeR 


Fic. 5 


the double and single stokers show results as given graphically 
in Figs. 3, 4, 5, and 6. The curves in Figs. 3 and 4 are self- 
explanatory. Fig. 5 shows a curve plotted upon the values as 
determined by curves in Fig. 4, this curve being indicative of 
the fact that operation with the double type was as economical 
in fuel values, as the single type increased in boiler capacity 
approximately seventy-one per cent. In the curves in Fig. 6 
is shown the fact that the economical loss for an increase in 
rating of 80%, as proportioned to the increase in grate area, 
varied between two and three per cent. 

To summarize the results of these tests: it has been made 


1716 FINLAY; HEATING SURFACE (Dee. 13 


evident that in this particular case double-stoker operation 
covers the entire range of single-stoker operation and adds an 
increase of capacity proportionate to its larger grate surface 
with but slight loss in economy, and that the increase of 71% 
in capacity is accomplished with no loss in economy. 

With these results as a basis, let it be assumed that boiler 
capacity is increased in ratio to increase in grate surface with 
but little loss of economy. This view might be further streng- 
thened when consideration is taken of the possibilities of econo- 
mizer practice, the increase in saving, by proper design, being : 
high in ratio to extra cost involved. 


EE Pa el alice CURVES SHOWING RELATIVE VALUES 
PT ET tt | eee 


BH DEVELOPED IN 

(A) SINGLE STOKER BOILER, 180% 
(B) DOUBLE STOKER BOLER 

\C) SINELE STOKER BOLER,x 171.47 


MEAT VALUE PER POUND OF COAL<(4250 BTU. 


Abel ad LAS gal 


Fs ‘ 1 - 5 . 
EQUIVALENT EVAPORATION FFKOM AND. AT zie*, PER POUND DRY COA! 


Fic. 6 


To return to the consideration of the items under the power 
plant whose first cost has been assumed to be $125.00 per 
kilowatt, the next point is: 

Piping. In the case involved, the cost of steam piping be- 
tween boilers and manifolds, plus boiler-feed piping, plus 
boiler blow-down piping, has alone been considered. With 
any change in number of boilers, capacity remaining the same, 
the cost of piping will vary in the same ratio times a factor 
due to change in size of pipe. 

Coal-handling apparatus. Fixed plant capacity would seem 
to demand fixed cost of coal-handling apparatus, but the pro- 


1907] FINLAY: HEATING SURFACE ileal 


portionate value of the conveying apparatus is so large that 
when any change is made affecting the length of carry the 
total system cost will be raised or lowered, although not in 
direct ratio to such change. 
Effect of change of ratio: 
heating surface 
grate surface 


Suppose that in a reconsideration of the plant design, it is 
decided to cut in half the ratio of heating surface to grate 
surface by the use of double grates or stokers under boilers of 


CURVE SHOWING VARIATION OF 
COzg IN FLUE-GAS,WITH B.HP 
DEVELOPED:- DOUBLE STOKER 
BOILER. 


ee 


rr 


° 
PER CENT Co, IN FLUE-Ga~S. 


nN 


rv) 


eo 
easured by Conhnuous-Record Mochine). 


N 


(m 


6BH.P DEVELOPED, 
920 960 1000 | 1120 


Fic. 8 


the same rating. Plant output is to remain the same. A 


tabulation of the costs as revised would be as follows: 
Per kilowatt 


Building (reduced 40%)........--+ sees eeeeees $26.25 
Boilers (tTeduiced O07 p Jvc. wees sees os ducers ae 3.488 
Stokers (remiaity Sale)... 65k ees we oes 1.75 
Piping (reduced 40%)....----- ss eee e eee eeeee 3.735 
Coal-handling apparatus (reduced 15%)....... 1.956 
Balance (remains SAME)... . eee eee sence ees 64.70 


$101 .828 


i718 FINLAY; HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


A curve (B Fig, 1) is plotted upon this new basis. 

Summation: Plant first cost and fixed charges, each reduced 
19.6%. 

The next consideration is that of the effect of such changes 
upon plant maintenance and operation charges. Properly to 
discuss this, the following tabulation based upon the figures 
given by Mr. H. G. Stott in his paper on ‘“‘ Power Plant Eco- 
nomics ’’ will furnish a means of comparison: 


Maintenance: Single grate Double grate 
Engine room mechanical............... 0.64% 0.64% 
Boilée roomie ot ese ot eee §.40-(16%) = 4.54 
Coal- and ash-handling apparatus....... 0.68 0.68 
Electricaltapparatusteccs ese sabres siren 1.41 1.41 

Operation. 

Coal- and ash-handling labor........... 2.65 2.65 
Removal OL shes, .0cen yi... 2 S20. ees LAGS 1.18 
Docktrentalsaniracion coc rea nite 0398 0.93 
Boiler-roomulabore, «1m ar eae ee 8.38- (18.5%) = 6.83 
Boiler-room oil, waste, etc............. 0.21 0.21 
COAL NA ete rot tpsacroh ten kant: ....71.944+ (8%) = 74.10 
IWiaitet se er rone cee, fait toi Me a vn te ee 0.90 0.90 
Engine-room mechanical labor..........1.70 1.70 
ubrication=.s, sae. deere t ee ee 0.44 0.44 
IWiAST OCH CE on, thy giths tesclis op <fegiice nine eee es 0.38 0.38 
Mlectricalgla bora. aavcerte ab oemeaitirs tie ts 3.16 3.16 
LO talnnaat sleek tare ae 100.00% 99.75% 


The saving in boiler room maintenance and operation may 
be accounted for in the following itemized statement of boiler- 
room charges: 


Maintenance. Cost 
Single grate Double grate 

Boers its re ce ote een 29.5% 14.75% 
TCGONOMLUZELS -te toca’ «choise cre etersys Ae 2.78 2.78 
PRUCHACES Rtas saat oie kr ee cere 17.29 17.29 
Stokers and stoker engines............ 40.68 40.68 
Botlemiccea pumps aac.cure aera ieee 5.42 5.42 
Bollemiced -pinin geen syne nares ate te 2.20 1.10 
Boilersblow-off piping.0.). pacman on 0.44 0.44 
WIRDEMESILDPLYaDLDIN ieee us) astro een 1.52 1.52 

PU OCALA tices er site ats hs « eh ee eee 100.00% 83.98% 

Operation. 
Watermtendetsscmarirs.scr co cnmeee 20.82 10.41 
Stokenoperatorsinw kit wia. oe een eee 88.09 38.09 
Assistant stoker operators..............15.49 15.49 


Stoker oilers sy. rece eieetetersto-onaspe and tice 2.54 2.54 


1907] FINLAY; HEATING SURFACE 1719 


Economizer oilers and cleaners.......... 5.84 292 
Boiler feed-pump men.<......,....... 5.08 5.08 
Bovlerscleanerss a een eee ee OF AT 5.21 
Miscellaneousila boreameaeniccese sea. Le 1.73 
hOtalsen, yates eee het Be: 100.00% 81.47% 


Thus with changes as noted, the decrease in maintenance and 
operation would be 0.25%, the curve for same practically coin- 
ciding with Curve C, Fig. 1. 

A second set of curves based upon a plant cost of $150.00 
per kilowatt is shown in Fig. 2. 


Bramercuct, per KilowWatter ...8 6-5 <. + as ne foes oe $150.00 100% 
US MALLU Die teeta para ted A Pasen Soe acess tne ale ecm ts 60.00 40 
BS OUCTS ree gett ewe Tee CE ee doe eo eda et wee, 8.25 5.5 
I LOKCLS eRe e ton Me eter ements, eee nes 2.25 ists 
Piping. . AB ty soos atch we Fossa shay seapowele es 6.75 4.5 
Coal- Sendiiag eens COTS ae Cr ne Roo 2.63 1.75 
PET CT IG CO sas 0 ie 2 AON ie SRR Aa A 70.12 
Sane Bint ‘doulte ptoler. 
Building Gastelorestel ANG ites sd cle eee eke s Oe $36 .00 
Boilers (Gechticeds 7) cnt sinat= yeidiey Paces 4.13 
Stokers KLOTIAIIINGATITE) Byene rc opeeensre ae heats ects 2) 5) 
Piping Geduicede40 97) eubainner nica ce hie: 4.05 
Coal-handling apparatus (reduced 15%)..............+.... 2.24 
i cll an Coreen etter ate te eee CUES SA Cele os RUS what eS a wae 70.12 
Ota aterm ec icrte ena esl sean nicer pe eeu 118.79 


showing a reduction in first cost and fixed charges of 20.8%. 
Summary. In the case of the $125.00 plant, the following 
savings might be effected by use of double grate: 
First cost, 19.6% saving. 

- Total plant charges varying from a saving of 5.64% at 100% 
load-factor to 7.54% at 50% factor and to 9.65% at 4.16%: 
factor (365 hours per year). 

In the case of the $150.00 plant, 

First cost, 20.8% saving. 

Total plant charges vary from about 7.06% saving at 100% 
load-factor, to 9.26% at 50% factor to 11.51 at 4.16% factor. 

Thus summarized, the remarkable effect that the grate area 
and heating surface ratio, when furnace design is carefully con- 
sidered, may have upon plant first cost and total annual costs, 
should certainly place this particular feature well up in the list 
of subjects for careful investigation, and make it a point of 
primary and fundamental consideration in advanced design. 


1720 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


Discussion ON ‘“' THE Ratio oF HEATING SURFACE TO GRATE 
SURFACE AS A FACTOR IN PowER Pant DESIGN ”’, AT NEw 
York. DECEMBFR 13, 1907. 


Chas. E. Lucke: Comparing the two curves of Fig. 4 it would 
appear that for an equivalent evaporation of 9.25 lb. of water 


per pound of coal, the ratio of boiler horse powers with double ~ 


and single stokers is as 1100 is to 638 or about 1.72, with 9.5 
equivalent evaporation the ratio is as 1046 is to 609. or about 
1.72, with an equivalent evaporation of 9.75 the ratio is as 996 
is to 582, or about 1.71. It thus appears that when operating 
this boiler at capacities 1.71 times as great with double stoker 
as for single, the equivalent evaporation, and, therefore, the 
boiler efficiency, is 1n nowise altered. At the same time re- 
ferring to the curve for single-stoker operation there is reported 
for 512 h.p. an evaporation of 10.50 lb., which fell to 9 Ib. on 
an increase of boiler horse-power to 670. In this case, therefore, 
an increase of boiler horse-power from 510 to 670, a ratio of 
capacities of 1.31, the efficiency or equivalent evaporation de- 
creased in the ratio of 10.5 to 9; or the efficiency for the higher 
capacity is to the efficiency for the lower capacity as 9 is to 
10.5, or, approximately, 0.86. An increase of boiler capacity 
in a given boiler is to be obtained by burning more coal primarily. 
From the preceding it would appear that burning more coal 
under this boiler with a single stoker gave a continuous drop in 
efficiency; also from the other curve an increase in the burning 
of coal on two stokers gave a decrease in efficiency continuously, 
but strangely enough, a very material increase in the coal burned 
per hour operating double versus single, sufficiently great to 
increase capacity to 1.7 its original value, gave no decrease in 
boiler efficiency. Why is it that with a single stoker an increase 
of capacity from 1 to 1.3 lowers the efficiency from 1 to 0.8, 
while increase of capacity from single to double stokers from 
1 to 1.7 does not decrease the efficiency at all. 

With increase of coal burned under the single stoker, the 
curve falls continuously and then breaks, starting again at a 
high point at the beginning of the double-stoker line, along 
which it again falls. It would seem as if these two curves should 
join and be continuous, and the fact that they do not, warrants 
an investigation into the causes. All of the general discussions 
of boiler efficiency seem to concentrate the conditions for effi- 
ciency, and with some degree of reason, on two prime variables; 
one entering into the structure, the other the operation. The 
first is the ratio of heating surface to grate surface, and the 
other is the rate of combustion per square foot of grate surface. 
With a view to determining how far the ratio of heat surface of 
itself, independent of other things, might effect boiler efficiency, 
one of the students at Columbia examined some 300 boiler tests 
that seemed most authentic and plotted, as in Fig. 1, boiler 
efficiency against the ratio of heating surface to grate surface. 


1907 | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1721 


From these data, it appears that the boiler efficiency lies between 
45.4 per cent. and 84 per cent., while the ratio of heating surface 
to grate surface lies between 14 and 89. The disposition of the 
points is such as to prevent any conclusion in the form of curves 
or law of relation, as they do not group themselves in any definite 


go 


BOER EFFICIENCY 


NEGLECTING ALL OTHER EXISTING CONDITIONS. 


Brew ds 


way, but are deposited over what has often been called ‘‘a 
shot-gun diagram ”, and not a very good one at that. It would 
thus appear that the ratio of heating surface to grate surface 
cannot of itself fix boiler efficiency, however much it may seem 
to be rationally related to it. 


1722 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


The phenomena taking place in a boiler are really quite simple. 
Any question of boiler efficiency resolves itself into an examina- 
tion of these phenomena in an attempt to trace the losses. 
Neglecting all insignificant losses and assuming all coal to be 
burned, a boiler has an efficiency of less than 100 per cent. because 
some of the heat is liberated in the fire escapes; first, by radiation 
in an amount depending chiefly on the mean temperatures of the 
setting and boiler room; secondly, in the flue gases in an amount 
depending on their excess of temperature over the atmosphere, 
their weight and specific heat. To all intents and purposes the 
mean temperature of the boiler setting of these tests, single and 
double, may be taken as the same, as may the specific heat of 
the gases, so that any changes in boiler efficiency that occurred 
must be charged, assuming all the coal to have been burned, 
which is reasonable, to a change in the product of excess flue 
temperature over atmosphere and the weight of gases discharged 
per pound of coal. 

With a given rate of heat liberation in the furnace, it is abso- 
lutely certain that the temperature of the gases passing through 
the boiler will continuously fall as they travel toward the flue. 
Thus, there might be plotted a falling curve of temperature 
with the path of these gases through the boiler. A very ma- 
terial increase in rate of heat liberation without change in the 
weight of air per pound of coal would have the effect of dis- 
placing this falling curve completely toward the flue end, or 
in other words, of raising the temperature at every point in the 
path and likewise raising the temperature at the flue, so that 
flue temperature would continuously rise with an increase in 
rate of combustion, perhaps slowly at first, and faster with the 
higher rate; boiler efficiency will thus continuously fall with 
increase in rate of heat liberation or weight of coal burned per 
hour without any increase of excess air, by reason of this rise in 
the flue temperature. Admission of more excess air with the 
higher rates might keep the temperature from rising, but still 
involve decrease of efficiency. An increased rate of heat libera- 
tion or pounds of coal per hour burned may be accomplished by 
an increase of the draft to raise the rate of combustion per 
square foot of grate per hour or by increase of surface without 
increase, perhaps with decrease, of draft. If by reason of a cer- 
tain stoker construction or by reason of the manipulation of any 
siven stoker, the air supply increases faster than the coal burned 
per hour, so will also the excess air and the weight of total 
gases per pound of coal. There is thus a possibility that with 
increase in rate of combustion per square foot of grate surface 
there may be also an increase in weight of gases per pound of 
coal by an increase of excess air, which would tend to decrease 
the boiler efficiency. 

An examination of the results of this test does not indicate 
from the curve for either the single or. the. double 
stoker which factor was more potent in decreasing boiler 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1723 


efficiency with increase of coal burned per hour—the flue-gas 
temperature or the excess weight of gases, but comparing the 
double-stoker curve with the single and finding thereby that the 
same boiler efficiency corresponds to the same rate of combustion 


Go 


ae 
— 
—— G 

et 


RATE OF COMBUSTION - OF” ‘ 
48S. OF COAL PEP. SQ. FT. GRATE SUMFACE PEP NOUR, 


NEGLECTING ALL OTHER By'i*riNe CONDITIONS. 


Fie. 2: 


per square foot of grate, it would seem that the éxcess-air factor 
was more potent than the flue-gas temperature factor. It is. 
inconceivable to me that increasing the coal burned per hour. 
from 2370 for the single stoker to 4100 for the double stoker, or 


1724 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


1.74 times as much, which corresponds to 9.25 evaporation for 
both cases, there should have been no change in the boiler effi- 
ciency if the weight of gas per pound of coal was the same in 
both cases, especially as with the higher rate the time of con- 
tact between gas and boiler tubes is very much less than for 
the lower rate. The flue temperature for the double-stoker 
operation must have been higher for the same excess air, and 
the fact that the efficiency was not any lower seems to indicate 
that the excess air was less in proportion or that in single-stoker 
operation, very much more excess air was used than for double- 
stoker operation. While I believe that two boiler efficiency 
curves should not be compared except on equal terms, which 
in this case would be on a basis of equal flue-gas composition, 
still such a course might be justified if, under the conditions of 
usual operation, the furnace were such that it could not be 
operated with the same excess air under different ratings, which 
would be a most severe criticism of the furnace and not of the 
boiler. If this is the true explanation, the paper would become 
a discussion of furnace operation as a function of draft and rate 
of combustion. The true explanation must depend on the 
presentation of data on flue-gas composition and flue tempera- 
tures. 

If on analysis of the efficiency results it should appear that 
they are due to a comparison of two boiler tests on unequal 
terms of flue-gas composition, and that for equal flue-gas com- 
position the efficiencies for double-stoker operation are lower 
than for single at equai capacities, then the conclusions on cost 
economy might be reversed. For example, if higher flue tem- 
peratures result from high capacity of operation, then more 
economizer. surface must be used to attain equivalent plant 
efficiencies, and discussions of plant cost economies must resolve 
into a comparison of the commercial value of heating surface 
in the form of boiler with that of heating surface in the form of 
economizer. 

W F. Wells: The ratio of heating surface to grate surface, 
although a question of primary importance, is to my mind a 
matter of secondary consideration. In order to design the most 
suitable boiler plant for a power house that can be constructed 
at a minimum cost per kilowatt installed, consideration should 
first be given to the evaporation possible per square foot of heat- 
ing surface consistent with commercial economy; and this in 
turn depends upon the maximum practical rate of combustion 
of the various fuels available in the local market, their relative 
costs per ton, cost of handling, and thermal values. 

Mr. Finlay’s statement that ‘‘a considerable increase in 
boiler capacity can, without great sacrifices in economy, be 
obtained by proportional increase in grate area’’ is applicable 
to most power plants, because until very recently, power house 
engineers have endeavored to obtain the greatest economies 
possible from boilers by proportionally increasing the heating 


1907] | DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1725 


surface, so that the average boiler of to-day will give but little 
more than rating when fired with the so-called ‘‘ steam coals’, 
In other words, most bowers, as installed on Jand, are iated on a 
basis of 10 sq. ft. heating surface per horse-power and will 
evaporate but 3.5 pounds of water per square ft. of heating sur- 
face, whereas, in marine practice double this amount, or 7 lb. 
of water, can generally be evaporated per square foot of heat- 
ing surface; and with closed stoke-hold and forced draft, three 
times boiler rating, or 10.5 lb. of water, can be evaporated per 
square foot of heating surface and even greater is sometimes 
possible. 

The following table shows that under the single stoker boiler, 
referred to in the paper, having a ratio of 1 : 56, it is necessary 
to burn about 20 lb. of coal per square foot of grate, in order to 
evaporate 3.5 lb. of water per square foot of heating surface, and 
that by burning 25 lb. of coal, which is about the maximum 
that can be burned commercially on a mechanical stoker, the 
boiler will develop only about 20 per cent. above rating. With 
two stokers under the boiler, making a ratio of 1 : 31, 7 lb. of 
water can be evaporated per square foot of heating surface, or 
double boiler rating. 

The flat grates originally installed in 1901 under the boilers 
at the Waterside Station of the New York Edison Company had 
a ratio of 1:74, and in order to obtain boiler rating, it was 
necessary to burn 35 lb. of No. 3 buckwheat coal per square 
foot of grate, which necessitated hard firing and great care. 
The same output could be obtained by firing 28 lb. of No. 1 
buckwheat, or 31 Ib. of a mixture, consisting of 20 per cent. soft 
coal and 80 per cent. No. 3 buckwheat. This, however, meant 
a loss in commercial economy on account of the higher cost per 
ton of fuel. By extending the fronts of the furnaces under these 
boilers, and enlarging the grates, thereby reducing the ratio 
to 1:59, it was possible to obtain boiler rating with 25 lb. of 
No. 3 buckwheat, 22 Ib. of No. 1, or 24 1b. of the mixture. With 
those extended grates, 50 per cent. above rating could be ob- 
tained by burning 40 lb. of No. 1 buckwheat per square foot of 
grate per hour. This firing is possible with forced draft, but 
great care must be used in order to maintain economy. 

In the Sixty-Sixth street station of the Brooklyn Edison 
Company the grates were originally installed with a ratio of 
1:68, but last summer the fronts on these furnaces were ex- 
tended and grates enlarged, giving a ratio of 1:53. This in- 
crease in grate area was utilized not so much for increased 
capacity as to give increased economy by burning a cheaper 
fuel. The economy actually effected by this increase in grate 
area amounted to 14 per cent. in cost of evaporating 1000 Ib. 
of water. 

At our Gold street station, the grates as originally contracted 
for three years ago were at a ratio of 1 : 76, but before installing 
the furnace, fronts were extended, thereby reducing the ratio 


1726 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 12 


to 1 : 59, and under the boilers installed in 1907 by moving back 
the bridge-wall, this ratio was still further decreased to 1 : 52. 
Under boilers proposed for 1908, this ratio has been reduced to 43. 

With this ratio of 1 : 48, almost double boiler rating can be 
obtained, or 7 lb. of water per square foot of heating surface, 
can be evaporated by burning No. 3 buckwheat, and double 
rating probably exceeded by burning No. 1 buckwheat or a 
mixture. This ratio would have been made less but for the 
physical impossibility of handling a deeper fire box. 

It must not be assumed that the least ratio practicable is 
the best, as there is a possibility of making the grate too large 
for the heating surface. In addition to the disadvantage of 
the loss of economy, due to excessive flue temperatures already 
mentioned, there is the necessity of banking boilers at times ot 
light load, and the loss of time and labor necessary again to 
bring the fires into condition for steaming. 

Walter T. Ray and Henry Kreisinger (by letter):* Perhaps 
the first inkling that something was wrong came when a 
number of operating engineers in various places began to 
explore the interior gas passages of water-tube boilers with 
thermocouples, and found large dead corners. We have care- 
fully explored many boilers and have never failed to find room 
or improvement, provided only that it is mechanically feasible 
to insert gas baffles so as to cause the gases to reach a greater 
portion of the heating surface, at the same time permitting the 
gases to travel over the whole surface with at least as high an 
average velocity as before. 

This latter point is important, for practically no benefit 
would come from inserting baffles such as would cause the gases 
to flow into dead corners, if at the same time the gas velocity 
over the old portion of the heating surface were proportionately 
reduced. The velocity of the gases over, (of past, or along) 
the heating surface is the active featute which determines how 
much heat will be imparted to the surface. other things being 
equal. If the velocity of gas be doubled, the amount of steam 
produced per second will be nearly doubled. For a fuller dis- 
cussion of this matter we refer to the Geologicai Survey’s bulletin 
entitled ‘ A Study of Four Hundred Boiler Tests tet 

The possibility of greatly increasing the rate of heat trans- 
mission into boilers will be apparent when it is considered that 
the amount of heat which can be passed through a thin metal 
plate is enormous. The heat-resistance of the metal in the 
case of boilers is insignificant, perhaps ordinarily much less 
than, zy of the whole; the seat of resistance is in the layers of 
scale and soot, and, most of all, probably, in the films of gas 


* We wish it distinctly understood that. the United States Geological 

puryey is in ae way eal Ae ib ae age to any of the opinions advanced 
ereafter. resented with the permission of the Dj i 

States Geological Survey. y Ge Heche eoseeu pied 


} Bulletin No. 325, United States Geological Survey, Washington, D.C. 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1727 


adhering to the soot and of steam and water adhering to the 
scale. If these are reduced in thickness by increasing the ve- 
locities of the streams of gas and water rubbing against them, 
the rate of heat transmission will be greatly increased. This is 
not mere theory, but has been experimentally demonstrated 
on laboratory models and on large boilers.* 

The great increase in capacity in the case cited by M-. Finlay 
was undoubtedly due to the increased velocity of the hot gases 
over the heating surfece of the boiler. By burning 80 per cent. 
more coal, the weight of hot gases generated per second was in- 
creased by thesameamount. In passing this increased weight of 
gases through the same boiler th» velocity was increased by the 
same percentage, resulting in an increase of 80 per cent. in 
capacity. 

Mr. Finlay has made only a beginning in working his boilers 
harder. The Interborough Rapid Transit Company has verified 
the conclusions experimentally reached mathematically by Pro- 
fessors Reynolds and Perry of England. Itis our personal opinion 
that the boilers under consideration could probably stand five 
passes instead of three, and that perhaps some other minor 
changes would be beneficial. 

Mr. Finlay’s device of putting two stokers under one boiler 
accomplished the burningvof more coal without working the com- 
bustion chamber any harder; that is, without increasing the 
velocity of gases from grate to tubes. Such an increase would 
have resulted in lessening the time available for the combustion 
of certain gases. It will be noticed that the distance from the 
old grate to the entrance into the tubes is only about one third 
the distance from the new grate to the same entrance; it is 
therefore likely that the gases from the new stoker are more 
completely burned, and so it is not surprising that on heavy 
loads the evaporation per pound of coal was as high as at lower 
loads on the old stoker alone. The point we wish to emphasize 
is, that the efficiency of the boiler as a heat absorber is practically 
constant and independent of the rate of working. The boiler 
will do its part in meeting increased demands for steam. 

In the Jamestown Exposition Plant of the Geological Survey 
is a 210 h.p. boiler which has been so re-baffled as to cause the 
gases to pass through the tubes twice instead of once. They 
pass through a smaller cross-section, nearly twice as far, at a 
higher average velocity, with the result that about ten per cent. 
more heat is absorbed, accompanied by no reduction in capacity 
when using the same draft. When the draft is raised and the 
boiler made to produce about twice its rated amount of steam, 
it still retains nearly all of its increased efficiency. Here is a 
case of greatly increasing the output at a slight cost and at the 
same time increasing the economical evaporation per pound of 
coal. 
+See “The Nature of True Boiler Efficiency,” by Walter T. Ray and 
Henry Kreisinger, September 18, 1907, Western Society of Engineers. 
Chicago. 


1728 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


We see no reason why boilers can not be so designed as to 
yield several times as much steam per square foot of heating 
surface as they now do, and with a considerable increase in 
economical evaporation. One thing seems inevitable—com- 
plete resort to forced or induced draft, or, better still, to both. 

W. L. Abbott (by letter): Mr. Finlay assumes the cost of a 
plant to be $125.00 per kilowatt and of this the cost of the 
building is 35 per cent. or, $43.75, and also that the size of the 
building is determined by the number of square feet of heating 
surface in the boilers. He therefore proposes to re-design the | 
plant, using only half as much boiler heating surface, but worked 
to double the former capacity, thereby effecting a saving of $23.58 
per kilowatt in the cost of the plant of which amount $17.50 
is due to a reduction of 40 per cent. in the size of the building. 

While the foregoing assumptions may have been correct a 
few years ago, they certainly do not apply to more recent de- 
signs for turbine plants using large generating units. In these 
designs the size of the building is not determined by the num- 
ber of boilers any more than it is determined by the number of 
turbines, and the cost of the building, which is about $15.00 per 
kilowatt, is divided about equally between the boiler room and 
the rest of the plant. The reduction of 40 per cent. in the cost 
of the building incident to a reduction by one-half of the boiler 
heating surface will therefore be applied only to a $7.50 boiler 
room and not to a $43.75 power house building. 

Again, Mr. Finlay allows an additional loss of only 3 per cent. 
of the fuel when he doubles the rating of a given boiler. This 
assumption is probably correct for a boiler having an ample 
economizer, but in the case of a boiler not so supplemented, 
the additional fuel loss would undoubtedly be as much as 10 
per cent., and it should be stated here that the figures given above 
for cost of boiler room do not allow space for an economizer. 

We now have the following approximate figures for power 
house costs: 


With boilers of standard rating............... $96.00 
Ag ‘“ double “ SIS SE OY $93 .00 
Both of these prices are without economizers. 


Taking these new figures and calculating the data for curves 
similar to those given by Mr. Finlay, it appears that the total 
cost of current output will be practically the same in both 
cases, regardless of the rating at which the boilers are worked. 

A. Bement (by letter): It is rather remarkable in the tests 
described by the author, how nearly constant final efficiency 
is in steam generation with one and two stokers, and this may 
be partially explained by the fact that the proportion of the 
usual type of water tube boiler is such that only a part of the 
tube surface is acted upon by hot gases, and if a larger volume 
is forced over the boiler, as would occur with two stokers, their 
relatively greater body, demanding more space, will extend to 


1907) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK ° 1729 


portions of the boiler which were Practically unused with a 
single stoker. This has been illustrated elsewhere.* 

Referring to Fig. 7, which shows an elevation of boilers and 
stokers in the Subway power plant, it would appear that a fur- 
nace roof has been improvised by the insertion of a baffle between 
the tubes of the two lower rows of the boiler in the rear. If this 

be true, it leaves the lower row of tubes exposed to the heat 
from both stokers for about five-sixths of its length. I 
would inquire if it has been possible to operate these boilers to 
to any considerable extent without destroying the tubes of this 
bottom row by overheating. Even if they have been able to 
stand such an amount of work, this design of furnace could be very * 
much improved by the use of encircling tiles which are usually 
made in lengths of 12 in. as have been elsewhere described.+ 
This would not only reduce the amount of work required of 
the bottom tubes, but would furnish a more satisfactory roof 
than an inserted baffle does. 

F. V. Henshaw (by letter): It may be well to point out that 
as neither heating surface nor grate surface has fixed value for 
different designs and conditions, they should be considered in 
connection with specific cases,and the ratios of the two com- 
pared with due regard to all the features of the furnaces and 
boilers in the different cases. A trifling change in the baffles 
can greatly alter the value of the heating surface in water- 

_tube boilers, and numerous other variables are obvious. 

In designing boiler-plants we have to provide for two distinct 
operations: first, the chemical operation of burning fuel; secondly, 
the physical operation of conveying the heat generated to the 
boiler water. The apparatus for performing these operations 
is supplied by independent makers. These makers are at times 
opposed in their requirements. The boiler designer being 
anxious to secure a high rate of evaporation and rapid circula- 
tion, may wish to apply the fire too directly to the boiler, with 
resultant imperfect combustion and production of cinders and 
smoke. The fuel value of discharged cinders and smoke is not 
great, but the deposit from them on tubes reduces the value of 
the heating surface, and, when emitted from city chimneys, 

they have a large ‘“‘ injunction and fine ”’ negative value. 
The boiler shown as Fig. 7 is a well known type with a slight 
change in the baffles. The front furnace is standard, whereas 
the rear furnace has a longer combustion arch. The grates 
are much farther below the tubes, and the tubes directly above 
the grates are covered by a baffle which deflects the flames 
toward the boiler-front. One would expect the rear furnace 
to be considerably more efficient, to produce less smoke or 
cinders, and to require a rather higher draught pressure than 


*Transactions American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Vol. X XVI, 
p. 626. 
+ Journal Western Society of Engineers, Vol. XI, p. 752. 


1730 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


the front furnace. We have here, therefore, something more 
than a simple case of added grate area. 

In the curves given, the single stoker doubtless refers to the 
front furnace. Additional comparisons of each furnace operated 
singly would be interesting. 

It seems to me that the estimate for cost of boilers is some- 
what too low, on account of the greater cost of settings for the 
double-furnace boiler. 

W. S. Finlay (by letter): It is evident that the discussion 
has been productive of possibly more valuable experimental 
results than are contained in the paper itself, and to attempt 
- to reply to each and every feature of the very long and elaborate 
criticisms, would be absolutely out of the question. What 
may be said in reference to these discussions, is said with due 
respect and recognition of the greater knowledge and experience 
possessed by the gentlemen whose work determines the value 
of the subject in hand. 

Possibly it was unfortunate that more emphasis was not 
given to the fact that the specific solution of the problem of 
increased efficient combustion, namely, the double stoker, was 
not proffered as a general or sole solution, but was quoted as 
merely one form, convenient and satisfactory in the case to 
which it was applied. Neither did the writer desire to give any 
specific value to the ratio, simply wishing to emphasize the im- 
portance of its careful consideration under attendant conditions. 

With reference to Dr. Lucke’s criticisms, which are chiefly 
from a theoretical standpoint, a reply should be given from a 
similar basis. A careful study of the discussion shows that 
there has been practically but one point brought up, this point 
being repeated in a number of different ways. In form, the 
discussion is interrogative, tending to throw a doubtful light 
upon the experimental! data referred to in the paper. A declara- 
tive form might be stated as follows: 

1. Operation under double-stoker conditions should theoreti- 
cally conform to operation under single-stoker conditions. With 
increased total combustion, and increased capacity, economy 
should decrease regularly, if expressed graphically, in a single 
continuous curve, whethe1 such increase in capacity be accom- 
plished by increased combustion upon a single stoker, or upon a 
double stoker. 

2. Boiler efficiency is conditioned upon two variables: 

a, Ratio of heating surface to grate surface. 

b. Rate of combustion per square foot of grate surface. 

The question has thus been reduced to a study of: first, that 
which actually determines boiler efficiency; secondly, the form 
in which this efficiency varies. 

It is a self-evident fact that a diagram, such as the “ shot-gun ” 
diagram, based upon results of three hundred tests under all 
sorts of conditions—boilers, combustion chambers, etc.—is of 
little or no value, and useless so far as it bears upon theoretical 
investigation, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1731 


The rate of combustion must be recognized as a factor in 
the “unit ” efficiency under practical conditions, but as to its 
effective value so far as the boiler proper is concerned, it would, 
in the light of recent investigation, seem highly probable that 
boiler efficiency decreases but little under conditions of in- 
creased rating. 

Merely to consider two factors determining boiler efficiency, 
namely: 1. The ratio of heating to grate surface—primarily a 
specific feature, which can not be generalized—and, 2. The rate 
of combustion, would be obviously to neglect certain most ele- 
mentary and fundamental features in design. 

It is inadvisable to attempt completely to discuss all factors 
entering into boiler and grate efficiency, particularly as certain 
new features in theory and experiment indicate that knowledge 
of the subject is not at all complete. However, a summary of 
recognized factors from both theoretical and practical points 
of view will serve to indicate the relative effective value of each 
upon the efficiency of the boiler when considered as a unit 
consisting of boiler proper, furnace, and grate. Thus, for any 
given set of conditions, unit efficiency will depend upon the 
following factors: 

1. Grate design, a factor involving in practice relative values 
of air-space, adaptability to grade of fuel, ease of handling in 
process of cleaning, with attendant effect due to admission of 
€XCess alt, etc. 

2. Furnace design, which involves complete combustion of 
gases, and transmission of the same to the heating surface when 
at their maximum temperature. 

3. Method of air supply, which must naturally be considered 
together with the preceding factors. 

4. Boiler design, which may be sub-divided as follows: 

a. Relative exposure of heating surface to heat radiation 
from fire and furnace walls. 

b. Design of heating surfaces in relation to direction of quan- 
titative flow of gases. 

c. Design of baffling as effective upon flow of gases, with 
due regard to the effect of such baffling upon soot accumulation, 
and ‘‘ dead ” space; also to direction of circulation in boiler. 

d. Boiler design in respect to rapidity of circulation of water. 

5. Boiler proper, maintenance and operation. This factor 
includes cleanliness in inner and outer surfaces of tubes and 
drums, together with the condition of all parts of the unit. 
Operation includes care and handling of fire, together with man- 
ipulation to obtain best combustion and lowest practicable 
flue-gas temperatures. 

A number of other governing factors might be quoted, but 
for purposes of comparison the above will suffice. 

A comparison of conditions existing in the single- and double- 
stoker boilers as influenced by changes in certain of these fac- 
tors, will serve to explain the apparent discrepancies which 


1732 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


Professor Lucke calls attention to. In the change .rom single 
to double stokers, the only factors vitally affected, are: 

1. Furnace design, in which case the new design undoubtedly 
favors a more complete combustion of gases, a point in favor 
of increased efficiency. d 

2. Grate design, the possibility of increasing combustion per 
square foot of heating surface without a tendency to force 
excess air through the fire. 

3. Increased exposure of heating surface to radiation from 
the fire-bed. 

4. Greatly increased volume of flow of hot gases; larger 
portion of the heating surface becoming active, and dead spaces 
and eddy currents of gases decreasing in number and effect. 
Heat convection to heating surface is increased by reason of 
greater speed of gas circulation. 

5. Boiler operation is improved by reason of the fact that 
increased water circulation tends to lessen the formation of 
scale, as well as improved heat convection inside of tubes. 

The above summation of changes in conditions, with their 
effect upon the unit efficiency, tends to show that curves plotted 
upon bases of efficiency and rating for the single-stoker boiler 
and the double-stoker boiler need not be identical, the one a 
continuation of the other. These curves would necessarily be 
distinct and individual for each set of conditions. 

It is to be noted, in the particular case of the efficiency curves 
given, that the decrease in efficiency for increase in rating 
seems to be rather rapid. To lessen the slope of these curves, 
the self-evident solution is to provide such draught or air- 
supply conditions that forcing of fires would not be accompanied 
by excess air supply or undue disturbance of fires. 

A move in this direction, with apparently successful results, 
has already been taken; but the fact remains that the double 
stoker must retain the all-round higher grate efficiencies accom- 
panying combustion at a lower rate per square foot of grate 
surface, together with improved furnace conditions. The 
feasibility of obtaining efficient high boiler output, with due 
consideration of total plant charges and costs, makes the double- 
stoker simply one device to obtain certain results, its choice to 
be based upon ruling conditions. 

Mr. Wells bases his entire discussion upon a premise whose 
value is exactly the point which originated the question brought 
up by the writer. He makes the statement: 

Consideration should first be given to the evaporation possible per 
square foot of heating surface consistent with commercial economy; and 
this in turn depends upon the maximum practical rate,of combustion, etc. 

This is just a re-statement of heating surface and furnace rela- 
tion. However, having made this statement as the funda- 
mental, his development of the subject has unfortunately been 
merely along lines of hitherto accepted methods of increasing 
boiler capacity without any consideration of the latest phases of 


> my 


—— 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1723 


development giving consideration to the possibilities latent in 
heating surface efficiency. 

The discussion by W. T. Ray and H. Kreisinger is peculiarly 
valuable in view of the fact that it incorporates results of most 
recent investigation. The writer considers it a most practical 
verification of what has been said in reply to Dr. Lucke’s dis- 
cussion as well as of the original paper. 

It is evidently a misinterpretation of the writer’s thought 
that Messrs. Ray and Kreisinger have emphasized the point of 
fixed valuations to the ratio of heating to grate surface. The 
writer fully realizes that such a fixed valuation could not be 
generally applied, the purpose in view being more particularly 
a careful consideration of furnace and heating surface relation, 
as applied to each specific case in the light of results such ashave 
been realized by the very investigations of the United States 
Geological Survey. 

Mr. Abbott objects to considering the size of the boiler plant 
as practically the determining factor in the size of a plant build- 
ing. Conservative design, as exemplified in nearly every recent 
plant of importance, has been on the parallel plan, it being al- 
most uniformly an accepted rule that consideration must be 
given to plant growth and extension, in addition to uniformity, 
as necessary to simple operation. The turbo-generator in point 
of permitting extreme flexibility in adapting turbine room size 
to boiler room size has been an additional incentive to the de- 
velopment of this system. 

Replying to Mr. Bement’s first question in reference to the life 
of the bottom row of tubes, the writer would say that operating 
results for a period of about three months show most satisfactory 
results in this regard. Improved circulation and evenness 
of heating of these tubes result in improved cleanliness and 
little wear. Mr. Bement’s statement in reference to increased 
utilization of heating surface in the case of the double stoker : 
‘seems to corroborate the reply to Dr. Lucke’s discussion. 

Albert A. Cary: Mr. Cary presented a careful analysis of 
fuel combustion, and the relative distribution of heat losses 
throughout the process of such combustion, for the particular 
purpose of emphasizing the need of deliberation and care in the 
design of furnace and grate in their relation to the boiler. In 
support of his position, Mr. Cary cited numerous examples and 
facts gathered during years of wide experience. 

J. P. Sparrow: It sems to me that undue prominence is 
given to the matters of grate area; if the question were the 
proper relation of boiler heating surface to maximum station 
output as affecting station design and operating costs, then the 
matter of grate surface becomes one of obtaining the necessary 
capacity at the maximum efficiency. 

In the ratio of square feet of heating surface to kilowatt capac- 
ity there are quite wide variations in practice—variations of 
from 5 to 1 to 10 to 1; there are also similar variations 1n the 


1¥3¢: HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


evaporation per square foot of heating surface, every-day prac- 
tice showing examples of from 2.5 to 8 lb. for land service, and 
as high as 10 or 12 lb. for marine work. 

In the ratio of grate area to heating surface, common practice 
vamies between the limits of 75 to 1 to 35 to 1. In central sta- 
tion service where variable loads are the rule, these variations 
in heating surface and grate area bear on two points—the 
economical evaporation per square foot of heating surface, 
and the economical rate of combustion per square foot of grate. 
Large grate areas have been advocated for many years, nearly 
always, however, from the standpoint of capacity. 

The performance quoted of a single stoker giving a boiler 
output of 610 h.p. and an equivalent evaporation of 9.5 Ib. 
represents a combined furnace and boiler efficiency of 64.4%. 
A comparative performance of the double stoker gives a boiler 
output of 1050 h.p. for the same equivalent evaporation. To 
compare with results obtained from other installations, I 
would quote a performance of a single stoker of the same size 
and design under a boiler of the same heating surface, of a boiler 
output of 1070 h.p. with an equivalent evaporation of 11.2 lb. 
or a combined efficiency of 74.5%. This capacity was obtained 
with a flue draft of 0.85 in. Mr. Finlay shows only 750 h.p. 
from a single stoker with same draft. 

Taking the curves in Mr. Finlay’s paper as a basis, his single 
stoker developing 600 h.p. burned coal at the rate of 19 Ib. of 
coal per square foot of grate, his double stoker at the rate of 18 
Ib. at 1000 h.p. while the installation referred to above burned 
coal at the rate of 28.6 lb. developing 1070 h.p. 

On a test of a marine boiler built for the cruiser Cincinnati 
with a ratio of heating surface to grate surface of 41.7 to 1, coal 
was burned at a rate of 59.75 lb. per square foot with equivalent 
, evaporation of 9.63 Ib. or an efficiency of 64 per cent. 

The New York Edison Company has for some time been con- 
ducting tests of high rate of combustion of soft coal under forced 
draft, and have on test burned at the rate of 44 lb. of coal per 
square foot of grate with a boiler output of 1300 h.p. and a com- 
bined efficiency of 73 per cent. With anthracite coal under 
forced draft burning 24 Ib. per square foot, 1,070 h.p. was de- 
veloped with a combined efficiency of 69 per cent. The evap- 
oration per square foot of heating surface of these various tests 
and the efficiencies are: 


Mr. Finlay’s single stoker.......... 3.4 Ib. 64.4 per cent. 
rebeteh el em Papal, cee ee AB Pn, iy los 64.4 bo 
Waterside single » 6 ear eacila eats er 74.5 - 
Watermide formed dra.c «.\ weont smut ppb 1a. 
% cs » « anthractieéns./..... BOO) - 
pO DS BE SMCS Te fateh: | & bee Aen een RSA ® i ete 64. - 


Yn electric lighting stations where the storm peak demands 
may be from 60 to 100% above normal, it is most convenient, 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1735 


and I believe most economical, with the commonly accepted 
ratios of grate to heating surface, to operate boilers at about 
15% above rating, relying on the ability to force evaporation 
to meet the sudden load demands. If this operating routine 
is correct, then increased grate areas are opposed to good econo- 
mies. It is practically impossible to burn fuel at low rates of 
combustion on large grate areas with reasonable economies. 
We all know the difficulties experienced in checking excess air 
when operating with a ratio of grate to heating surface of 1 to 60, 
how much more difficult it will be to operate with ratio of 1 to 
32 at the same boiler output. 

A very large number of tests conducted by The New York 
Edison Company with boilers designed with ratios of 10 sq. ft. 
of heating surface to one boiler horse power have shown conclu- 
sively that while there is a falling off of combined efficiency at 
high rates of evaporation, this decrease of efficiency is not at 
all serious if the higher rate is maintained only at time of peak 
load. 

The crux of the matter lies in an increase in rate of com- 
bustion, this bearing the same relation to construction costs and 
fixed charges as Mr. Finlay’s increase of grate surface. An 
evaporation of 6 lb. of water per square foot of heating surface 
is not unreasonable, and as against 3.4 lb. allows a decrease in 
boilers of 43 per cent. A comparison on this basis with. the 
figures in Mr. Finlay’s paper would show: 


Evaporation per Evaporation per 
square foot of square foot of 
Maintenance heating surface heating surface 
3.4 Ib. 6 lb. 
IByONI ESR, otpig Geo OOO UO 29.9 % AB. inthe clothe. 16.82% 
ISGONOMUIZETSS atc. «cree o's LS Pan PORE cists es ot 26 2.78 
TEENACES setae stercsleteverereis » 17.29 QO G5 chustae ota 13.84 
SHOE aut Se Sooo Coan 40.68 QO itor oe tereres 32.55 
Boiler feed-pumps....... DEAF ee pide SA casa etehs 5.42 
KS ey 11 DUNT Oy meratee tox 2.20 ABO) cua weak issn 1.25 
ERED IOW- Oller = eleva race 0.44 PO agente ee 0.19 
WV CEL EPIDINS Comer cci e OS) <p gery d artis es ile ap 
100. 00% 74.37% 
or 74.37 : 100 as against Mr. Finlay’s 8&4 : 100. 
Operation. . sc. =< BO he | Pe reicepe hemor Gelb: 
iWater-tenders... 2... .- 20.82 AS Orta cole oat 11.87 
Stoker operators........- 38.09 DOA cae Met eh arena: 21.72 
Assistant stoker operators... .15.49 AB med Nekers ces stks 8.83 
Stoker oilers:..........% 2.54 ASG casinnat eae 1.45 
Economizer oilers..... Se SA oet ee peer iat st 5.84 
Feed pump men........ SAS Fan ie MRE AIRRLEY 5 So ar's vol cso 5.08 
Boiler cleaners.......... WO aL clan eo eS heee an a 10.41 
Miscellaneous..........- Levon A eC KA 1.73 
AUMOD Go eco 66.93% 


or 66.93 : 100 as against Mr. Finlay’s 84 : 100. 


1736 HEATING SURFACE [Dec. 13 


As Mr. Finlay has said, the value of specific results obtained 
lies in their adaptability to existing conditions. These results to 
be of value must be fairly indicative of results obtainable under 
normal operating conditions, and I fail to see the warrant for 
the conclusions drawn on the basis of the results quoted. 

J. E. Moultrop: 1 understand that the installation described 
by Mr. Finlay was brought about by reason of the necessity of 
more steam from a boiler house built as large as the location 
permitted, and completely filled with boilers. Also, that pre- 
viously to the installation of the double grates, these boilers 
were run at about their rating, 600 h.p., and that the original 
grates had an area of 100 sq. ft. These data, together with the 
evaporation curve in Fig. 4, indicate that the maximum coal 
consumed per square foot ot grate per hour was about 21 Ib., 
not a large amount compared with the consumption of some 
other large stations. As the curves indicate an ample draft, 
the natural question is, why was not more coal burned on the 
original grate? An inspection of the other curves indicates that 
this could have been done, and practically the same capacity 
obtained from the original grate as is now obtained from the two 
grates, but the economy would fall off appreciably. 

If this be true, the solution of the problem is not necessarily 
more grate area under the same boiler. There is nothing in 
the paper to indicate that any change was made in the heating 
surface or in the travel of the gases across the heating surface, 
so it may be assumed that this part of the boiler remained un- 
changed and that all improvements were made in the furnace. 
The cross-sectional elevation of the boiler shows two noticeable 
changes in the furnaces; the ignition arch on the new furnace is 
longer than in the old, and the combustion chamber is much 
larger. The new boiler appears to be almost twice the size of 
the old one. These two modifications are decided improve- 
ments, and should be large factors in the improved operation 
of the boiler. It does not follow that it was necessary to build 
a second furnace under this same boiler to obtain these im- 
provements, because the original furnace could be re-designed on 
similar lines, and if necessary a considerably larger grate could 
be placed in one furnace. 

The proposition to reduce the size and cost of the boiler plant 
is a step in the right direction, but in so doing the utmost sim- 
plicity should be maintained, especially in the large stations of 
to-day. Possibly the scheme adopted at the Interborough 
station was the best that*could be devised.in an existing plant 
for a reasonable cost, but it does not follow that this design is 
a good one to adopt in laying out a new station. 

A vertical-header boiler is more compact, and with 18-ft. 
tubes, 14high, will be some 3 ft. shorter and take about 41 sq. 
ft. less floor space than the inclined-header boiler. Here is a 
real saving in building space with no disadvantages. Such 
a boiler can be equipped with as large a single grate as may 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1737 


be conveniently installed under the rear end of the boiler, with 
the gases passing in the usual way through the heating surface. 
In other words, install the vertical header boiler in a similar 
manner to the Interborough boiler with the original furnace 
omitted. This arrangement incorporates all the real advantages 
of the double-grate plan with none of the disadvantages of the 
latter, except possibly one. Both of these plans require a tile 
roof on the lower row of tubes immediately over the fire, which 
may prove troublesome to maintain, 


A paper presented at the 223d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, December 18, 1907. 


Copyright 1907. By A.I.E.E. 


AN EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 


BY HENRY H. WAIT 


At the Wisconsin Steel Company’s Mill at South Chicago the 
turbine utilizes the exhaust steam from a reversible engine which 
drives the blooming rolls. The steam passes first to the re- 
ceiver which takes out the shock of the puffs of steam, thence to 
the steam accumulator or “‘ regenerator’”’, and from there to 
the turbine and condenser. The general layout of the plant is 
shown in Fig. 2. 

As this is the first plant of this character to be installed in 
this country, it was subjected to an elaborate series of tests by 
Mr. A. U. Leonhauser, the chief engineer of the Wisconsin Steel 
Company, and Mr. F. G. Gasche, mechanical engineer of the 
Illinois Steel Company. Besides testing the turbine equipment, 
the arrangement offered an opportunity to test the steam con- 
sumption of the primary engine by making a temporary change 
in the piping, so that the exhaust was led directly to the con- 
denser without passing through the turbine. Mr. Gasche has 
already published an account of the various tests, giving very 
interesting continuous indicator diagrams of the engine and 
charts of the roll-train resistance, etc.* 

Primary engine. This is a 42 by 60 double-cylinder engine, 
of the rolling-mill type. When in normal operation the engine 
rolls about 19 ingots per hour with 21 passes per ingot, stopping 
and reversing after each pass with a short interval for the start- 
ing of a new ingot, so that it is stopped or practically idle 20% 
of the time during the cycle required for turning out an ingot. 
There are other frequent stops for the ordinary manipulation of 
the mill which last from a few seconds to several minutes. 


*“ Power” June 1907. 
1739 


1740 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT  [Dec. 18 


The average i.h.p. while the engine is actually running is 1010, 
and, if the total work per hour were distributed evenly over the 
hour, the average i.h.p. for the hour would be 820. Figuring 
back from the total steam consumption gives 64 pounds of steam 
per average i.h.p. for the hour, or 54 pounds during the running 
period. This large consumption is readily understood when we 
consider that the engine takes steam for practically the full 
stroke when starting the passes, and is running on very light 
load most of the rest of the time. Of course the horse power and 
especially the torque runs up enormously when the rolls first 
take hold of the ingot. 


Fic. 1 


Receiver. This is the vertical drum shown on the left of Fig. 3. 


When the engine is exhausting directly to the atmosphere and 
is taking steam at nearly full stroke, the puffs of steam shoot a 
long distance up in the air and make a noise like a number of 
big locomotives puffing in unison. The receiver is to relieve the 
accumulator of the strains and disturbance which would occur 
if the puffs went directly to it. The receiver consists of a tank 
with a number of baffle-plates and is provided with drains for 
water and oil. At the top of the receiver, between it and the 
vertical exhaust-pipe, used when desired to exhaust directly to 


HOLVUIN ASMA 10. SNOILOAS IVNIGN.LISNOT ANV aSUaASNVaL HLM “NOILVTIVISNI SNI@eNL TASSIad-MOT 40 SNOILYAATS ONY NVId “Zz “DTA 


Semmes SE 
dung wnnow, 


PIBOQUOIUMS “ECT 
QUT pus wag 


“grb uonag 


rr 
zoyerusn ff 


“AH 055 \ 


PrwegTp HAMS 


Tamog 


{= ”F 


SSSI STS 
SHC] 4 


IL FOE 


TTT, 


ZZ 


gee 


et 


itt 
Ef : 


| 
L 


ouldug “sau 


109% 8h30 "10 


Te 
‘al Bonyelay 25K, OF 

eg ees 
pi 


ip aes de lage a ch spn PR enh 


¥ 
cereal 


i 


eicHn 


fare t 
<3 Biter, #09 DISEE 
Gee ence ae Presa 
it LTT LE EN 
a ico LL A OEY 


5 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1741 


atmosphere, will be seen the relief valve which permits the es- 
cape of steam to the air during the periods when there is more 
than the demands onthe turbine and regenerator 1equire. 


L 
EG 


~ Accumulator. The accumulator or regenerator is a very in- 
teiesting piece of apparatus and is virtually the same as the 
more recent Rateau regenerators built in Europe. It is shown 


1742 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


in Fig. 4. Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections of a small 
regenerator are shown at the right in Fig. 2. 

Principle of operation. The accumulator might be called a 
heat fly-wheel, absorbing or giving up energy in accordance with 
the requirements. It might also be likened to a storage-battery 
floating on the line. : 

When the engine is running, the exhaust steam comes from 
the engine through the receiver and is delivered to a number of 
pipes immersed in the water in the regenerator. These pipes or 
ducts are perforated with a number of small holes, spraying the 


steam, so to speak, in through the mass of the water in the re- 
generator. A’ greater or less proportion of this steam is con- . 
densed in passing through the water and gives up heat to the 
mass of water in the regenerator. 

It is usual to operate the regenerators at about atmospheric 
pressure.: In other words, the steam coming to the regenerator 
will usually have a temperature of 212° fahr. and will tend to 
heat the water to just that temperature. If the engine stops 
and the supply of exhaust steam discontinues, we will see that 
we have a large mass of water heated to 212° fahr., and if there 
is a continuous load on the turbine the flow of steam through 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1743 


the turbine to the condenser will tend to make the pressure fall 
off slightly in the regenerator, and 212° fahr. will then be slightly 
above the boiling temperature of water at this lower pressure, 
so that the mass of water begins to give off steam and act like 
a boiler running at approximately atmospheric pressure. If, 
now, the engine starts again, steam will be delivered to the 
accumulator at a temperature slightly above that to which the 
water has fallen, due to the cooling effect of the evaporation of 
the steam for supplying the turbine, and the mass of water will 
again absorb heat from the exhaust steam. 

In actual practice it is more convenient to run the regenerator 
at a pound or two préssure above the atmosphere, as in this case 
the piping is not under vacuum’ so that so much care does not 
have to be exercised to avoid air leaks. However, in certain 
cases, it is desirable to run below atmospheric pressure. In this 
way the power of the primary engine may be augmented by 
letting it operate at a partial vacuum. Plants are actually 
running with a delivery pressure to the turbines as low as six 
pounds below atmosphere. 

Details of accumulator. The accumulator at South Chicago, 
being quite a large one, is divided by a diaphragm in the middle 
into two decks, each deck having a series of flues similar to those 
shown in the small regenerator of Fig. 2. The steam generated 
in the lower deck passes up through steam flues into the upper 
chamber and passes out with the upper steam through the steam 
dome. 

Water trap. There is a small percentage of the steam de- 
livered to the regenerator which is condensed on account of 
radiation from the surface of the apparatus and this makes an 
accumulation of excess water in the regenerator, and this is 
automatically discharged by the float trap seen at the end of 
the regenerator. In most plants where such apparatus is used, 
there is more exhaust steam than is actually required for the 
turbines so that this condensation does not matter as it is only a 
small percentage anyhow. But in some plants, where the fullest 
possible amount of steam needs to be saved, the regenerators 
are lagged. — 

Water level. Gauge glasses are shown on each deck, and a series 
of valves and pipes are shown so that the water level in the upper 
deck can be set to suit that maintained in the lower deck by the 
float valve. 

Reducing valve. If for any reason the primary engine shuts 


1744 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


down for a considerable period, the supply of heat stored in the 
regenerator will become exhausted and the pressure will fall 
below a workable amount for the turbines. To take care of 
this condition, there is an automatic reducing valve which will 
be seen on the piping just above the scaffold. This valve in the 
present plant is set so that it will open whenever the pressure 
falls below atmosphere and deliver live steam through the re- 
ducing valve to the regenerator whenever the primary engine is 
shut down for a long enough period to make it necessary. 

In this plant the relief valve is set for three pounds above 
atmosphere; in other words, whenever there is more steam than 
is necessary to run the turbine and heat the water in the re- 
generator to a temperature corresponding to its pressure, the 


a LY Pv ee eee Meare OVE Te 
> | WAI YO Na ASAIO 
Sa RA Ee 


Les. GAUGE. 


MINUTES. 
Fic. 5 


excess steam will pass off to the air through the relief valve. On 
the other hand, if the engine does not give enough steam to supply 
the needs of the turbine, the reducing valve will open and let 
in enough live steam to make up the deficiency. 

Fig. 5 shows a typical chart from a recording pressure gauge 
on a regenerator operating from the exhaust of a roll-train 
engine. From A to B the engine is working and the pressure 
rises and falls as a function of the amount of steam delivered. 
At B the engine stops and the regenerator continues to deliver 
steam to the turbine so that the pressure begins to fall off down 
to the point C, where the engine begins rolling again. At F the 
engine stops again for a considerable period so that the pressure 
falls to atmosphere and a little below, until the point F is reached, 
where the pressure has fallen sufficiently to let the automatic 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1745 


reducing valve open and admit live steam, which brings the 
pressure back up slightly above the atmosphere. 

At the Wisconsin Steel Company’s plant, during normal opera- 
tion, the pressure ranges about one or two pounds above at- 
mosphere; when the engine is exhausting heavily it runs up to 
about three pounds. The lower limit of pressure, when the re- 
ducing valve opens, is about atmosphere. 

As a matter of fact the regenerator is considerably larger than 
would be really necessary to regularize the flow of steam to the 
turbine, as tests show that under the ordinary load conditions 


Fie. 6 


the regenerator will keep the turbine running at its average load 
for about seven, minutes after the primary engine shuts down 
before the reducing valve opens. This would correspond to a 
period of about five minutes at full load on the turbine. 

Turbine. The turbine is of the well-known Rateau type, 
similar to those of the same character built in Europe, except 
that on account of American conditions it was necessary to 
make the construction heavier and stronger. The exterior of 
the turbine is shown in Figs. 1 and 6. 

Wheels. The revolving wheels and their vanes are shown in 
Fig. 7. The wheels are turned out of solid steel plate with an 


1746 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


cross-section increasing toward the center to give them a large 
factor of safety. 

Buckets. The buckets are made of a special alloy of 
great mechanical strength and rust-resisting qualities. Each 
bucket resembles a half of a brass shot-gun cartridge sawed in 
two. The buckets are held against the rim of the wheel by 
special rivets which have heads formed to fit the shape of the 
bucket at the bottom. It will be noted that this is an extremely 
simple and reliable method of securing each bucket independently 
of the others. The rivets are figured with a very large factor of 
safety, and there has never been a case of a rivet giving out in 


Fic. 7 


all of the large number of Rateau turbines which are running. 
The buckets are spaced at the periphery by a spacing or shroud- 
ring which serves to maintain an accurate spacing and acts as 
a baffle for improper currents of steam. 

It will be noted that these rings are made in several pieces. 
This is for the sake of convenience in manufacture and handling 
and does not materially affect the strength, as will be seen when 
it is remembered that at these high peripheral speeds a band of 
this character would have scarcely the requisite strength to hold 
itself as a hoop. On the other hand, the buckets must be de- 
pended upon to hold it as far as centrifugal force is concerned. 


\e 


1907] WAIT; EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1747 


It is of interest to note that as the turbine is divided into so 
many stages, the steam velocities are very low, so that the im- 
pinging jets of steam do not wear away the entering edges of 
the buckets One of these turbines was examined after being in 
service for five years and it was found that the marks of grinding 
on the buckets were still visible, showing that the wear was 
negligible. 


Rives § 


Diaphragms. The Rateau turbines have fixed diaphragms 
which extend to the shaft between the wheels, forming a cell 
in which each wheel operates. There are no photographs of 
the diaphragms of this particular turbine, but they are of the 
same character as those shown in Fig. 8. 

As the turbine is of the impulse type, the pressure is the same 


1748 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. i3 


on both sides of the wheel and there is no tendency to leakage of 
steam through the clearance spaces around the periphery. 
These clearances can therefore be made as large as desired: within 
reason, without having any material effect on the efficiency. 
Governor. The governor is of the spring-balanced, fly-ball 
type, operating in connection with a dash-pot. It is located in 
the cylindrical casing on the turbine bearing seen in Fig. 6. 
Throttle value. The governor regulates the speed by throttling, 
the valve being of the double-beat type, located in the vertical 
cylinder seen in Fig. 1. Of course it will be realized that the 
steam admission pipe and the throttle valve have to be of ab- 


Fic. 9 


normally large dimensions on account of the steam being de- 
livered at such a low pressure. 

The governor operates satisfactorily and maintains the speed 
within the ordinary ranges, either during violent or slow changes 
of load. 

Bearings. The bearings are very simple in construction, as 
they are practically the same as the ordinary ring-oiled dynamo 
bearings, except that they have water-jackets to maintain the 
temperature at the desired value. 

The turbine being of the impulse type, there is no end-thrust 
except that due to slight residual effects, so that only a few 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1749 


thrust-collars are necessary to locate the shaft and these are 
placed at one end of the governor bearing. 

Stufjing-boxes. On low-pressure turbines the stuffing-boxes 
become a comparatively simple problem; on this turbine they 
simply consist of a water-seal in chambers bolted to the heads of 
the turbine. 

Dynamos. One of the dynamos is shown in Fig. 6, the arma- 
ture in Fig. 9, and the fields .in Fig. 10. 

The design of direct-current dynamos at turbine speeds is 
the really hard part of the engineering problem connected with 


Mies 16) 


such an installation. The turbine itself, being constructed en- 
tirely of strong materials, is relatively a simple matter in com- 
parison with the dynamos. The centrifugal force at the per- 
iphery of the armature is nearly half a ton per pound of 
material, and it can be readily understood that the designing of 
4 machine to hold a large number of small insulated coils with an 
adequate factor of safety, and so placed that they will stay 
where they are put and not unbalance the machine, is not a 
problem of the nature of child’s play. 

-When it was decided to put in this plant we found that direct- 
current dynamos of the speed and capacity required had not 


1750 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT ([Dec. 13 


been built in this country and were not obtainable, so it was 
necessary for us to design the dynamos ourselves. It might 
also be remarked that although larger direct-current turbine 
dynamos had been designed in Europe, there were none, as far 
as we could find out, adapted to the requirements of American 
steel-mill practice. 

In order to make the problem simpler and not run so much 
risk with abnormally long commutators, it was decided to divide 
the generating capacity into two direct-current units of 250 kw. 
each, the pressure being 250 volts. 


Armature. The armature resembles an ordinary iron-clad 
armature, except that everything has to be much stronger and 
the shaft at the center is very large so as to bring the critical 
speed well above normal. At the ends of the winding, where 
there are no teeth to hold the coils against centrifugal force, 
nickel-steel retaining rings are used, which give a very large 
factor of safety in spite of the enormous strains. These rings 
revolving in the fringe of the magnetic field from the pole-pieces 
would, of course, have a large loss in eddy currents generated 
in them and would overheat and cause loss in efficiency if some- 
thing were not done to prevent it. | 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1751 


In Fig. 10, just outside the pole pieces will be seen iron rings 
which serve as magnetic shields to protect the retaining rings 
from the leakage flux which would otherwise pass through 
them. These rings of course increase the magnetic leakage of 
the fields by a small percentage but this can be allowed for once 
' for all by providing a little extra material in the fields and, on 
the contrary, the shielding of the retaining rings prevents a 
loss which would be a continuous one during the operation of 
the machine. 

Commutator. Abnormal peripheral speed limits the size of 
the commutator diametrically, and the great coefficient of 
expansion of long commutator bars limits the permissible length 
in a longitudinal direction. The commutator is therefore 
divided into two sections, as shown in Fig. 9, to avoid expansion 
troubles. The segments are held against the great centrifugal 
force by nickel-steel retaining rings which are shrunk in place 
and give a large factor of safety to the commutators. The two 
sections of the commutator are united by tangs resembling those 
ordinarily used at the inner end of commutators. 

Fields. in order to overcome the effects of the very high 
commutating voltages caused by the large current and high speed, 
it is necessary to use commutating poles. These are well 
shown in Fig. 10. The rest of the field structure is of the same 
general character as ordinary machines. On the right of the 
field frame in Fig. 10 may be seen half of the turbine shell with 
the diaphragms removed. 

Brush-holders. The brush-holders are one of the difficult 
features of the problem. I think it may be said that some brush 
holders are worse than others, but there are no perfect ones. 

On these high-speed commutators the energy lost in the 
brush friction is usually a good many times that of the [? R loss, 
so that it is important to keep the brush tension as low as 
possible. The other horn of the dilemma is that, unless con- 
siderable tension is maintained, it is difficult to keep the com- 
mutator absolutely true, and even one-thousandth of an inch 
eccentricity or a high spot will throw the carbons out of contact 
and make sparking and other troubles. On these machines the 
problem is handled in a very interesting manner by a novel type 
of brush holder, Fig. 10a. The carbons are held in a clamp 
swiveled some distance back of the point of contact, and be- 
tween the carbon and a lead weight is located quite a stiff 
spring. The lead weight is held by this spring on one end and 


“ 


1752 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


the swiveled arm at the outer end. A spiral spring adjusts the 
tension on the weight. The weight acts like the weight of a 
seismograph.and the brush is therefore acted upon by a strong 
force tending to bring it back in contact if for any reason it has 
a tendency to be thrown off the commutator by a high spot or 
otherwise. On the other hand, the adjusting spring behind the 
weight enables the maintenance of a low average tension on the 
brush. In this way the natural period of vibration of the brush 
and its spring acting against the weight can be made a number 
of times the frequency of revolution. Care must, however, be 
taken that the natural period of vibration of the inertia weight, 
vibrating on the inner and outer springs, shall not be such that 
resonance will be caused by the frequency of rotation. 

Ventilation. These high-speed machines cause a considerable 
whirring noise on account of high peripheral speed, and for 
this and other reasons the frames are enclosed with end-bells. 
On the end of the armature in Fig. 9 will be seen the projecting 
tips of fan-blades which are mounted on the armature. These 
draw in air through a passage at one end of the frame and force 
it through the machine down through a passage at the other end 
and out through the base. This assures adequate ventilation 
and makes the machines comparatively quiet in operation. 

Operation. The general operation of the machines, as regards 
heating and sparking, is about the same as with ordinary slow- 
speed dynamos, although it is usual to have slightly higher tem- 
perature rises on the high-speed machine, because the losses are 
concentrated in such small space that it makes the ventilation 
of abnormal proportions to get down to the limits which are 
sometimes specified for slow-speed machines. 

Regarding the sparking, it may be said that these high-speed 
machines are quite sensitive to the condition of the commutator 
surface, as dirt or other causes which tend to keep the brushes 
out of contact will induce sparking. Sometimes the same cause 
would not have the same effect on slow-speed machinery. In 
general it may be said that there is not a great deal of difference 
in the operation of slow- and high-speed machines. 

These machines being equipped with commutating poles, 
with which the forces to accomplish commutation increase 
proportionately to the load, have an advantage as compared with 


ordinary machines in handling temporary overloads, as will be 


seen from the fact that we have a number of times carried the 
entire load on one machine for several hours while the other 
dynamo was running idle. 


—_-_-- 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1753 


Condenser. The condenser and air pump are of standard 
type. It may be remarked that there has been no difficulty in 
maintaining a good vacuum in normal operation and that the 
plant is usually run at a vacuum of about 28 inches. 

Tests. The tests of the plant have already been referred to. 
Table I gives the details of the observations. Fig. 11 shows a 
curve of the steam consumption of the turbine per electrical 
horse-power at the switchboard. The steam consumption was 
determined by temporarily putting a Venturi meter in the pipe 
delivering the condensing water to the condenser and measuring 
the temperature of the entering and discharged water, in this 
CEE 


CURVE OF STEAM CONSUMPTION 
60H RATEAU STEAM TURBINE 


Pounds per H.P.-Hour at Switchboard 
§ 


8 


Y 
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 
H.P. at Switchboard 


CURVE OF STEAM CONSUMPTION OF TURBINE 
ieee Uhiky 


way using the condenser as a calorimeter to determine the heat 
ejected from the turbine. It may be well to point out that in 
order to get suitable temperature ranges and on account of other 
local. conditions obtaining at the time of the test, the vacuums 
were not as high as the turbine was designed for, so that, although 
the steam consumption was better than the guarantees, the 
values given do not represent the actual capabilities of the tur- 
bine. 

Comparative power of low-pressure turbines. To those not 
familiar with low-pressure turbines, the query might naturally 
arise as to how it comes that the low-pressure turbine can get 


EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT | [Dec. 13 


WAIT 


1754 


# ON Isa 


caer 


SMONS 
Sool 
for) 
1D 


0° 082'6Z 
0'+9 

ame sa 4 
€°St 


€ ON Isay 


0° LEZ 
0° 00¢'T 
6°96 
Lb 1G 
£6 08 


“0S0'GS 
9 


“916 
“ST 


3 63 

0° 0G2‘9T 

SG LES 
09° SS 
0 


ie <3 Le spunod 
3 IF 8°ZS spunod 
o°S¢ SEL spunod 
O° LEE 0°93€ spunod 
0° 000'6F8 0° OOT‘68E nya 
0 0S6'8% 0° 06F‘LT nyg 
0° 002‘ 0° 00'S n+¢ 
0° 16P 0° 698 “dy 
Z°06 Z 06 queso 13d 
21°998 1°99z S}}EMOTLY 
6° OFZ Z StS SzJOA 
0° S8F'T 0° S80'T sorodue 
OFFS 0° 60% ‘dy 
0° OFS'T 0° OFS'T ‘urd's 
9°96 1€° Sz sayout 
0°61 9°81 sayout 
SE 6° SE sayout 
0° 0Z3'06 0° 00¢‘6T spunod 
0° 8F 0° 8F “IYPJ o 
0 LIZ G°SIZ “IYPJ 
9'9T 6°91 spunod 
9° 6% 9°63 sayout 
0° 0€0'ZT 0°SST'S spunod 
8°61 6° IST “4g "no 
00° 6Z 09° IF “IPI 6 
0g" 89 00°08 “TUPI 
08° 6E OF 8€ “IYPY 9 
Lo°L Sb'S sayout 
00°S 00°T sinoy 
Il “Jew IT ‘Jew 2061 
GON 184 L T ‘ON isa LINQ 


srrerreesereessssinoy Jad auiqin} ye ‘dy axviq Jod ureayg 
ee “anoy, sad paeoq yoytMs ye ‘dy iod wea4g 
cence syle Male ogy Fiaeiia ie Nataass,#\<0' INOY-WEMOTIY Jad wee4yg 
sete eeeeeeseeseesesssgutqiny 0} “uli Jed uea}g 
Dn a aes eed iad 1a}eM Zursuapuoo 0} paleatep yeep 
ks ‘utul Jad auop y1IOM JO JuaTeAMba yeayy 
wie utu Jed Zuidid wo1j uolyeIpey 
SLINSay aaaluaqd 


ha rahe MNO Rte a oi ou. ay} 1e ‘dy e8vieay 

bh GS, OR Res Are One “sioyeiauas Jo Aouatagja asei0Ay 

ze ““SHEMOLDY ul AlaAT[ap JUeINO aseIeaAy 

Sepa Hy 0:4, 18.60% '¢ Widte 9 *-ssurpeed JaJBWUIY{OA VBeIBAY 

Bienen © rie am “‘sBUIPBal JajsWUIUIe aseIBAY 
<Siseeeess 


coecerccereess -q3ByS SDIqIN, 78 ‘dy axeiq aseloAYy 
wie SS. c nelle a ae ea utul Jad G[ + 9uIqin} Jo suOTN[OAel aseIBAY 
Pr ee ee ee Butseo qsneyxe ye wnnoeaA aSeIBAY 
rrrstseseesee sss -QATBA ZuUlTOIUOD Japun ainsseid eseIsAy 
Saran aie ay ee SA[PA BuT[OIyUOS eAoqe ainsseid aseIeAy 
aNIGuny 
8) 2 ©. 0.6 weleis 0:8 0 000 010 00, 9 ee 6 “moy qed pereatjap wes4s eBeIOAY 
ste eee eee eee “11e Jo ‘dule} aseloay 
ore auIqin} 7e uresjs Jo ‘duis, oBvioay 
asec eeeee sqe ‘autqiny 4e ainsseid aseleay 
UOLVUANAINAY 


eee ee eee e eee reeee se tweens Jojeuioreq aBeIOAY 
aban. 9105 5. ie aa nam aie utul Jad IazeM SuIsuapUoD sseIOAY 
Baye we © eet te ‘ulu Jed Ioj¥m Sulsuapuoo sseisay 
e ae “Joye (goleuaeen jo ‘duia} jo ast eseloay 
i ke a ‘Iajem Sutsuspuoo jo “durey jeuy aseIIAY 
Ry a dat take Die we Mees “soyem Bulsuapuod jo ‘duie} [eqIul asevleay 
SOS Sey erst sb.) (aa ow ‘Iajoul LinjusA UO prey aseloAYy 
waASNAAGNOD) 


Riaideln eels 6 ae 662.5 cea 0 \dlaua.s ontcem tse -Terry Jo uoryeInq 
ie elajope stall. «6.0 eua.e us mo n.qia'a.6 a i a.e 6 She 0lacs a1eia ouatei [ety Jo a1eq 


SAN1IVA GaAIeAG AGNV GaANaSAO 


ANVdWO%) YaISHAAV A TIVNOILYNUALNI AHL dO INY1d 


OOVOIHD HLNOS GZHL LY ‘SYOLVYANAD GNV YOLVUANAOAUA NVALS ‘ANIGUAL AVALVY AO NOILVTIVISNI LLYMOTIO- 00¢ 40 SISAL AO SLINSAY— |] AIAVGE 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1755 


so much power out of the exhaust steam. It is quite inconven- 
ient to show this by the ordinary pressure volume diagram, Fig. 
12, but this diagram readily shows the difficulty of trying to 
make a piston engine utilize the expansion of the steam down 
to the volume realizable with the good vacuums maintained 
with turbines. The diagram is laid out showing 
the expansion of 4.21 pounds of steam, which is 
the average amount of steam used per stroke in 
the primary engine. The dotted curve shows 
- the volume in cubic feet of this amount of steam 
expanding without condensation from 140 
pounds gauge to atmosphere and from there 
down to a vacuum of something less than 28 
inches, the 28-inch point being considerably off 
the scale of the diagram. The upper cross- 
hatched portion represents the adiabatic ex- 
pansion of the steam down to atmospheric 
pressure and the lower cross-hatched portion, 
the expansion from atmosphere adiabatically 
to 28 inches vacuum. It will be seen that the 
areas of the diagrams, which show the theoretical 
power in the steam, are approximately equal. 

The theoretical steam consumption of a per- 
fect heat engine working between the limits of 
‘the absolute initial pressure P and the absolute 
exhaust pressure p, is given by the following 
formula: 


tbo 


PLDI L OL ILIA IL ‘i 


OA Z A a a hh hh hah elo 


~ 
e 


LAA La 


LBs. PER S$ IN. ABSOLUTE. 


i 
: rect 


“ir £09 600 100 Noo 1800 
cu FT. 


loo 300 


Fic. 12 


. 6.95-0.92 logy P _ , aa 
= = kg. per hp-hr. for metric units 
amy” Pee obi, Plog io P 


17.91—2.051log,, 2 tb. Enslish unit 
= = lb. per hp-hr. English units. 
os anal logo P—logio P 


1756 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


If from this we work back and find the pressure at which a 
perfect heat engine would have to operate in expanding fiom 
boiler pressure down to atmosphere in order to consume the 
same amount of steam as a perfect engine or turbine working 
from atmosphere down to 28 inches vacuum, we find that the 
initial pressure would be about 140 pounds. 


The temperature-entropy diagram shows this much better 


than the pressure-volume diagram. In Fig. 13 the upper cross- 
hatched area represents the energy available in expanding one 
unit of steam adiabatically to atmosphere, while the lower area 
shows the available energy in expanding a unit of steam from 
atmosphere down to 28 inches vacuum. It will be seen at a 
glance that the energy available in each case is the same. 
Further than this, the low-pressure turbine is usually a more 


aE a a Wy Tee 

rr ica SSE EEE eee bo. oe 

Pa id West SS me 
{Pa CRA ee ets SG mad sr 
4 SS =~ a Md dK De es aS mies 
eee a A Te Es Bi. 
A a EY et SS mez Lact 
fa SSS SS SS SSS me 
{om Re OW LTT Pe RE SA 
LL LMMLML!MMMLLL LLL MO: ead 
PRM; LLL LL ia LL /// 
s/n rea ae aes aa Bs 

PBL) SSR renege Mee SAIN ED em ee: 


Lue Y//)} 2 


a PFO ELI RE "ed EECOET, DOETTE TT 


Fy a fa es Se Re Te 
ENTROPY 


Fics is 


efficient heat engine than the primary engine, that is, it turns 
out a greater percentage of the power theoretically available. 
Thus it will be seen from the tests that the turbine in this case 
consumed less than 35 pounds of steam per horse power delivered 
at the switchboard, while the primary engine consumed. 54 
pounds per indicated horse power. 

Condensing engines. The query also arises how the exhaust- 
steam-turbine plant compares in economy with the primary 
engine running condensing. 

In the first place, it introduces operating difficulties to run 
reversible engines of this character condensing. Nevertheless, 
they are being operated this way in a number of instances. We 
understand that a steam consumption of 25 pounds per indicated 
h.p.-hour is the best that can be obtained on a compound re- 


eet te 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1757 


versible condensing mill engine and that, when the losses in 
clearances, condensation, and mechanical efficiency are taken 
into consideration, the steam consumption per horse power at 
the shaft would come up to at least 38 pounds. 

In comparison we can take the low-pressure turbine plant at 
the Wisconsin Steel Company as an example. The primary 
engine delivers to the regenerator an average of 52,400 pounds 
of steam per hour and develops 1010 indicated horse power. 
The tests on the turbine showed that it took 33.6 Ib. per electrical 
horse power-hour. This would make available at the switch- 
board 1560 hp. or a total of 2370 hp., after deducting the 
engine friction, that is, 22.1 lb. of steam per total horse power 
at the shaft. as against 38 with the condensing engine. In other 
words, the condensing engine would take about 70% more steam 
per effective horse power than the combined high-pressure 
engine and turbine; this result is checked by the experience at 
the Poensgen Steel Works at Dusseldorf, in which various 
engines of the plant were connected to a central condensing 
system which effected a saving of 15% in the amount of steam 
tised. Afterwards one of the Rateau steam regenerator plants 
was installed, and the exhaust steam put through the turbines. 
The saving now exceeds 40% as compared with the average of a 
15% saving by running all their engines into the condensing 
system. Sireamhlitie gee 

The saving in this case is not as great as the example we have 
just cited, because thé engines are not all reversible and are 
consequently more economical to start with. 

In general, it will be found to work out that the combination 
of a low-pressure turbine with a high-pressure engine is a more 
economical unit than a condensing engine alone; and it frequently 
figures out to a lower steam consumption than a high pressure 
and low-pressure turbine or a high-pressure condensing turbine. 
-. Degree of vacuum. An interesting problem in connection with 
these plants is what degree of vacuum is most economical. 
Where the admission pressure to the turbines is so low, the 
steam consumption is affected to a greater percentage by the 
vacuum than with high-pressure turbines. In Fig. 14, the 
Curve I shows the theoretical steam consumption per horse 
power of a perfect heat engine working between an admission 
pressure equal to atmosphere and an exhaust pressure of the 
various inches of vacuum set down as abscissas. 

The actual steam consumption per brake horse power would 


1758 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


be as indicated in Curve A, assuming a constant efficiency of the 
turbine over the range of the curves. This assumption is not 
strictly correct but is near enough so over the region of the 
minimum point which is what we are concerned about. It is 
seen that both the theoretical and actual consumption decrease 
very rapidly with a better vacuum, so that, for example, about 
25% more power can be obtained from the same amount of steam 
by running at 28 inches vacuum as compared with 26 inches. 
On the other hand, it will be found that the horse power required 


LBS PER H.P HOUR. 


20" 21" 22 23° 24 oe 25 ” 26" 27 “ 238" 29" 30" 
VACUUM AT EXHAUST 


Fic. 14—T = Theoretical consumption of perfect engine per horse power- 
hour. A=Actual consumption of turbine per biake horse power-hour. 
B=Actual consumption of turbine per net electrical horse power-hour 
with barometric condenser after deducting power for auxiliaries. S and 
T=Consumption per net electrical horse power-hour with surface con- 
denser and cooling tower after deducting power for auxiliaries. 


to run the circulating pump and the other auxiliaries increases 
at a very rapid rate with the higher vacuua, although the power 
of the air pump decreases slightly. 

In order to show the effect of the power consumed in the 
auxiliaries. we have taken as an example such a turbine operated 
in connection with a barometric condenser and assumed that the 
circulating pump and air pump were motor-driven by current 
supplied from the dynamo connected with the turbine. This 
would not ordinarily be the method of arranging such a plant, 
as the turbine depends on the vacuum as its source of power and 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1759 


it is inconvenient to get the plant started; but such an example 
offers a clear way for figuring the net output of the plant. 

The Curve B shows the pounds of steam per net electrical 
horse power, the power for operating the auxiliaries first having 
been deducted. This curve is on the basis of circulating water 
at 70° fahr., (which can be taken as representing average con- 
ditions) and the usual commercial forms of condenser auxiliaries. 
It will be noted that the curve begins to turn up at the higher 
vacuua instead of turning down as do the theoretical curve and 
the actual gross consumption curve. 

In steel mills there is usually a large water system for supply- 
ing the plant, and it is generally thought best to avoid com- 
plication and supply the condensing water for the turbine plant 
directly from the system, without installing a separate circulating 
pump. The head of the water systems is usually in the neighbor- 
hood of four times the head required for the circulating pump. 
This extra amount of power, although not needed for the turbine 
plant, has to be considered in determining the most economical 
vacuum and has the effect of shifting the minimum point to 
something over half an inch lower vacuum than indicated on 
Curve B. 

Where condensing water is not available, a low-pressure 
turbine plant can be installed in connection with a cooling-tower 
equipment. 

Curves S and T show the steam consumption per net electrical 
horse power in a plant equipped with a surface condenser and 
cooling tower, after deducting the power which would be con- 
sumed in motor-driven air, circulating and hot-well pumps, and 
in the cooling-tower fan. This curve is made out on the basis 
of 75° temperature of the air and 70% humidity, which are taken’ 
as representing average conditions. It will be noted in this case 
that the most economical vacuum is practically the maximum 
vacuum obtainable under the conditions. 

With the barometric Curve B, it will be noted that a higher 
temperature of the circulating water would move the most 
economical point to a lower vacuum and vice versa. 

These curves are on:the basis of machinery of the character 
under consideration. It would be well to point out that with 
larger turbines and with alternating-current generators, the 
efficiency of the generating set and also that of the auxiliaries 
would be increased so that the points of minimum net consump- 
tion would be shifted downwards and slightly towards the right. 


1760 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec 13 


These values refer to steam consumption and the real point in 
most cases is the minimum cost of current. The cost of current 
in such a plant is almost entirely represented by the interest 
on the investment and other fixed charges The intrinsic cost 
of both the turbine and the condensing equipment increases 
with the higher degrees ot vacuum so that these factors would 
tend to shift the point of minimum cost of current a slight 
amount to the left 

Practical results. The general result of the installation of this 
low-pressure turbine equipment is that it enabled the mill to 
shut down the two 250 kilowatt engine-driven generators which 
formerly operated the mill. and for a long time the turbine 
carried the entire electrical load of the steel mill, operating from 
the exhaust of the blooming engine and not taking any live steam 
except during abnormal! stoppages of the blooming engine. 

Recently they have installed some electricat unloading ma- 
chinery on their docks. When this machinery is all in operation 
the load frequently runs up above the ultimate capacity of the 
turbine and they have to start up one or more of the engines and 
run in parallel with the turbine. 

The attendance and lubrication items for the turbine plant are 
very small The turbine is located near the blooming engine, 
while the other generators are located in the blowing-engine house 
about a quarter of a mile away. There is but one attendant on 
duty in the turbine engine room. 

At this plant the boilers are supplied principally by gas from 
the blast furnace, but the supply of gas is quite variable and 
usually not adequate to give all the steam required, so that 
more or less coal has to be used. The installation of the turbine, 
therefore, results in a saving of the coal corresponding to the 
steam required for operating the dynamo engines. This, as 
indicated above, is quite a variable quantity but has been 
variously estimated at from $10,000 to $20,000 per year. In 
figuring on the installation of the turbine plant, it was estimated 
that the turbine would effect a considerable saving, even if the 
supply of gas were generally adequate, as the maintenance of 
the turbine plant would be considerably less than the correspond- 
ing engine and boiler plant, or even a gas-engine plant. 

Further, it is well to remember that exhaust steam passing 
to the atmosphere can be looked upon as the equivalent of a 
water-power plant and that it usually has the advantage of being 
near a market for power, besides costing less to develop than a 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1761 


Wwater-power plant would. In other words, the exhaust-steam 
plant should be able to produce the power cheaper than a 
corresponding water-power plant. 

Cost of power. During three months when the steel plant was 
running at nearly full capacity. the turbine delivered an average 
of 188,300 kw-hr. per month, or 51% of the total possible kilo- 
watt-hours if run at its rated load the entire time. . 

The operating expenses are at the following rates, based on 
the above output: 


Oily waste, Gic... bs. : 0.002 cents per kilowatt-hour 
Ationdaneeciacec ers 0 074...“ « « % 

. Maintenance and miscel- 
NMC OLS Meche eaet wee Meats caine «* “ & “ 
Total operating........ CuOSE i. ges «“ «“ 
Rixed charges). 04:00) Oi 4 cs « a“ 
i GLaleCOs te ce Kaine: Os2995 =" a i “ 


The fixed charges are figured on the basis of a cost of $80 per 
kilowatt. This figure would, of course, vary considerably with 
the conditions, but it can be taken as an average for moderate- 
size plants. Interest, depreciation etc. are allowed for at 12%. 
Nothing is allowed for superintendence, as no additional force is 
required for this item. 

The cost being made up so largely of fixed charges, it varies 
very markedly with the load-factor. In fact, if the plant is 
run 24 hours a day, the iubrication, attendance, and mainte- 
nance are only affected toa slight extent by the amount of load, 
so that they have almost the same effect as a fixed charge. Of 
course if the plant were run only during the day shift the opera- 
ting expenses would go down 

The effect of the load-factor on the cost is seen in Fig 15, 
the load-factor here being taken as the ratio of the actual output, 
divided by the output if run the entire time at rated load 

Metallurgical operations. lt will be noted that the cost of 
power at the larger load-factors is extremely low and would be 
even more so in a larger plant where the first costs and the other 
costs would go down considerably 
- If the exhaust steam turbine plant were used for electric 
smelting or similar purposes, it is probable that the load-factor 
could be kept up over 80%, which we see from the curve, gives 
a cost of 0.19 of a cent per kilowatt-hour. 


1762 WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


It might be remarked that the electric smelting processes 
take, on a very crude average, one kilowatt-hour per pound of 


LOAD FACTOR. 


Fic. 15 


metal produced. It will therefore be seen that such plants 


offer a good opportunity for doing certain kinds of metallurgical 
or similar work, 


1907] WAIT: EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT 1763 


In the foregoing no valué has been assigned to the exhaust 
steam. In most places where such exhaust steam occurs, there 
is not a good opportunity to utilize any considerable portion of 
it in any other ways, so that it would otherwise be a waste prod- 
uct. In case of selling power, it will be seen that either the 
steam itself or the current produced could be profitably sold to 
outside parties. 

Under these conditions the question of the continuousness of 
the power would arise. Of course when the primary engine 
shuts down for more than a few minutes, there is a tendency 
for the boilers to blow off at the safety valve, so that for short 
periods it does not mean any more fuel, even if the primary en- 
gine is stopped. If the primary engine is stopped altogether, 
the boilers stand ready to furnish the steam to the turbine and 
the latter would consume approximately the same amount of 
steam as non-condensing engines would. If this condition of 
running with live steam were one that would occur for a con- 
siderable time, it would be advisable to install a mixed high- 
pressure and low-pressure turbine; that is, one which would 
have a high-pressure section which is automatically fed with 
high-pressure steam whenever this becomes the normal source of 
steam. Such plants as this are already operating in a number 
of places where the primary engine runs only during a day shift 
and it is necessary to have the electric power day and night. 

Field of usefulness. The foregoing remarks apply more par- 
ticularly to the conditions in a steel plant, but similar conditions 
occur with large mining hoists; of course any other source 
of exhaust steam, whether intermittent or not, can be utilized 
in similar fashion.. It has been already pointed out that a 
great saving can be effected in connection with continuous-run- 
ning engines, and that such a system can be used to increase the 
power of such engines and that, even when run condensing, the 
power and total economy can sometimes be increased by com- 
bining a low-pressure turbine and engine. 


4 


1764 AN EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT.  [Dec. 13 


Discussion on “AN Exuaust STEAM TURBINE PLANT”, AT 
New York, DECEMBER 13, 1907. 


Francis Hodgkinson: The combination of a turbine utilizing 
steam at atmospheric pressure in conjunction with a reciproca- 
ting engine is by no means new, although the one described is 
probably the first installation in this country of such apparatus in 
conjunction with a Rateau heat accumulator. However, leaving 
out any value there may be in the heat accumulator, there is 
no doubt that power plants now operating non-condensing and 
requiring increased capacity would do well to obtain it by low- 
pressure turbines so long as means of condensing the exhaust 
steam are available within reasonable expense. There are 
many power plants employing high-grade compound reciproca- 
ting condensing engines where the total expansion is such that 
the engines have a higher efficiency ratio when operating non- 
condensing (efficiency ratio, not steam economy), than when 
operating condensing. In making this statement I] have more 
in mind high-grade engines for modern power plants, than such 
prime movers as blooming-mill engines where the expansion 
when exhausting even to atmosphere is somewhat incomplete. 
The power-plant engineer, therefore, should not expect to make 
the large percentages of increase in economy that the author 
cites in the case of the Wisconsin Steel Company, and the Poens- 
gen steel works, at Dusseldorff. 

In the case of the Dusseldorff installation, presumably most 
of the engines were simple engines, if compounded at all, it was 
probably with low cylinder ratios. Hence, merely turning the 
exhaust from these into a condenser would not make material 
difference in the steam consumption; but exhausting them instead 
through a low-pressure turbine, and thence into the condenser 
would, if the power from the turbine be made use of, cut the 
steam consumption per unit of power to about one-half what 
it was befofe. 


Low-pressure turbines are not only applicable for working in 


conjunction with non-condensing reciprocating engines in which 
the steam expansion is incomplete, but just as much in conjunc- 
tion with engines designed for operating condensing. A low- 
pressure turbine can, furthermore, just as well be designed to 
operate at less than atmospheric initial pressure, should the per- 
formance of any given high expansion ratio reciprocating engine 
show a higher efficiency ratio when exhausting at some pressure 
less than atmosphere. 

One obvious reason for the beneficial results of low-pressure 
turbines is due to the large temperature drops as low steam 
pressures are reached, which in the low-pressure cylinder of the 
reciprocating engine are harmful because of condensation and 
re-evaporation as the cycles are reversed. This objectionable 
condition does not exist in the low-pressure turbine. 

As an instance of the advantage of low pressure turbines, 


——— 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1765 


assume a compound reciprocating engine of cylinder ratios of 
3.5 :1, say of diameters 28 in. and 52 in.; this with 150. lb: 
initial pressure may be assumed of 1000 kw. economical capacity 
when running condensing and having a steam consumption of 
about 22 lb. per kilowatt-hour. This engine, if operated non- 
condensing, could have valve gears adjusted to develop 1700 
i.h.p. when it would consume about 20 lb. of steam per i.h.p. 
per hour. This gives 30,600 lb. steam available for the turbine, 
allowing 10 per cent. of moisture in the exhaust of the reciproca- 
tingengine. The total amount of steam passing the reciprocating 
engine, however, being 34,000 lb. 30,600 ib. would develop 
not less than 1,073 brake horse power in the turbine. Allowing 


80 000 


20 000 


TOTAL POUNDS OF 
S STEAM PER HOUR 


000 


0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 906 
BRAKE HORSE POWER 
Jee. al 


94 per cent. for the mechanical efficiency of the reciprocating 
engine, the; combined horse power developed would be 2673 
brake horse power and the steam consumption of the two units 
12.7 Ib. per brake horse power-hbur, or 18 lb. per kilowatt-hour, 
which is a remarkable performance for engines of such capacities 
operating without superheat. Compared with the performance 
of the reciprocating engine running condensing, this gives 75 
per cent. in¢rease of power and /18 per cent. saving of steam. 
One very nice feavure of low pressure turbines when used in 
conjunction with reciprocating nits where the electric energy 
from each may be connected to the same bus-bars, is that the 
turbine need have no governor other than a safety stop. In the 
case of alternating-current generators, they are locked together, 


1766 AN EXHAUST STEAM TURBINE PLANT [Dec. 13 


electrically, the steam turbine doing all the work that it can 
within its pressure limits and in the event of the load becoming 
light, the available steam will be proportionately reduced by the 
governors on the reciprocating engines. In the case of ‘direct 
current units the generators may be shunt wound, which makes 
them self-regulating in a precisely similar manner, inasmuch 
as the voltage varies nearly directly as the speed, and the load 
will divide itself properly between the reciprocating unit and the 
turbine. 

A low-pressure turbine built for such purposes naturally con- 
tains very few rows of blades as compared with ordinary tur- 
bines, the volume of steam being large permitting generous 
blade proportions and having neither regulating valve nor 
governor mechanism, must commend itself as the simplest kind 
of apparatus imaginable. 

Examining the tests which Mr. Wait quotes in detail, we find 
that the curves show the steam consumption per brake-horse- 
power per hour. The general characteristics of a turbine are, 
however, much better exhibited by a curve of total steam con- 
sumption; to show it in this case, | submit Fig. 1 where the total 
steam consumption per hour is shown by curve A. It is unfor- 
tunate in the tests quoted by the author, that the vacuum was 
not maintained constant at the various loads, for the line of 
total steam consumption is very much curved. It is the writer’s 
experience that the line of total steam consumption for low 
pressure turbines is a straight line, just the same as it is in the 
case of standard condensing turbines. Of course had the vacuum 
been kept constant the curve would have been more nearly a 
straight line. Correcting this curve to constant 27 in. vacuum 
in accordance with the writer’s experience with varying vacuum, 
indicates the performance of the low pressure turbine to be about 
as curve B. 

We note in the tests, the generators have been assumed to 
have constant efficiency at all loads tested. 

Some tests on a low pressure turbine made recently gave 
the following results: 


Steam pressure pounds| Vacuum in exhaust Total Steam 
aiscluse, Dry and. | nferred te 00 | bade iy. be | ee 

. _Saturated steam meh barometer hour hour 

17.4 25 .98 920 25670 27.9 

12.4 25.99 472 17487 37.1 

11.8 26.97 ‘ 592 17720 29.9 

vier 27.03 321 11980 37.3 

: 5.2 ae 26.98 102 6570 64.4 
11.6 27.8 586 16400 28.00 

wr 8.7 28 .00 458 13920 30.4 

6.1 27.90 234 9036 38 6 

4.5 27 .9y 114 6248 «6 54.8 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1767 


It will be observed from the above table that various loads 
were carried at constant vacuum, and sets of tests were also 
made with different vacuums. In these particular tests high- 
pressure steam was used, but care was taken to inject enough 
water to reduce the superheat at the inlet pressure to zero 
The results of two of these sets of tests: namely, at 27 in. and 
28 in. vacuums, are shown in Fig. 1 and from these were deduced 
the corrections to constant vacuum which I have applied to the 
author’s test. 

Another turbine built to operate in conneciion with high- 
pressure reciprocating engines gave the following result in shop 
test: 


Initial steam pressure, 15 Ib. absolute. 
Superheat 40° fahr. 

Vacuum referred to 30 barometer—23 in. 
Load 1500 brake h.p. 

Pounds steam per brake h.p-hr. 35.5. 


In all these tests the exhaust was condensed jn a surface con- 
denser, which assures accuracy in measuring the steam consump- 
tion. 

The author makes some remarks on the subject of condensers 

as applied to low-pressure turbines and endeavors to show what 
vacuum it is most expedient to carry with different conditions 
of temperature, etc. He draws his conclusions largely from the 
power required to operate the condenser, which he assumes to 
be motor-driven. Except when motor-driven, the power re- 
quired to operate the condenser does not necessarily have much 
bearing on the case. ‘There are many reasons why it is preferable, 
as is customary in this country, to operate condensers by means 
of non-condensing steam engines, the exhaust of which is con- 
densed in feed-heaters. So long as this steam is utilized, the 
thermal efficiency of the engines wiil be something like 87 per 
cent., as has already been pointed out by Mr. H. G. Stott, in his 
paper on ‘‘ Power Plant Economics ”’, so that where the exhaust 
steam is thus profitably used the amount of power required to 
operate the condenser is almost immaterial. ! 
- It is unfortunate we are not given more information regarding 
the performance of the heat accumulator, especially as to how 
much energy it is capable of storing up and giving out. We 
calculate from the published description that the regenerator 
has normally 100,000 lb. of water init. Mr. Wait says it blows 
to atmosphere at three pounds gauge pressure, 222° fahr. The 
reducing valve admits live steam at atmospheric pressure 212° 
fahr. and that the regenerator normally works between these 
limits. This gives a temperature range of 10° and Mr. Wait 
says the turbine will carry load for 7 min. without exhaust steam 
from the reciprocating engine or the admission of live steam. 
With this range of temperature, the regenerator will take up 
and give out 1,000,000 B.t.u. the equivalent of 


1768 AN EXHAUST STEAM: TURBINE PLANT  [Dec. 13 


ee = 1040 1b. of steam. 
é = 1040 x Ge : 
which will run the engine “27,000, ~ 2.31 min. 


27,000 being the assumed steam consumption of the turbine. 
The other 4.69 min. to make up the 7 min. quoted by Mr. 
Wait, requiring 2110 Ib. of steam would be accounted for if 
there were 280,000 cu. ft. contents in the receiver, steam space 
of regenerator, piping, etc. 

I should think that better results would be obtained from the 
regenerator by having the turbine large enough to carry its load 
without the reducing valve having to admit live steam until the 
temperature has fallen to, say 180°, when something like three 
times the heat will be absorbed and given out by the regenerator. 

J. R. Bibbins: It is interesting to note that the steam ve- 
locities are reduced to so a low point by subdivision of the ex- 
pansion into a large number of stages, that no appreciable erosion 
has resulted from moisture in the steam. ‘This, of course, is an 
extremely desirable feature, particularly for a low-pressure 
turbine in which the maximum amount of suspended moisture 
is found, as compared with the high-pressure element of a com- 
plete machine. In a standard complete expansion turbine 
operating on superheated steam, the so-called ‘“‘ dew point ”’ 
where moisture begins to appear, may not occur until a con- 
siderable number of expansion stages have been transversed by 
the steam; so that while part of the high-pressure section of the 
turbine runs in superheated steam, the steam traversing the low- 
pressure section increases in moisture more or less approximating 
the adiabatic law. For instance, assuming ideal adiabatic 
expansion between the limits of 165 Ib. absolute and 28 in. 
vacuum, the moisture in suspension would gradually increase 
to about 23 per cent. In practice, however, internal heat inter- 
changes, considerably reduces this moisture, perhaps as much 
as 50 per cent. Thus, the low-pressure turbine is obliged to 
work with steam containing large amounts of moisture, and the 
necessity of low steam velocities is apparent, not only as affecting 
depreciation, but also efficiency. . 

In actual installations of low-pressure turbines, it is possible 
to trap out some of the suspended moisture in the engine ex- 
haust and deliver steam approaching a dry saturated condition 
to the turbine. | Here the average moisture encountered in the 
low-pressure turbine would evidently be lower than in the 
corresponding expansion stages of a complete expansion turbine 
operating on saturated steam. Or a heating chamber might be 
introduced between engine and turbine for the purpose of com- 
a 


*961.8.is taken as the mean heat of evaporation between steam at 
212° and 222°, “2 


——e— 


1907] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 1769 


pletely drying, or slightly superheating, the low-pressure steam. 
Owing to the low temperatures at which this could be accom- 
»lished, it is possible that some of the waste products of a factory 
or power station might be utilized to good advantage—hot gases 
from heating furnaces, possibly boiler-flue gases, in cases where 
underground flues were employed leading to the chimney. 

Although it is true that the impulse or velocity type of tur- 
bine may have as large peripheral clearances as desired around 
the bucket-wheels, it must not be inferred that correspondingly 
small clearances at the shaft are not necessary to prevent the 
leakage of steam between the various pressure stages, also that 
the side clearances between the buckets and nozzles must be 
small, while in the reaction or pressure type turbine the side 
or axial clearances may be made as large as desired without 
affecting the efficiency, owing to the fact that the entire steam 
space or annulus surrounding the rotor is always filled with 
working steam. 

As low-pressure turbines are usually started under vacuum, 
provision must be made for flooding the water packing until 
the turbine picks up its speed sufficiently to provide its own 
water-seal. This, of course, is easily accomplished from the 
ordinary water service pressure; otherwise, the vacuum would be 
seriously interfered with by the air leakage. 


A paper presented at the 28d Meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, New York, December 13, 190%. 


Copyright, 1907. By A. I. E. B. 


A NEW CO, RECORDER 


BY CC. O. MAILLOUX 


In the very valuable paper on ‘‘ Power Plant Economics,” 
presented before this Institute, Jan. 26, 1906, by Mr. H. G. 
Stott, (Trans. Vol. XXV, pp. 1-27), attention was called to the 
utility of records of the percentage of CO, (carbonic dioxide) 
present in the flue gases of a boiler plant, as a means of deter- 
mining and of preventing those fuel losses which might be 
termed ‘“‘ avoidable ’’. 

Mr. Stott’s paper contains curves and data which show quite 
conclusively that there is an important and close relation be- 
tween fuel-economy and the percentage of CO, contained in the 
flue-gases. In analyzing the average loss incidental to the con- 
version of the energy of a pound of coal into electrical energy, 
he finds, in the case of one of the most efficient plants in ex- 
istence, that the ‘loss to the stack ” amounts to 22.7 per cent. 
It is well known that in the majority of cases this loss exceeds 
30 per cent. Mr. Stott refers to a case where the loss was ap- 
proximately 40 per cent. of the thermal value of the coal. The 
utility of CO, records, as a means of locating the “‘leak’”’, ina 
case of this kind, is made apparent by the following statement, 
quoted from Mr. Stott’s paper: 

“ Fig. 2 shows what improvement may easily be obtained by 
watching the CO, records, and indicates a saving of about 19 

_per cent. over the previous case.” 

In the time which has elapsed since the reading of Mr. Stott’s 
paper, the importance of ‘‘ watching the CO,” has been Gemon- 
strated in hundreds of cases, here and abroad, in a manner which 
no longer leaves room for doubt. As an example of a recent 

1771 


« 


1772 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


appreciation of the utility of complete knowledge of the CO,, in 
flue-gases, the following emphatic statement is of interest: 

“Tt cannot be too strongly impressed upon the power-plant 
owner that CO, is the factor upon which depends his very ex- 
istence under any circumstances of real competition ”’. 

This statement is made by Mr. W. D. Ennis, a leading au- 
thority on fuel-economy. It is quoted from the Engineering 
Magazine of June, 1907, containing the first of a series of articles 
‘by him, on “ Efficiency in Fuel Burning ’’, in which the entire 
subject is treated exhaustively. Many other citations to the 
same effect could be made. These will suffice to demonstrate 
the desirability of CO, records, and of satisfactory apparatus for 
obtaining such records, in the boiler room. Incidentally, they 
call attention to two sources of reliable information regarding the 
scientific (chemical and physical) principles on which the value 
of the percentage of CO, as a criterion of the efficiency of a steam 
boiler depends. 

It is not within the scope of this paper to enter into a detailed 
discussion of these principles. For our purpose, a sufficient idea 
of these principles and of their consequences may be obtained 
from the graphical ‘‘ summary ” or “‘ resumé ”’ of them indicated 
by the curves in Fig. 1, which were prepared and placed 
at the disposal of the Institute by Mr. H. J. Westover, the 
inventor of the present CO, recorder. The ordinate values of 
the different curves, at the points where these curves intersect 
the vertical line A, when interpreted by reference to the proper 
scales of values, represent the condition of ‘‘ good’ practice. 
The vertical line B marks, in the same way, the conditions of 
“bad ”’ practice. 

The average working conditions and the economic results 
attained, in the majority of steam plants, are such as would cor- 
respond to a characteristic vertical line located somewhere be- 
tween the vertical lines A and B—asarule, nearer Bthan A. In 
a few “ glorious’ examples, that characteristic line is at the 
left of the line A. In many “horrible” examples it is at the 
right of the line B. 

We see, at a glance, in Fig. 1, that high efficiency corresponds 
to high percentage of CO,, in the flue-gases. We also see that 
the falling off in percentage of CO, and in the fuel efficiency, is 
due primarily to excess of air. From this, it becomes obvious 
that the percentage of CO, present in the flue-gases, being in- 
fluenced directly and solely by the conditions of combustion of 


1907] MAILLOUX:, A NEW CO, RECORDER 1773 


the fuel, can serve as a criterion of the performance and efficiency 
of the boiler plant, and as a means of detecting defects and of 
suggesting improvements in its operation. ; 
This has been known more or less generally, for a long time, 
and it has been the practice of many experts to make chemical 
analyses of the flue-gases in connection with boiler tests. The 
oldest and most widely known form of apparatus used for this 
purpose is that of Orsat. Since a knowledge of the principle 


suRetus OF AIR iN PERCENTAGE OF WEIGHT 


) 60 
TA Tt] 


d StEUUESEBERI: 
PEEP ane 
| | 
| is crise 


‘ECT COMBUSTION 


7 0 a 9 & 


AR BON) 
a 


) SE ia 
HEEECHSS 
s 
ial DS 
| 3 
an 
SHOWING LOGS IN HORSE-POYWER 


RATING OF BOILER 


la gl 


- 
- 


ee 
S 


Cee 


iS 
OH 


PENSE 
Ma 
PENH 


STE 
Soeeeers 


beer 
COE 


1N PRODUCTS OF GOMBUSTION 
- 
= 


Vette 
ae 
core 


1 3 xl 
Loss CURVE IN PERCENTAGE 
ae 


aN 
bhi RRS RK 


pS) 
» 


4 
ae 


RUAN 


ECOL a 
ro ion M4 
an 


Nal 
mae 


H 
iy 


af rhe | 
ey 
WO 
he! 
a 


Net 
h wv, 
IT KZ 
Bay sm 


Pres 


CAPACITY CURVE IN PERCENTAGE & 


Ere 


a 
93 
a 
3 73H 
a 
= J 
v0 
«Eo 
«¢ 
a 
< 
v 
5 
« 
3 
x 
z 
H+} 


PERCENTAGE OF C 
el nwt el wo 


|| 


IN GUBIC FEET AT 72° FH. 
157 190 220 "bs0 oes" 344 345 377 408 439 471 502 534 565 596 628 660 691 722 764 785 CuBFT. 


€x. Cos 142% shows 36% surptuss aiR with IIb%Loss Representinc 682% FURNACE EFFICIENCY 
Co, 5 stows 300% sureius AIR with 344%LosS REPRESENTING 653% furnace EFFicieNcy 


THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN USUAL AND GOOD PRACTICE 1S 222% 
Picea! 


of this apparatus will be of assistance in understanding the opera- 
tion of a new form of CO, recorder to be herein described, a brief 
reference to it will be made. 

The Orsat apparatus is represented diagrammatically in Fig. 
2. The movable vessel FE, of glass, containing water, is con- 
nected by a flexible (rubber) tube, F. with a stationary vessel 
G D, of glass, of the general form shown, having graduations at 
the upper part of the tubular portion G, and connecting, by a 
small tube, C, with a three-way coupling in which are valves or 


1774 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


stop-cocks,A,L,and M. ThecockL controls a connection leading 
to a receiving vessel H, filled with small glass tubes, and con- 
nected, at the bottom, by a bent tube, with a supplemental 
receiver, I, which is open to the atmosphere, at the top. The 


lial 


linyluddaylinbanlyy 


SQ ES een aw oA SN OB eS 


Ra S62 see 2 © we a ea ee eee ST 


Fic. 2 


liquid put in the vessels Hand J depends on the particular gas 
which is to be analyzed. When the apparatus is to be used for — 
determining the percentage (by volume) of CO, in flue-gases, the 
liquid put in these vessels consists of a solution of caustic soda, 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 1775 


or caustic potash. The process of making an analysis com- 
prises various manipulations which must be made in proper 
order, with a certain care, each requiring a certain time. The 
cocks M and L being both closed, the-cock B is opened, leaving a 
free passage from the receiver D to the atmosphere. The mov- 
able vessel is then raised, causing the level of the liquid to rise 
in the vesselG and the liquid to fill the portion D as far as the 
small tube C. The cock Bis then closed, and the cock M, control- 
ling the connection with the supply of gas, is opened, allowing 
the gas which is to be analyzed to enter. The vessel E is now 
lowered; and the gas enters and fills the vessel Dand a part of 
the vessel G as faras desired. The exact quantity of gas allowed 
to enter is controlled by the position of the movable vessel E, 
which is adjusted carefully, so as to bring the level of the liquid 
in G to a certain mark, corresponding to a definite volume, say 
100 c.c. of gas. The cock Mis then closed and the cock L is 
opened. The vessel His normally left filled with the absorbent 
liquid, at the end of the preceding test. Therefore, on opening 
the cock L, this liquid begins to fall, in H, and the gas begins to 
enter. The movable vessel E is now raised again until the gas 
has been ertirely forced out of the vessel D by the rise of the 
liquid in G and D. The gas enters the vessel H, forcing down 
the absorbent solution, which is displaced into the vessel J. 
The glass tubes in the vessel H present a greatly increased 
surface, wet with the caustic soda or potash solution, whereby 
the chemical reaction on which the analysis depends is ex- 
pedited. This reaction is the absorption of the CO, gas con- 
tained in the sample of gas forced into the vessel H, and its 
combination with the soda or potash contained in the solution, 
to form a ‘‘ carbonate ’’, of soda or potash, which remains in 
solution. The volume of the gas in the vessel H is diminished 
in proportion to the amount of CO, abstracted from it by this 
chemical reaction. After a certain time, sufficient for the 
reaction to be practically ended, the movable vessel E, which 
was held at its upward position during the time allowed for 
the reaction to take place, is lowered, causing the residue of 
gas to return into the vessel D. The vessel E is lowered until 
the liquid in H rises and fills the vessel to the top as far as the 
cock L. If the sample of gas contained no CO,, it will not have 
been reduced in volume when it returns into the vessel D; 
and the level of the liquid in this vessel will be at the same mark 
as it was before the gas was sent into the vessel H. If the gas 


1776 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 12 


contained CO,, the volume returned from H to D will be smaller 
than it was before; consequently, when the “ residue ”’ has all 
passed out of H, the liquid in G will stand at a higher mark than 
before. Suppose, for example, that the initial volume was 
100 c.c. and that the residual volume is found to be 92.5 c.c. 
Then, the percentage (by volume) lost, in passing through the 
vessel H, was = 100—92.5 = 7.5 per cent. Since the loss in 
volume was due to the absorption of CO, only, it follows that 
this sample of gas contained 7.5 per cent. of CO,. If the residue 
is not to be subjected to further analysis, the cock B is opened 
and the gas is forced out at A, by raising the movable vessel E 
and filling the vessel D, as before. If it be desired to analyze 
the residue for some other gas, say oxygen, for example, the 
pipe A is connected with another vessel similar to the vessel H 
and containing a chemical reagent which can absorb the gas 
whose percentage is to be determined. The reagent used for 
the oxygen analysis is pyrogallic acid dissolved in a solution of 
caustic potash. The operation is conducted in substantially 
the same manner as for the estimation of the percentage of CO,. 
The residue of gas is returned to the vessel D, its volume is 
measured, and the loss of volume, if any, is noted, as before. 
Suppose the volume be now found = 90c.c. Then the percent- 
age of oxygen which was present in the gas was 92.5-- 90 = 2.5 
per cent. “A third analysis may serve to determine the per- 
centage of CO (carbon monoxide), present in the sample. The 
reagent then used is cuprous chloride, dissolved in hydrochloric 
acid. The residue left after this determination will be sub- 
stantially all nitrogen. From the data thus obtained it is 
possible to determine the percentage of CO,, O, CO, N, and of 
air, contained in the flue gas. 

Various other forms of apparatus for gas analysis have been 
devised and are known under different names, such as the ap- 
paratus of Wilson, Elliott, Hempel, etc. 

(Further details and also some bibliographical references con- 
cerning methods of flue-gas analysis will be found in Carpenter’s 
‘Experimental Engineering’, Chapter XIV.) 

These different forms of apparatus are all, in reality, trans- 
plantations from the chemical laboratory, modified and simpli- 
fied as far as practicable, to render them more transportable, 
and more suitable generally, for the purposes of flue-gas analysis. 
They are only intended and, obviously, would only be suitable, 
for the purpose of making a few analyses at a time, under 
‘laboratory ’’ conditions. 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER Raat 


In order that the results of flue-gas analysis may be of service 
in the operation of a steam boiler plant, it is necessary that these 
analyses should be obtained under conditions which satisfy 
certain indispensable “ practical ’’ requirements, including the 
following: Ist, the apparatus should work automatically, without 
more care and attention than any ordinary apparatus of ‘‘ me- 
chanical’ character; 

2d, it should give results (analyses) quickly and regularly; 

3d, it should give a visual indication and record of all the 
results. 

For the purposes of information and guidance, in regard to 
the economic operation of an average boiler plant, it is not 
necessary that analyses should be made of all the constituents 
of the flue-gases. This would require a too much complicated 
apparatus, and would lengthen too much the time required for 
each operation. Practically, the determination of the per- 
centage of CO, is all that is required. 

Various forms of automatic CO, recorders, which meet the 
above requirements more or less satisfactorily, have been devised 
and have been put into commercial use, during the last three 
or four years. Although some of these CO, recorders have done 
and are still doing good work in many cases, their applicability 
and usefulness in other cases have been restricted by the pres- 
ence of conditions and the absence of features which rendered 
modifications and improvements very desirable. 

The present CO, recorder, which has recently been perfected, 
is the result of careful analysis of all the requirements’ and of 
a critical study of the weak points and drawbacks: of all the 
preceding forms of CO, recorder. The new features especially 
desirable from the point of view of the boiler room’ manager 
are: Ist, to make the apparatus more “ rugged ”’ mechanically, 
and, consequently, less liable to break down or derangement 
from mechanical causes; 2d, to do away with the necessity for 
any technical knowledge or skill, and to reduce to a minimum 
the amount of ordinary care and attention, necessary to keep 
the outfit in good operative condition; 3d, to reduce to a mini- 
mum the time required for each analysis and.to increase as much 
as possible the total number of analyses obtainable per. hour; 
4th, to increase the accuracy of the apparatus’ by eliminating 
all errors due to variations of the temperature, of chemical 
composition of the reagent, or of barometrical pressure; also all 
errors due to frictional resistance in the recording mechanism; 


2 
i 


[Dec. 18 


MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 


EL 


my 
p 


| ne 

| Bs 

j a : 

| Sake ; = : 7 — oe 

| RES J eo ee ee 7 

i} te = .. — ¥ ~ 

HI F ee Le — = ee 

H - es * ~ - — | 

i} 4s a = - 4 
: ae eee . hs 

| 4 it oe tien | ja nett 4 

i} } Pa Li El esi s > 

ie eee eat et - ees - 

i} . , ss = 


' 
* 


Fic. 3 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CC, RECORDER 1779 


5th, to make the same apparatus give CO, records for several 
boilers, thereby reducing the cost of equipment per boiler. 

Fig. 3 shows this CO, recorder arranged to give CO, records 
for a battery of four boilers. Fig. 4 is a theoretical neath 
of the apparatus. 


4 


DEED. 


i 


MUTANT. 


& FF © BH » 


ESS 
‘| 
ia) alee) 


Psu Msurigy ay susigd) Aras 


SYNAANN SN 


rec bom CNsUrEEy 


720Rs US ew ear UD a, 


NNN Aon 


wx CRASS 
unui LS 
SASSY 


SANNA 
D 


ANYSNAAAS 
vy 
y 
ha 


Fic. 4 


Each complete analysis of a sample of gas comprises, in this 
case, a succession of steps or a cycle of operations very similar 
to those described in connection with the Orast apparatus. 
All the manipulations are made automatically the work inci- 
dental thereto being done by a small constant-speed electric 


1780 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dee. 13 


motor partly visible at the lower left hand portion in Fig. 3. 
This motor drives, through suitable speed-reducing gearing, the 
mechanism by which all necessary movements of valves, liquids, 
recording devices, etc., are effected and controlled, in systematic 
manner. 

The function of the movable vessel E, in Fig. 2, is performed, 
in this case, by two movable vessels (11 and 16, Fig. 4), which 
are counterweighted and which are raised or lowered or held 
stationary at certain positions and at certain times, by means 
of ingenious cam-actuated devices driven by the electric motor. 
One of the movable vesséls, 11, serves to displace the sample 
of gas when it is first received from the boiler-flue. The other 
movable vessel, 16, serves to displace it during the operations 
of measuring, “‘ treating ’’, and remeasuring the gas. 

In a case such as indicated in Fig. 4, where the CO, recorder 
serves four boilers, a pipe must be run from the flue of each of 
these four boilers to the ‘“‘ selector ’’ shown in Fig. 4, at the 
left side. This selector is provided with a small steam injector 
and with four valves so operated that only one is open at a 
time. In Fig. 4, the valve of the ‘‘ sampling ”’ pipe from boiler 
No. 1 is shown open, the other valves being closed. The in- 
jector causes a stream of gas to be drawn from the particular 
sampling pipe which happens to be in connection with it, and to 
flow through the selector and out through the exhaust pipe 5. 
This insures a rapid motion of the flue-gas in the sampling pipe 
and, therefore, enables a ‘‘sample’’ of flue gas to be drawn 
directly from the boiler flue at the very time when it is to be 
used. The opening of the valve of each sampling pipe is so 
“timed”? by the motor-driven mechanism, that it occurs 
some seconds before the sample is taken for analysis, thereby 
allowing the sampling pipe to be first cleared of “‘ stale’? sam- 
ples. This feature overcomes one of the objections which has 
been found hitherto, namely, that the CO, records are some- 
times several minutes ‘“ behind time’’, especially when the 
sampling pipe is of considerable length. In this case the sam- 
ple is taken into the recorder, through the receiving vessel, 7. 
Before the sampling pipe is ‘‘ cleared ’’, the movable vessel 11 
is raised to its highest position by the action of the cam, thus 
causing the liquid to fill the vessel 7 and empty it of all gas. 
When a new sample is to be taken, the vessel 11 descends, 
causing the liquid in vessel 7 to lower, and consequently, causing 
a certain volume of gas to be “‘ aspirated’ from the selector 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 1781 


into vessel 7. This gas is prevented from leaving the vessel 7 
by the sealing action of the liquid in the pipe connecting with 
the selector. 

When the vessel 11 has reached its lowest position, it re- 
mains stationary, during an interval of time sufficient to allow 
the valve 8 to be opened by the motor-driven mechanism, and 
to make connection between the vessel 7 and the measuring 
vessel 12. The vessel 11 is then caused to rise by the action 
of the motor-driven cam; the liquid rises in vessel 7 and forces 
the gas into the measuring vessel 12. The capacity of vessel 7 
being from four to six times greater than that of vessel 12, 
there will be more gas than is necessary for one analysis. The 
pressure produced by the rising of receiver 11, and the rising 
of the water level in vessel 7, tend to force the liquid into meas- 
uring vessel 12. This pressure would, obviously, compress 
the gas, were it not that room is made for the gas by the lower- 
ing of vessel 16 (which then occurs by the action of the motor- 
driven cam), and the consequent lowering of the liquid in space 
.14, until the liquid is about half an inch below the mouth of the 
measuring vessel 12. Consequently, the surplus gas can escape 
freely through the vessel 13 and through the vent pipe tothe 
atmosphere or to an exhaust pipe. The vessel 16 remains 
stationary at its lowest position for a brief interval, during 
which the valve 8 is moved so as to close the connection be- 
tween 12 and 7 and open the ccnnection between 12 and 9. 
The displacement vessel 16 then begins to rise. The consequent 
rise of the liquid and of the “ float ’’ 14, in measuring vessel 12, 
causes the gas therein to be imprisoned or sealed. The further 
‘rise of the displacing vessel 16 and the further rise of the liquid 
at 14 now cause the liquid to rise in the measuring vessel 12, 
and the gas to be displaced out of the said measuring vessel, 
through the valve 8 into the caustic potash vessel or “‘ treating ”’ 
chamber 9. The liquid in vessel 9 is displaced to make room for 
the gas, the excess of liquid being forced into the supplemental 
receiver 10. The chamber 9, being of relatively large diameter 
and filled with iron-wire netting, presents,as the level of the 
liquid in it is lowered, a very finely subdivided chemical surface 
which is wet with the chemical reagent (caustic soda orcaustic 
potash). The amount of surface exposed is approximately 40 
times greater than the area of cross-section of the vessel 9; 
consequently, the rapidity of the absorption of the CO, is greatly 
increased. The presence of this iron netting has the further 


1782 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


advantage of stirring and mixing up the solution when it rises 
again in the vessel 9, which happens when the vessel 16, after 
having reached the upper end of its ‘‘ excursion”’ and having 
remained there a certain length of time, now descends, allowing 
the level of the liquid to fall in vessel 14, thereby reducing the 
pressure exerted on the gas in the vessel 9, causing the unab- 
sorbed gas or ‘‘ residue’ to return from the vessel 9, through 
the vessel 8, into the measuring vessel 12. This return process 
is assisted by the simultaneous fall of the level of liquid in the 
compensating vessel 10, and its rise in vessel 9. It will thus be 
seen that the residual gas is measured in the same vessel in 
which the sample was measured before the analysis. 

The final step is the estimation of this residual volume of gas 
as a percentage of the original volume of the sample. This is 
accomplished in an ingenious manner. There are two cylin- 
drical pivoted floats, 14 and 15, in the vessel 13. Each float 
carries, at its lower part, an annular electrical contact which 
forms part of an electric circuit, indicated on the diagram 
(Fig. 4). Although these floats may revolve on their pivots, 
as they rise or fall with the liquid, an electric contact will be 
made by their annular portions whenever these are allowed to 
touch. The annular contacts are faced with platinum. The 
“liquid”? in which they are placed is “oil”. The current 
which passes when the circuit is completed is only small 
fraction of an ampere. Therefore, the chances of ‘‘ failure to 
connect ”’ are very remote. The contacts are, however, readily 
accessible, in case of necessity. The electric circuit is con- 
trolled at another point by a contact-segment mounted on a 
revolving disc which is operated by the motor-driven mechanism. 
The electrical contact at this segment is so “timed” by the 
mechanism, that it occurs only during the final period of analy- 
sis, when the percentage of CO, is to be determined and recorded. 

When, during this period, the vessel 16 is lowered, causing 
the residual gas to be returned from the vessel 9 into the vessel 
12, for the estimation of its volume, the floats 14 and 15 each 
tend to follow the levels of the liquids in the respective portions 
of vessel 13. The float 14 will remain stationary when the 
residual gas has all been returned from the absorption chamber 
9 to the measuring vessel 12. If the original gas contained CO,, 
the residual gas will obviously be of smaller volume: conse- 
quently, the level will not fall as low as the mouth of the meas- 
uring vessel and the float 14, which forms a sort of' plunger or 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 1783 


piston in the lower part of vessel 12, will remain at a higher 
position. 

When, now, by the continued lowering of the receiving vessel 
16, the float 15, in following the level of the liquid, has come 
down to a point where its annular contact touches the annular 
contact of float 14 the electric circuit will be closed, the electro- 
magnet 17 will be energized, and the measurement will be re- 
corded on the paper strip 18. It will be seen that when the 
circuit is closed, both of the floats 14 and 15 are in stable equi- 
librium because the gases in vessel 12 and in vessel 13 are thus 
at atmospheric pressure; and the possibility of variations in 
consequence of errors due to barometric conditions is eliminated. 

The recording mechanism, being attached to a stem, rising 
from float 15, moves therewith. The recording point 21 does 
not, however, come in contact with the paper strip until the 
electric circuit is closed in the manner just described. In this 
manner, the possibility of errors due to the friction of the record- 
ing mechanism, and the consequent liability to failure of the float 
15 to follow the level of the liquid, is obviated. The weight of 
the float and of the recording mechanism attached thereto can 
be accurately counterbalanced by a counter-weight 19. The 
float 15 can obviously be made to rise or fall to some extent in 
the liquid, when in a position of equilibrium, by varying the 
counterweight 19. Advantage is taken of this fact, in making 
the initial adjustment of the float 15, so as to insure the closing 
of the circuit at the exact point when the levels of the liquids 
in vessels 12 and 13 are the same. 

In practice, when the.same recording apparatus is used for 
several boilers, the recording point and the recording strips are 
duplicated. Fig. 3 shows a recording apparatus capable of 
giving four distinct recording charts, corresponding to four 
different boilers. In such a case, the float 15 carries and moves 
four recording points instead of one. The conditions are such, 
however, that only one of these points can make a record 
at any one time. In such a case, the driving mechanism 
of the apparatus automatically makes an analysis for each of 
the four boilers in succession and makes a record of the analysis 
on a chart corresponding to that boiler. This is done by a train 
of gears so arranged that, at the end of each analysis, the “ se- | 
lector” is connected to the sampling pipe of a different boiler. 
The connections are changed successively, in such a manner, 
that each sampling pipe in turn becomes connected with the 


1784 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


steam jet and with the receiving vessel 7. At the same time, 
the electric circuit connections with the recording magnets 
are changed in such a manner that the magnet of the recording 
apparatus corresponding to that boiler is alone in circuit. The 
proper codrdination of all the moving devices, including the 
displacement of the vessels 11 and 16, the change of the valve, 
the change of the electrical connections, etc., is insured, as already 
stated, by means of positive gearing-mechanism, all driven by 
the same source of motive power, consisting of a small constant- 
speed motor, shown in the lower left hand portion of the case, 
in Fig. 3.. In this way, it is practically impossible for any of the 
different operations which have been described to take place out 
of their proper turn, or to be “ out of phase.” 

One of the important sources of errors of previous forms of 
CO, recording apparatus was due to the fact that the residual 
gas was left in the measuring chamber 12 and had to be forced 
out by a new sample. In this case, at the end of an analysis, 
the residual gas is positively forced out and the measuring 
chamber is, so to speak, “cleaned ’’ by the rising of the liquid 
until it fills, entirely, the measuring chamber. This is done by 
a preliminary upward “‘excursion”’ of the displacing vessel 16 
which rises for that specific purpose until the level of the liquid 
in vessel 12 reaches the top. The only gas that is not displaced 
is that in the small tube connecting with valve 8. The succeed- 
ing analysis begins by the transfer of a new sample into vessel 
7, while the residue is being expelled from vessel 12. In this 
way, a certain amount of time is gained in getting ready for 
the succeeding test. The design of the treating chamber 9 
is such as to reduce to a minimum the time required for the ab- 
sorption of the CO,. The recorder can make a complete analysis 
and record the same inside of one and one-half minutes. There- 
fore, a recorder serving four boilers can give a record for each 
of the four boilers once every six minutes or ten times per hour. 
If the recorder is serving only two boilers, it will give a record 
for each every three minutes or twenty times per hour. 

It is an important advantage of this CO, recorder that the 
measurement of the gas residue does not take place in the treat- 
ing vessel 9, as it does, practically, in some forms of CO, recorder. 
The present CO, recorder, by adhering to the Orsat principle, 
in this respect, and forcing back the gas residue to the measuring 
vessel 12 before measuring it, avoids some more or less important 
causes of error due to changes in the volume of the reagent solution, 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 1785 


by reason of changes of temperature and of actual increase due 
to the absorption of CO,. In sucha case, the error due to a change 
of temperature will, obviously, be all the more important when 
the total quantity of solution is large. The expansion ofthe 
liquid in vessel 9, either from absorption of CO, or from rise of 
temperature, has no influence on the final result. The vessel 
10 with which the vessel 9 is connected, is open to the atmosphere 
and, consequently, allows adjustment to be made automatically 
between the two vessels, for change of volume. 

The external features which distinguish this recorder from 
all previous forms, is the liberal use which has been made of 
metal to the exclusion of glass in its construction. It can be 
said, indeed, that glass has been eliminated everywhere except 
where it is desirable or necessary in order to allow the operation 
to be seen at any point or at any stage. 

Damper-control. Mr. Stott, himself, is authority for the 
statement that the efficiency of a boiler plant can be materially 
improved by ‘‘ watching the CO, records”. The tests made 
by him, and by many others since, have shown conclusively, that 
the CO, record gives accurate information regarding the efficiency 
of asteam boiler. Fora boiler working constantly at the highest 
possible theoretical efficiency, the CO, record would be a straight 
line, corresponding to a little over 20% of CO,. In practice, 
such high CO, values are seldom attained, even momentarily. 
Occasionally, the records may ‘“‘make a jump” to 16, 17, or 
even 18%; but even those results are infrequent and of very 
short duration, and may be considered abnormal, since they 
correspond to conditions of combustion which cannot be main- 
tained for any great length of time without affecting the output, 
or steam-capacity, of the boiler. 

The above-mentioned CO, record corresponds to the condition 
of perfect combustion, in which only the quantity of air theo- 
retically necessary for perfect combustion is admitted into the 
furnace. We all know that this ideal or theoretical condition 
could not be satisfied in practice. There always is, and, indeed, 
there must always be, a certain excess of air, as there are always 
some parts of the fire which have a deficiency of air even when 
there is an excess of air in the rest of the fire. The consequence 
is, that, practically, the highest efficiency attainable corresponds 
to a CO, record which is-seldom higher than 15%, and is usually 
considerably lower, being as low as 9, or even 8 per cent., in 
some cases. This highest attainable line depends upon the de- 


1786 MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


sign of the boiler plant, and, especially, upon the kind and 
quality of coal and the way in which it is burnt. For the very 
lowest grades of ‘‘culm”’, the line of highest attainable prac- 
tical efficiency probably could not be higher than 8%. 

The desideratum, in any boiler plant, then, is a CO, record 
which is as nearly as possible a straight line, representing an 
average value of CO, which is as high as is consistent and pos- 
sible, with the particular conditions of design and operation, for 
that plant. That line is the line of highest attainable efficiency 
for that plant; and there is a similar line for every plant. The 
examination of CO, records obtained even in those boiler plants 
which may be considered “well regulated”’ to the highest 
degree, indicates that the CO, ‘‘curve” is far from being a 
straight line; but shows “lapses from grace ”’ or losses of effi- 
ciency which occur in somewhat erratic, unexpected, and often- 
times apparently unaccountable manner. 

Now, what Mr. Stott means by “‘ watching the CO, records”’, 
is, that the careful study of such “lapses’”’ of the CO, records 
from the line of highest practical efficiency for that particular 
plant, will, in nearly all if not all cases, lead to the discovery 
of the reasons for them; and these reasons are almost always 
related to the method of firing and the damper-control. The 
CO, record, obviously, renders a great service by calling atten- 
tion to discrepancies or irregularities in the method of firing 
or to improper methods of damper-control. When the fault 
is discovered and remedied, the CO, records bear testimony to . 
that fact by showing a decided improvement, because the CO, 
curve does not then have so many and such large breaks or 
notches in it. 

One of the important lessons which the CO, recorder has taught 
the boiler-room expert, is that the damper must be adjusted 
much more often, and usually much less at a time, than it has 
‘been hitherto, if we expect to get very near the maximum 
efficiency obtainable in any particular plant. In the case of 
boiler-plants which are operated at more or less constant load, 
and with automatic stokers, the damper-adjustment may not 
need to be so frequently changed; but, in the case of boilers 
which are hand-fired and which supply steam for variable loads, 
it sometimes seems, judging from the CO, records, as if the 
damper-adjustment ought to be changed every few moments. 
Even in the most favorable cases, however, it ought really be 
changed much more often than it is. 


1907] MAILLOUX: A NEW CO, RECORDER 1787 


If we admit the necessity and desirability of frequent changes 
of damper-adjustment, the question of finding ways and means 
of doing it properly and cheaply assumes some importance. In 
several cases the problem has been partly solved, and with 
satisfactory results, by making the fireman himself watch the 
CO, records, and adjust and readjust the dampers accordingly. 
In some cases, in large boiler plants, it might even be profitable, 
to have a special attendant for the purpose of watching the 
CO, records and of adjusting and readjusting the dampers. The 
ideal solution of this problem is, obviously, automatic damper- 
control. 

It being evident that automatic damper-control could render 
valuable service, by increasing the fuel-efficiency, in a large 
number of steam plants, work has been done on this problem 
systematically, in the last year. While it seemed simple enough 
to let the CO, recorder close an electric circuit, which would 
start a motor that moved the damper, yet, the solution did not 
prove to be quite so simple as that. The truth is, that, in this 
case, as in the cases of all automatic apparatus, the apparatus” 
must be so organized that it can, if not entirely replace, at least 
assist, human intelligence instead of counteracting its result. 
There being limitations to the capabilities of automatic appa- 
ratus, as there are to the limitations of the human intelligence 
that is at hand in the boiler room, it is necessary to exercise 
great foresight and to make provision, in the automatic device, 
for all contingencies, even that of bringing human intelligence 
to the ‘‘ rescue’, when circumstances arise which cannot be 
successfully dealt with by a machine, but which require more 
or less prompt application and exercise of human intelligence. 
It is needless to say that these circumstances are of frequent 
occurrence in the furnace of the steam boiler, and it is obvious 
that an automatic device which failed to do the right thing, 
or which did the wrong thing, at a critical moment, would be 
very inadvisable, to say the least. It should be so organized 
that it will not, at least, put the boiler out of commission, or 
prevent it from doing its work, even temporarily. 

The practical results which have already been obtained are 
satisfactory and encouraging. A detailed reference cannot be 
made here, at the present time, for obvious reasons. It is 
hoped and expected, however, that full publicity can be given 
to the method and the results obtainable by it, within the next 
few months. 


1788 A NEW CO, RECORDER [Dec. 13 


Discussion ON ‘‘'A New CO, RecorpdER”’, aT NEW York, 
DECEMBER 13, 1907. 


A. A. Adler (by letter): The CO, determinations are not the 
only determinations to be made in the proper estimation of 
furnace efficiency, as a low percentage of CO, may be due either. 
to too much, or too little air. When too much air is admitted 
through the furnace, the O determinations will show a high per- 
centage; when too little air is admitted, the carbon burns to CO 
and CO,, and no oxygen will be found in the analysis. The CO, 
recorder, therefore, only indicates that there is something 
wrong, and leaves it for the attendant to find the real cause. 

Again there is great difficulty in obtaining the proper sample 
to be analyzed, and the exact location cannot be determined at 
random. In the opinion of the writer, it should be taken before 
it enters the flue on the ‘‘ boiler side’ of the damper, so as to 
eliminate the errors due to infiltration of air, when natural or 
induced draft are used. Frequently the infiltrated air pro- 
duces combustion in the flue, when CO is present, and the tem- 
perature of the flue gas rises at the far end of the flue. Such an 
occurrence shows an erroneous CO, determination, as that com- 
bustion does not benefit the boiler. 


LA report presented by the Committee on a Code of 
Ethics at the 24th Annual Convention of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907. 

Revised by the Committee and considered at 
a mecting of the Board of Dzirectors of the In- 
stitute, at New York, August 30, 1907. 
Ordered printed and submitted to the member. 
ship for suggestions.] 


Copyright 1907 ByA.I. E. E. 


PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS. 


PRINCIPLES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT FOR THE GUIDANCE 
OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER. 


A. General Principles. 

B. Relations of the electrical engineer to his employer, customer, or 
client. 

C. Relations of the electrical engineer to the ownership of the records 
of his work. 

D. Relations of the electrical engineer to the public. 

E. Relations of the electrical engineer to the engineering fraternity. 

F. Relations of the electrical engineer to the standards of his profession. 


A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES. 


1. In both his professional and his business relations the electrical 
engineer should follow strictly the same ethical principles that are recog- 
nized in the social relations of every-day life. He should consider him- 
self personally responsible for the character of the enterprises with 
which he is associated professionally. 

2. Before entering into professional relations, it is therefore the duty 
of the electrical engineer to satisfy himself that the enterprises with which 
he connects himself are of a legitimate character. If, after becoming 
associated, he finds them to be of a questionable nature he should sever 
his connection as soon as possible. It should not be considered an excuse 
that his connection extends only to legitimate engineering work. 

3. An electrical engineer permitting the use of his name in any enter- 
prise or exploitation becomes morally .responsible for its character. 
He should therefore not allow the use of his name in connection with any- 
thing upon which he is not qualified by training and experience to 
exercise competent judgment. 

4, The electrical engineer should take care that credit for engineering 
work is attributed to those who, as far as his knowledge of the matter 
goes, are the'real authors of such work. 

5. The electrical engineer should incline toward and not away from 
standards of all kinds, since standardization is peculiarly essential to the 
general progress of the profession. This applies to construction, meas- 


1789 


1790 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 


urement and expression or nomenclature, as well as to conduct, or 
ethics. Even the tendency to give individuality by providing special 
construction may usually be avoided with advantage. 


B. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO HIS EMPLOYER, 
CUSTOMER, OR CLIENT. 


7. The electrical engineer should consider the protection of his client’s 
interests as his first obligation, and therefore should avoid every act that 
would be contrary to this duty; if any other consideration such as pro- 
fessional obligations or restrictions interfere with his so acting, in ac- 
cordance with the expectation of his client, he should inform him of the 
situation. 

8. The electrical engineer, whether consulting, designing, or operating, 
may not accept financial or other compensation, directly or 
indirectly, from more than one side or party interested in the 
same matter. 

9. Electrical engineers in a position to decide on the use of inventions, 
apparatus, etc., should not be financially interested in their use, as by 
receiving a royalty, etc., unless the matter is clearly understood by the 
client or employer 

10. Electrical engineers should not accept employment while finan- 
cially interested in a rival concern except with the express permission 
of both parties. An electrical engineer may be employed by more than 
one pariy, as in the case of a consulting engineer, when the interests of 
the parties do not conflict and it is understood, as is usual in such cases, 
that he is not expected to devote his entire time to the work of one party 
but is free to enter into other engagements. A consulting engineer 
permanently retained by a party should notify other prospective employers 
of this affiliation before entering into relations with them. A consulting 
engineer when not exclusively retained by one side may advise rival 
concerns, with the full knowledge of all of them and upon taking care that 
the interests of the parties do not conflict in the particular matter handled. 

11. Operating engineers should consider themselves responsible for 
defects in apparatus or dangerous conditions of operation, should bring 
the same to the attention of their employers and insist upon the re- 
moval of the causes of danger as soon as feasible. 

12. An electrical engineer should in general be considered directly 
responsible to his employer or client for the successful fulfilment of the 
work upon which he has been engaged and for its satisfactory performance 
as a whole. It should therefore be clearly understood at the outset just 
what the extent or the limitations of responsibility of the engineer are to 
be. Whether he has been employed merely as designer or whether he is 
retained to design and to superintend construction; whether to design 
only the chief features, or also to pass upon all details of the apparatus 
that is to be installed. Attention should be directed to the fact that 
defects in the manufacture of material or apparatus is a matter distinct 
from the matters of design or installation. An engineer should not be 
held responsible for the unsatisfactory performance of a plant resulting 
from defective apparatus furnished, unless he has undertaken to include 
this subject. 


PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 1791 


C. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE OWNERSHIP OF THE 
RECORDS OF HIS WoRK: 


15. If in executing his work, the electrical engineer uses data or informa- 
tion which are not common and public property, but which he receives, 
directly or indirectly from his employer, or if the problem solved by the 
engineer is met in the pursuit of his work for his employer, and is not of 
such character that his attention would have been directed to it regardless 
of his relations to his employer, the products of his work, in the form of 
inventions, plans, designs, etc., are not his private property, but the 
property of his employer. 

16. If in the execution of the work the consulting engineer uses only his 
own knowledge or data or information which are public property by prior 
publication, etc., and receives no engineering data from his employer or 
customer, except performance specifications, the results of the work, 
such as inventions, plans, designs, etc. are the private property of the 
engineer, and his employer or customer is entitled to their use only in the 
specified case. 

17. All the work done by the engineer in the form of inventions, plans, 
designs, etc., which are outside of the field of engineering for which his 
employer has retained him, are the engineer’s private property. 

18. When an engineer or manufacturer builds apparatus from engi- 
neering designs supplied to him by his customer, the designs remain the 
property of the customer and should not be duplicated for other cus- 
tomers without express permission. When the engineer or manufacturer 
and his customer are jointly to work out designs and plans or develop 
inventions, a clear understanding should be arrived at before the beginning 
of the work regarding the proportionate rights of ownership in any in- 
ventions, designs, etc., that may result, since in such case both parties 
should be considered to have rights therein. 

19. Any engineering data or information which an electrical engineer 
obtains, directly or indirectly, from his employer or customer, or which he 
creates as a result of such information, must be considered by the engi- 
neer as confidential; and while the engineer is justified in using such 
data or experience in his own practice as going towards his education, the 
publication thereof without express permission is improper, as is also 
its use in producing for other parties, work that is characteristic of the 
original customer or employer. , 

20. Designs, data, records and notes made during his engagement by an 
engineer employed on salary under permanent engagement, and referring 
to his work, are hisemployer’s property. The same matter in the case of a 
consulting electrical engineer paid by fee or by commission, are the 
property of the consulting engineer. 

21. A customer, in buying apparatus, does not acquire any right in its 
design beyond the use in the apparatus purchased. A customer of a 
consulting engineer does no acquire any right to the plans made by the 
consulting engineer except for the specific case for which the apparatus 
was built or the plans made, 


1792 PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 


D, RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE GENERAL 
PuBLIC. 


22. The electrical engineer should endeavor to assist the public to a 
fair and correct general understanding ot engineering matters, spread the 
general knowledge of electrical engineering, and discourage wrong or 
exaggerated statements on engineering subjects published in the press or 
otherwise, especially if these statements are made for the purpose of, or 
may lead to inducing the public to participate in unworthy schemes. 

23. Controversies on engineering questions, however, should never be 
carried on in the public press, but should be confined to the technical 
press and the engineering societies. 

24. First publication of inventions or other engineering advances should 
not be made through the public press but rather through the engineer- 
ing societies and the technical press or through trade bulletins. 

25. The publications which an electrical engineer is justified in making 
through the public press should therefore be of a historical, educational, 
instructive or similar character and should not relate to controversies 
between engineers or on engineering questions, to new inventions, etc., 
nor contain technical criticisms of fellow engineers, and it should be 
considered unprofessional to give opinions without being fully informed 
on all the facts relating to the question, and on the purpose for which the 
opinion is asked, with a full statement of the conditions under which the 
opinion applies. 

26. In giving expert testimony before judicial bodies, the electrical 
engineer should confine himself to brief and clear statements on engi- 
neering or historical facts. He should not give personal opinions without 
so expressly stating, and should avoid pleading on one side or the other. 


E. RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE ENGINBERING 
FRATERNITY. 


30. The electrical engineer should take interest in and show due regard 
for the electrical engineering societies and the technical press, and should 
assist his fellow engineers by exchange of general information, ex- 
perience, etc. through them. 

82. He should not seek a position held by another electrical engineer. 

33. Where engineering work is in charge of an electrical engineer, no 
other electrical engineer should undertake the work except on request of 
or in codperation with the electrical engineer who had charge of the work 
before, unless the latter’s connection with it has already terminated. 

35. In engineering work in charge of a board of engineers, the respective 
limitations of the authority of each should be decided at the outset, and 
each electrical engineer should give full and complete information on his 
part to the other engineers and insist on this being reciprocated. 


F, RELATIONS OF THE ELECTRICAL ENGINEER TO THE STANDARDS OF 
HIS PROFESSION. 


40. The title ‘‘ electrician "’ should be applied to those having practical 
training sufficient to enable them to carry on intelligently certain classes 
of electrical work, such as the installation of electric lights and bells, 
and the operation of small electric plants, 


PROPOSED CODE OF ETHICS 1793 


41. The title ‘“‘ electrical engineer ” should be applied only to graduates 
from electrical engineering schools of recognized standing, and 
such men as possess an equivalent knowledge of electrical engineering. 
Letters usually employed to denote College degrees should be used 
only by those holding such degrees. 

42. The title ** consulting electrical engineer ’’ should be applied only 
to those electrical engineers who are engaged in consulting work, and 
who possess such knowledge and experience in electrical engineering as 
would qualify them to full membership in the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers. 


Signed, 
CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, 
Haroutp W. Buck, Committee on a 
ScHUYLER SKAATS WHEELER. | Code of Ethics. 


Chairman. 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.I.E.E. 


New York, June 17, 1907. 
Dr. SAMUEL SHELDON, 


PRESIDENT, AMERICAN INSTITUTE ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS, 
33 West 39th Street, 
New York City. 


Dear SIR:— 


In accordance with a motion made by Dr. Steinmetz, and duly carried 
at the last Annual Convention of the Institute, at Milwaukee, the Standard- 
ization Rules have been revised in form and wording and in accordance 
with various suggestions received from members of the Institute. This 
work has been accomplished by the Standards Committee which has 
held monthly meetings beginning in September last. 

Dr. Steinmetz’ motion provided that the Standardization Rules when 
completed by the Committee should be submitted to the Board of Di- 
rectors for final adoption and promulgation. I therefore submit the 
revised Standardization Rules through you to the Board of Directors, 
and request that they be formally approved and adopted. : 

Respectfully yours, 
(Signed) Francis B. CROCKER, 
Chairman, Standards Committee. 


STANDARDS COMMITTEE. 

FRANCIS B. CROCKER, Chairman, Columbia University, New York, N. Y. 
ARTHUR W. BERRESFORD, Milwaukee. CHARLES F. SCOTT, Pittsburg, Pa. 
DUGALD C. JACKSON, Boston, Mass. HENRY G. STOTT, New York, N. Y. 
ARTHUR E. KENNELLY, Cambridge, Mass CHARLES P. STEINMETZ, Schenectady. 
C. O. MAILLOUX, New York, N, Y. SAMUEL W. STRATTON, Washington, D.C 
ROBERT B. OWENS, Montreal, Can. ELIHU THOMSON, Lynn, Mass. 


Approved by vote of the Board of Directors, June 21, 1907. 
RALPH W. POPE, 


Secretary. 
New York, June 21, 1907. 


— 
SI 
co 
or 


STANDARDIZATION RULES 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


GENERAL PLAN. 
I. DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL DATA 


Hmvowp 
cp) 
ies] 
Z 
jes] 
rs] 
> 
le 
Q 
is 
> 
n 
mA 
‘g 
Lal 
e) 
> 
3 
ie) 
Z 
() 
y 
e- 
yg 
g 
> 
ve) 
> 
4 
fe 
n 


(ligase Coadgl actor sa emniom tee ots occur cso <i tetie se 4 
(IT) Non-Inductive and Fanon FEN IOAG chats sielers es 
(III) Power-Factor and Reactive Factor........... 
CW) eSaturation-Vactorterermtt. vearlesierenserre hie te eS 
(Drea VariationsandsPulsa tions)... cerita ite ncsloriene 


II. PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS 


(GU) Detinitions yer meee vonetenetenalchevoloie PARI OO 
(II) Determination of Efficiency.............-.-. 
(III) Measurement of Losses............+-6-+-+5-: 
(IV) Efficiency of Different Types of Apparatus.... 
(A) Direct Current Commutating Machines... 


Paragraph 
4 te) (a) 
7 to —21 


5 eR wey 279) 


65 to 78 
79 to 83 
84 to 186 
84 to 88 
89 to 100 
101 to 117 
118 to 186 


.118 to 126 


(B) Alternating-Current Commutating Machines127 to 135 


(C) Synchronous Commutating Machines.... 
(D) Synchronous. Machines.........-...-.-- 
(E) Stationary Induction Apparatus......... 
(F) Rotary Induction Apparatus............ 
(G) Unipolar or Acyclic Machines............ 


(H) Rectifying Apparatus........ ASO Gae ; 


(1) Transmission Lines.........++eeeeeeees 


136 to 147 
148 to 155 
156 to 161 
162 to 167 


168 to 175 
.- 176 to 179 


180 


(J) Phase-Displacing Apparatus..sessrerenees 181 to 186 


1797 


1798 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


D. REGULATION Si apisiccois ee sal eu deeze Sebo) oe eae oka ceneen ele RE 187 to 209 
(1): Definitions i.e.) Senne chee ee eee tee 187 to 203 

(Il) Conditions for and Tests of Regulation... ..... 204 to 209 

Ei INSULATION j5cieitic syd oles ole folovs, «erates alae aia saa ae 210 to 259 
(T)@ Insulation: Resistance y.trtet 15) <taimi statist 210 to 213 

(11). Dielectric Strength. .3.5.. 0% a re cee, eee 214 to 259 

(A) Test Voltages. 002% cic sts alow arash nara ennai 214 to 226 

(B) Methods of Testing i. ccist.tytk eet ae 227 to 241 


(C) Methods for Measuring the Test Voltage. ..242 to 249 
(D) Apparatus for Supplying Test Voltage... .250 to 259 


Pt (CONDUCTIVITY: accatte cote onal ae tae et arenes 260 
GwwERiIsrjOrhlLEMPERADURES ist. oe Soe eae ae 261 to 292 
(I) Measurement of Temperature........-........ 261 to 271 
(A)r Methodsio.ci.mrak teeters iret pomi ete 261 to 266 
(B) Normal Conditions for Tests............. 267 to 271 
(II) Limiting Temperature; Riseyetm iy. 22... eee 272 to 292 
(A)eMachinés\am-Generall. s. ce.csct aos eee 274 to 278 
(B) Rotary Induction Apparatus....... .....279 to 282 
(C) Stationary Induction Apparatus.......... 283 to 286 
(DD) Rheostats ce stah terete ae ee MOR ANee 287 to 288 
(EZ) Limits Recommended in Special Cases... .289-to 292 
HSOVERLOAD. CAPAGITIBG ae hhicle kad sit eotets eee ene 293 to 304 
III. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES 

A GUN OUTAGES! Sots'e:.'s:<Fo.aierehs el atensisierel a « ona alata eis icmandietan ci steeetd 305 to 310 
Biv OE RBEOUEN CLE Siititac cor tasrciee testa ial catia ciiacteteke oi cieteraneteceenne 311 to 312 
IVaGENBRAL RECOMMENDATIONS: Sic. ccm ei esc sisi 313 to 323 

Vv. APPENDICES AND TABULAR DATA 
APPENDIX) Ai=-NOTATIONKas sin AL eC s ee ee nn ee 324 
APPENDIX\Bi—-RAILWAY Movors.. 4... o.uhieg snes cae 325 to 340 
(CD) MRAGIN Gs ic suse s elemiaiahete nlc ele era tetcican siten eee 325 to 327 
(II) Selection of Motor for Specified Service........ 328 to 340 
AppENDIxX C.—PHOTOMETRY AND LAMPS.:.............. 341 to 357 
AppENDIX D.—SpaARKING DISTANCES. AUactange ieicyrontor tn tobe 358 to 359 


APPENDIX E.—TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENTS.......cceee- “ 360 


i 


o ON 


10 


11 
12 
13 


14 
15 


16 


17 
18 
19 


20 


21 


1907) STANDARDIZATION RULES n799 


I. DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL DATA. 


Note: The following definitions and classifications are intended to be prac- 
tically descriptive and not scientifically rigid. 


A. DEFINITIONS. CURRENTS. 


A Direct Current is a unidirectional current. 

A ConTINUOUS CURRENT is a steady, or non-pulsating, direct current. 

A PULSATING CuRRENT is a current equivalent to the superposition of an 
alternating current upon a continuous current. 

An ALTERNATING CURRENT is a current which, when plotted, consists 
of half-waves of equal area in successively opposite directions from the 
zero line. 

An OSCILLATING CURRENT is a current alternating in direction, and of 
decreasing amplitude. 


B. DEFINITIONS, ROTATING MACHINES. 


A GENERATOR transforms mechanical power into electrical power. 

A Drrect-CurRENT GENERATOR produces a direct current that may or 
may not be continuous. 

An ALTERNATOR or ALTERNATING-CURRENT GENERATOR produces alter- 
nating current, either single-phase or polyphase. 

A Po.typHasE GENERATOR produces currents differing symmetrically 
in phase: such as two-phase currents, in which the terminal voltages on 
the two circuits differ in phase by 90 degrees; or three-phase currents, in 
which the terminal voltages on the three circuits differ in phase by 120 
degrees. 

A DovusBLe-CuURRENT GENERATOR produces both direct and alternating 
currents. ? 

A Motor transforms electrical into mechanical power. 

A Booster is a machine inserted in series in a circuit to change its 
voltage.’ It may be driven by an electric motor (in which case it is termed 
a motor-booster) or otherwise. 

A Moror-GENERATOR is a transforming device consisting of a motor 
mechanically connected to one or more generators. 

A DynamotTor is a transforming device combining both motor and 
generator action in one magnetic field, with two armatures; or with an 
armature having two separate windings and independent commutators. 

A CONVERTER is a machine employing mechanical rotation in changing 
electrical energy from one form into another. A converter may belong 
to either of several types, as follows: 

a. A Drrect-CURRENT CONVERTER converts from a direct current to 
a direct current. 

b. A SyNcHRONOUS CONVERTER (commonly called a rotary converter) 
converts from an alternating to a direct current, or vice versa. 

c. A Moror-CoNvERTER is a combination of an induction motor with 
a synchronous converter, the secondary of the former feeding the arma- 
ture of the latter with current at some frequency other than the impressed 
frequency; 7.¢., it is a synchronous converter concatenated with an in- 
duction motor. , 

d. A FREQUENCY-CONVERTER converts from an alternating-current sys- 
tem of one frequency to an alternating-current system of another fre- 
quency, with or without a change in the number of phases or in voltages. 

e. A Rotary PuHase CoNVERTER converts from an alternating-current 
system of one or more phases to an alternating-current system of a dif- 
ferent number of phases, but of the same frequency. 


1800 STANDARDIZA1ION RULES [June 21 


C. DEFINITIONS. STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS. 


22 SratTionary InpucTION AppaRATus change electric energy to electric 
energy through the medium of magnetic energy. They comprise several 
forms, distinguished as follows: : 

23 a. In TRANSFORMERS the primary and.secondary windings are insulated 
from one another. 

24 »b. In Auto-TRANSFORMERS, also called compensators, a part of the 
primary winding is used as a secondary winding, or conversely. 

25 c. In PorentTiAL ReGuLaTorRs a coil is in shunt and a coil is in series 
with the circuit, so arranged that the ratio of transformation between 
them is variable at will. They are of the following three classes: 

26 (a) ComMPENSATOR POTENTIAL REGULATORS in which a number of turns 
of one of the coils are adjustable. 

27 (bo) InpucTION PoTENTIAL REGULATORS in which the relative positions 
of the primary and secondary coils are adjustable. 

28 (c) MaGNETO POTENTIAL REGULATORS in which the direction of the 
magnetic flux with respect to the coils is adjustable. 

29 qd. Reactors, or REACTANCE Coits, formerly called choking coils, are 
a form of stationary induction apparatus used to produce reactance or 
phase displacement. 


D. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF APPARATUS. 


30 CommuraTinc Macuines. Under this head may be classed the following: 
Direct-current generators; direct-current motors; direct-current boosters; 
motor-generators; dynamotors; converters, compensators or balancers; 
closed-coil arc machines, and alternating-current commutating motors. 

31 Commutating machines may: be further classified as follows: 

32 a. DirEecT-CURRENT CoMMUTATING MACHINES, which comprise a mag- 
netic field of constant polarity, a closed-coil armature, and a multiseg- 
mental commutator connected therewith. 

33. b. ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES, which comprise a 
magnetic field of alternating polarity, a closed-coil armature, and a 
multisegmental commutator connected therewith. 

34 c. SYNCHRONOUS CoMMUTATING MacuINEs, which comprise synchronous 
converters, motor converters and double-current generators. 

35 SyncHrRoNous Macuinges, which comprise a constant magnetic field, 
and an armature receiving or delivering alternating-currents in synchron- 
ism with the motion of the machine; 7.e., having a frequency equal to the 
product of the number of pairs of poles and the speed of the machine in 
revolutions per second. 

86 Srationary INpucTION APPARATUS, which include transformers, auto- 
transformers, potential regulators, and reactors or reactance coils. 

37 Rotary INpucTION Apparatus, or INDUCTION MacuINEs, which include 
apparatus wherein the primary and secondary windings rotate with re- 
spect to each other; 7.e., induction motors, induction generators, frequency 
converters, and rotary phase converters. 

38 Unipovar or Acyciic Macuings, in which the voltage generated in the 
active conductors maintains the same direction with respect to those 
conductors. 

39 Recriryinc Apparatus, PULSATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 

40 EvecrrostTaTic APPARATUS, such as condensers, etc. 

41 ELrcrRocHEMICAL APPARATUS, such as batteries, etc. 

42 ELECTROTHERMAL APPARATUS, such as rheostats, heaters, etc. 

43 Prorective Apparatus, such as fuses, lightning arresters, etc. 

44 Luminous Sources. 


F. MOTORS. SPEED CLASSIFICATION. 


45 Morors may, for convenience, be classified with reference to their speed 
characteristics as follows: 

46 a. CONSTANT-SPEED Motors, in which the speed is either constant or 
does not materially vary; such as synchronous motors, induction motors 
with small slip, and ordinary direct-current shunt motors, 


bE Nl | 


47 


48 


1907] - STANDARDIZATION: RULES 1801 


b. MuttisPEED Morors (two-speed, three-speed, etc.), which can be 
operated at any one of several distinct speeds, these speeds being 
practically independent of the load, such as motors with two armature 
windings. 

c. ADJUSTABLE-SPEED Motors, in which the speed can be varied grad- 
ually over a considerable range; but when once adjusted remains prac- 
tically unaffected by the load, such as shunt motors designed for a con 


- siderable range of field variation. 


49 


50 


61 


VaRYING-SPEED Morors, or motors in which the speed varies with 
the load, decreasing when the load increases; such as series motors. 


F. DEFINITION AND EXPLANATION OF TERMS. 
(I) LOAD FACTOR. 


The Loap Factor of a machine, plant or system is the ratio of the 
average power to the maximum power during a certain period of time. 
The average power is taken over a certain interval of time, such as a day 
or a year, and the maximum is taken over a short interval of the maxi- 
mum load within that interval. 

In each case the interval of maximum load should be definitely speci- 
fied. The proper interval is usually dependent upon local conditions and 


» upon the purpose for which load factor is to be determined. 


52 
63 


b4 


55 


56 


67 


68 


(Il) NON-INDUCTIVE LOAD AND INDUCTIVE LOAD. 

A non-inductive load is a load in which the current is in phase with the 
voltage across the load. 

An inductive load is a load in which the current lags behind the voltage 
across the load. A load in- which the current leads the voltage across the 
load is sometimes called an anti-inductive load. 


(Il) POWER-FACTOR AND REACTIVE FACTOR. 


The Power-Facror in alternating-current circuits or apparatus is the 
ratio of the electric power in watts to the apparent power in volt-amperes. 
It may be expressed as follows: 


true power = watts _ energy current _ energy voltage 
apparent power  volt-amperes total current total voltage 


The Reactive Factor is the ratio of the wattless volt-amperes (1.e., 
the product of the wattless component of current by voltage, or wattless 
component of voltage by current) to the total amperes. It may be ex- 
pressed as follows: 


wattless volt-amperes _ wattless current _ wattless voltage 


total volt-amperes total current total voltage 


Power-Facrtror and REACTIVE FAcTor are related as follows: 
If p = power-iactor, g = reactive-factor, then with sine waves of voltage 


and current, 
P+P=1 


With distorted waves of voltage and current, 
Pt+P=or<l 


(IV) SATURATION-FACTOR. 

The SaTurRATION-Facror of a machine is the ratio of a small percentage 
increase in field excitation to the corresponding percentage increase in 
voltage thereby produced. The saturation factor is, therefore, a criterion 
of the degree of saturation attained in the magnetic circuits at any ex- 
citation selected. Unless otherwise specified, however, the saturation 
factor of a machine refers to the excitation existing at normal rated speed 
and voltage. It is determined from measurements of saturation made on 
open circuit at rated speed. 4 re 

The PERCENTAGE OF SATURATION of a machine at any excitation may 
be found from its saturation curve of generated voltage as ordinates, against 


59 


60 


61 


62 


65 


66 
67 


68 


69 


70 


71 


72 


1802 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


excitation as abscissas, by drawing a tangent to the curve at the ordinate 
corresponding to the assigned excitation, and extending the tangent to 
intercept the axis of ordinates drawn through the origin. The ratio of 
the intercept on this axis to the ordinate at the assigned excitation, when 
expressed in percentage, is the percentage of saturation and is indepen-. 
dent of the scale selected for excitation and voltage. This ratio is equal 
to the reciprocal of the saturation-factor at the same excitation, deducted 
from unity. Thus, if f be the saturation factor and p the percentage of 

saturation ratio, ; 

Pp = 1 — 

i 


(V) VARIATION AND PULSATION. 


The VARIATION IN PRimME Movers which do not give an absolutely 
uniform rate of rotation or speed, as in reciprocating steam engines, is 
the maximum angular displacement in position of the revolving member ex- 
pressed in degrees, from the position it would occupy with uniform rota- 
tion, and with one revolution taken as 360°. 

The PuLsaTION IN PRIME Movers is the ratio of the difference between 
the maximum and minimum velocities in an engine-cycle to the average 
velocity. 

The eesty. IN ALTERNATORS or alternating-current circuits in general 
is the maximum difference in phase of the generated voltage wave from a 
wave of absolutely constant frequency, expressed in electrical degrees 
(one cycle equals 360 degrees) and may be due to the variation of the 
prime mover. 

The PULSATION IN ALTERNATORS or alternating-current circuits, in gen- 
eral, is the ratio of the difference between maximum and minimum fre- 
quency during an engine cycle to the average frequency. 

RELATION OF VARIATION in prime mover and alternator. 

If » = number of pairs of poles, the variation of an alternator is 
times the variation of its prime mover, if direct-connected, and 2/p times 
the variation of the prime mover if rigidly connected thereto in the ve- 
locity ratio p. 


Il. PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS. 
A. RATING. 


RatinG By Ourput. All electrical apparatus should be rated by output 
and not by input. Generators, transformers, etc., should be rated by 
electrical output: motors by mechanical output. 

RatinG IN Krtowarts. Electrical power should be expressed in kilo- 
watts, except when otherwise specified. 

APPARENT Power, KiLovo.t-AmpEREs. Apparent power in alternating- 
current circuits should be expressed in kilovolt-amperes as distinguished 
from real power in kilowatts. When the power factor is 100 per cent., 
the apparent power in kilovolt-amperes is equal to the kilowatts. 

The Ratep (FuLt-Loap) Current is that current which, with the rated 
terminal voltage, gives the rated kilowatts, or the rated kilovolt-amperes. 
in machines in which the rated voltage differs from the no-load voltage, 
the rated current should refer to the former. 

DETERMINATION OF RATED CURRENT. The rated current may be de- 
termined as follows: If P = rating in watts, or apparent watts if the power 
factor be other than 100 per cent., and & = full-load terminal voltage, 
the rated current per terminal is: 


Pig F 
I = % in a direct-current machine or single-phase alternator. 


I= a in th h It t 
= —— ina ree- ‘ 
/3 E ee-phase alternator 
1 


Il=5 ee 
= 3 £ 1 a two-phase alternator 


713 


74 


75 


76 
17 
78 


719 


80 
81 


82 


83 


84 
85 


86 


87 


88 


1907) STANDARDIZATION RULES 1803 


Norma Conpitions. The rating of machines or apparatus should be 
based upon certain normal conditions to be assumed as standard, or to be 
specified. These conditions include voltage, current, power-factor, fre- 
quency, wave shape and speed; or such of them as may apply in each par- 
ticular case. Performance tests should be made under these standard 
conditions unless otherwise specified. 

a. Power Factor. Alternating-current apparatus should be rated in 
kilowatts, at 100 per cent. power factor; i.e., with current in phase with 
terminal voltage, unless a phase displacement is inherent in the apparatus 
or is specified. If a power factor other than 100 per cent. is specified, 
the rating should be expressed in kilovolt-amperes and power factor, at 
rated load. 

6b. Wave Suape. In determining the rating of alternating-current ma- 
chines or apparatus, a sine wave shape of alternating current and voltage 
is assumed, except where a distorted wave shape is inherent to the appar- 
atus. See Secs. 79-83. 

Fuses. The rating of a fuse should be the maximum current which it 
will continuously carry. 

_ Circuit-BREaKeErRS. The rating of a circuit-breaker should be the max- 
imum current which it is designed to carry continuously. 

a. Note. In addition thereto, the maximum current and voltage at 
which a fuse or a circuit-breaker will open the circuit should be specified. 
It is to be noted that the behavior of fuses and of circuit-breakers is much 
influenced by the amount of electric power available on the circuit. 


B. WAVE SHAPE. 


The Sine Wave should be considered as standard, except where a dif- 
ference in the wave form from the sinusoidal is inherent in the operation 
of the apparatus. 

A Maximum Deviation of the wave from sinusoidal shape not exceeding 
10 per cent. is permissible, except when otherwise specified. 

The Deviation of wave form from the sinusoidal is measured by de- 
termining the form by oscillograph or wave meter, computing therefrom 
the equivalent sine wave of equal length, superposing the latter upon the 
observed wave in such a manner as to give least difference, and then 
dividing the maximum difference at any ordinate by the maximum value 
of the equivalent sine wave. 

The EQUIVALENT SINE WavE is a sine wave having the same frequency 
and the same effective or r.m.s. (root of mean square) value as the actual 
wave. 

Non-S1INE Waves. The phase displacement between two waves which 
are not sine waves, is that phase displacement between their equivalent 
sine waves which would give the same average product of instantaneous 
values as the actual waves; 7.e., the same electro-dynamometer reading. 


C. BFFICIENCY. 
(1) DEFINITIONS. 


The Erriciency of an apparatus is the ratio of its net power output 
to its gross power input. : 

a. Note. An exception should be noted in the case of storage batteries 
or apparatus for storing energy in which the efficiency, unless otherwise 
qualified, should be understood as the ratio of the energy output to the 
energy intake in a normal cycle. An exception should also be noted in 
the case of luminous sources. 

APPARENT ErFiciENCY. In apparatus in which a phase displacement is 
inherent to their operation, apparent efficiency should be understood as 
the ratio of net power output to volt-ampere input. 

a. Notre. Such apparatus comprise induction motors, reactive synchron- 
ous converters, synchronous converters controlling the voltage of an 
alternating-current system, self-exciting synchronous motors, potential 
regulators and open magnetic circuit transformers, etc. __ : 

b. Note. Since the apparent efficiency of apparatus delivering electric 
power depends upon the power-factor of the load, the apparent efficiency, 
unless otherwise specified, should be referred to a load power-factor of unity, 


1804 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


(II) DETERMINATION OF EFFICIENCY. 


89 MerHops. Efficiency may be determined by either of two methods, 
viz.: by measurement of input and output; or, by measurement of losses. 

90 a. MetHop or InpuT aND Output. The input and output may both 
be measured directly. The ratio of the latter to the former is the efficiency. 

91 0b. MetHop By Losses. The losses may be measured either collectively 
or individually. The total losses may be added to the output to derive 
the input, or subtracted from the input to derive the output. 

92 Comparison oF METHODS. The output and input method is preferable 
with small machines. When, however, as in the case of large machines, 
it is impracticable to measure the output and input; or when the per- 
centage of power loss is small and the efficiency is nearly unity, the method 
of determining efficiency by measuring the losses should be followed. 

93  Evectric Power should be measured at the terminals of the appar- 
atus. In tests of polyphase machines, the measurement of power should 
not be confined to a single circuit but should be extended to all the cir- — 
cuits in order to avoid errors of unbalanced loading. 

94 MecHanicaAL Power in machines should be measured at the pulley, 
gearing, coupling, etc., thus excluding the loss of power in said pulley, 
gearing or coupling, but including the bearing friction and windage. The 
magnitude of bearing friction and windage may be considered, with con- 
stant speed, as independent of the load. The loss of power in the belt and 
the increase of bearing friction due to belt tension should be excluded. 
Where, however, a machine is mounted upon the shaft of a prime mover, 
in such a manner that it cannot be separated therefrom, the frictional 
losses in bearings and in windage, which ought, by definition, to be included 
in determining the efficiency, should be excluded, owing to the practical 
impossibility of determining them satisfactorily. 

95 In AuxiLrary APPARATUS, Such as an exciter, the power lost in the 
auxiliary apparatus should not be charged to the principal machine, but 
to the plant consisting of principal machine and auxiliary apparatus 
taken together. The plant efficiency in such cases should be distinguished 
from the machine efficiency. 

96 Normat Connitions. Efficiency tests should be made under normal 
conditions herein set forth and which are to be assumed as standard. 
These conditions include voltage, current, power-factor, frequency, wave 
shape, speed and barometric pressure, temperature, or such of them as 
may apply in each particular case. Performance tests should be made 
under these standard conditions unless otherwise specified. See Secs. 
73-75. 

97 a. TEMPERATURE. The efficiency of all apparatus, except such as may 
be intended for intermittent service, should be either measured at, or re- 
duced to, the temperature which the apparatus assumes under continuous 
operation at rated load, referred to a room temperature of 25°C. See 
Secs. 267-292. 

98 With apparatus intended for intermittent service, the efficiency should 
be determined at the temperature assumed under specified conditions. 
99 b. Power Facror. In determining the efficiency of alternating-current 
+ apparatus, the electric power should be measured when the current is in 
phase with the voltage, unless otherwise specified, except when a definite 
phase difference is inherent in the apparatus, as in induction motors, 

induction generators, frequency converters, etc. 

100 c. Wave Swarr. In electrical apparatus, the sine wave should be 
considered as standard, except where a difference in the wave form from 
the sinusoidal is inherent in the operation of the apparatus. See Secs. 
79-83. 


(III) MEASUREMENT OF LOSSES. 
101 Losses. The usual sources of losses in electrical apparatus and the 
methods of determining these losses are as follows: 
102 (A) BerEariInG FRICTION AND WINDAGE. 
The magnitude of bearing friction and windage (which may be consid- 
ered as independent of the load) is conveniently measured hw 4riving 


es ee 


Ce i eile ee | 


102 


104 


105 — 


106 


107 


108 


109 


110 


111 


112 


113 


114 


1907) STANDARDIZATION RULES 1805 


the machine from an independent motor, the output of which may be 
suitably determined. See Sec. 94. : 


(B) Commutator Brusu FRICTION. 


_ The magnitude of the commutator brush friction (which may be con- 
sidered as independent of the load) is determined by measuring the dif- 
ference in power required for driving the machine with brushes on and 
with brushes off (the field being unexcited). 


(C) CouLector-Rinc Brus FRICTION. 


Collector-ring brush friction may be determined in the same manner 
as commutator brush friction. It is usually negligible. 


(D) Mo.ecuvar Macnetic Friction AND Eppy CurRRENTS. 


These losses include those due to molecular magnetic friction and eddy 
currents in iron and copper and other metallic parts, also the losses due 
to currents in the cross-connections of cross-connected armatures. 

In Macuines these losses should be determined on open circuit and 
at a voltage equal to the rated voltage +77 in a generator, and —J rina 
motor, where J denotes the current strength and 7 denotes the internal 
resistance of the machine. They should be measured at the correct 
speed and voltage, since they do not usually vary in any definite pro- 
portion to the speed or to the voltage. 

Note. The Torat Losses in bearing friction and windage, brush fric- 
tion, magnetic friction and eddy currents can, in general, be determined 
by a single measurement by driving the machine with the field excited, 
either as a motor, or by means of an independent motor. 

RETARDATION METHOD. The no-load iron, friction, and windage losses 
may be segregated by the Retardation Method, in which the generator 
should be brought up to full speed (or, if possible, to about 10 per cent. 
above full speed) as a motor, and, after cutting off the driving power and 
excitation, frequent readings should be taken of speed and time, as the 
machine slows down, from which a speed-time curve can be plotted. A 
second curve should be taken in the same manner, but with full field ex- 
citation; from the second curve the iron losses may be found by subtracting 
the losses found in the first curve. 

The speed-time curves can be plotted automatically by belting a small 
separately excited generator (say 1/10 kw.) to the generator shaft and 
connecting it to a recording voltmeter. When the retardation method 
is not feasible, the frictional losses in bearings and in windage, which 
ought, by definition, to be included in determining the efficiency, may 
be excluded; but this should be expressly stated. 


(E) Armature-REsISTANCE Loss. 


This loss may be expressed by p I’ 7; where r = resistance of one arma- 
ture circuit or branch, J = the current in such armature circuit or branch, 


and p = the number of armature circuits or branches. 


(F) CommuTaToR BRUSH AND BrusH-ContTacT RESISTANCE Loss. 

It is desirable to point out that with carbon brushes these losses may 
be considerable in low-voltage machines. 
(G) CoLLecTor-RING AND BrusH-ConTact RESISTANCE Loss. 

This loss is usually negligible, except in machines of extremely low 
voltage or in unipolar machines. 


(H) Frevip Excitation Loss. tes ee 

With separately excited fields, the loss of power in the resistance of the 
field coils Ficus paid be considered. With either shunt- or series-field 
windings, however, the loss of power in the accompanying rheostat should 
also be included, the said rheostat being considered as an essential part 
of the machine, and not as separate auxiliary apparatus. 


Orne Ee alvecos ‘may be considered as the difference between the total 


losses under load and the sum of the losses ahave specified. 


115 


116 


117 


118 
119 


120 
121 
122 
123 
124 


125 
126 


127 
128 
129 


130 


131 


132 


133 


134 
135 


1806 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


a. In CommutatinG Macuines of small field distortion, the load losses 
are usually trivial and may, therefore,be neglected. When, however, the field 
distortion is large, as is shown, for instance, by the necessity for shifting the 
brushes between no load and full load, or with variations of load, these 
load losses may be considerable, and should be taken into account. In 
this case the efficiency may be determined either by input and output 
measurements, or the load losses may be estimated by the method of 
Sec. 116. 

b. EstimaTION oF Loap Lossgs. While the load losses cannot well be 
determined individually, they may be considerable and, therefore, their 
joint influence should be determined by observation. This can be done 
by operating the machine on short-circuit and at full-load current, that 
is, by determining what may be called the ‘‘ short-circuit core loss.’’ With 
the jow field intensity and great lag of current existing in this case, the 
load losses are usually greatly exaggerated. 

One-third of the short-circuit core loss may, as an approximation, and 
in the absence of more accurate information, be assumed as the load loss. 


(IV) EFFICIENCY OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF APPARATUS. 
(A) Drrect-CurRRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES. 


In Direct-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES the losses are: 

a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. ; 

b. MoLECULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND Eppy CURRENTS. See Measure- 
ment of Losses (1), Sec. 105. 

c. ARMATURE RESISTANCE Losses. See ‘Measurement of Losses (EF), 
Sec. 110. 

d. CommMuTAaTOR BrusH Friction. See Measurement of Losses (B),. 
Sec. 103. 

e. COMMUTATOR BRUSH AND BrusH Contact RESISTANCE. See Meas- 
urement of Losses (F), Sec. 111. 

j. Fretp Excitation Loss. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 113. 

g. Loap Losses. See Measurement of Losses (/), Sec. 114. 

Note. 6 and ¢ are losses in the armature or ‘‘ armature losses ’’; 
d and e ‘“‘ commutator losses ’’; f ‘‘ field losses.” 


(B) ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES. 


In ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINEs, the losses are: 

a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. 

b. Roration Loss, measured with the machine at open circuit, the 
brushes on the commutator, and the field excited by alternating cur- 
rent when driving the machine by a motor. 

This loss includes molecular magnetic friction, and eddy currents, 
caused by rotation through the magnetic field, J*r losses in cross-con- 
nections of cross-connected armatures, J?r and other losses in armature- 
coils and armature-leads which are short-circuited by the brushes as far 
as these losses are due to rotation. 

c. ALTERNATING or TRANSFORMER Loss. These losses are measured 
by wattmeter in the field circuit, under the conditions of test b. They 
include molecular magnetic friction and eddy-currents due to the alter- 
nation of the magnetic field, J?7 losses in cross-connections of cross-con- 
nected armatures, /?r and other losses in armature coil and commutator 
leads which are short-circuited by the brushes, as far as these losses are 
due to the alternation of the magnetic flux. 

The losses in armature-coils and commutator leads short-circuited by 
the brushes, can be separated in b, and c, from the other losses, by run- 
ning the machine with and without brushes on the commutator. 

I’r Loss, OrHER Loap Losses in armature and compensating wind- 
ing and J*r loss of brushes, measured by wattmeter connected across the 
armature and compensating winding. 

e. Fretp Excitation Loss. See Measurement of Losses (F/), Sec. 113, 
He ComMuTATOR BrusH-FRicTIOoN, See Measurement of Losses (B), Sec. 


136 


137 
138 
139 
140 


141 
142 
143 
144 


145 
146 


147 


148 
149 


150: 


151 
152 
153 
1b4 
15& 


156 
157 


158 


159 


1907) STANDARDIZATION RULES 1807 


(C) SyncHronous CommuTATING MACHINES. 


1. In Dovsie-CurrRENT GENERATORS, the efficiency of the machine 
should be determined as a direct-current generator, and also as an’ alter- 
nating-current generator. The two values of efficiency may be different, 
and should be clearly distinguished. 

2. In CoNvERTERS the losses should be determined when driving the 
machine by a motor. These losses are: i 
. a. eae Friction anD WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 3 

b. MoLecuLarR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND Eppy CurrENTS. See Mease 
urement of losses (D). Sec. 105. 

c. ARMATURE Resistance Loss. This loss.in the armature is q 1?r, 
where J = direct current in armature, r = armature resistance and gq, a 
factor which is equal to 1.47 in single-circuit single-phase, 1.15 in double- 
circuit single-phase, 0.59 in three-phase, 0.39 in two-phase, and 0.27 in 
six-phase converters. 
eg ComMMuUTATOR-BrRusH FRICTION. See Measurement of Losses (B), Sec. 
< é. ‘(ae BrusuH Friction. See Measurement of Losses (C), 

ec. : 

7. CommuTatTor-BRusH AND BrusH-Conract RESISTANCE Loss. See 
Measurement of Losses (fF), Sec. 111. 

g. CoLLEcTOR-Rinc Brusu-Contact Resistance Loss. See Measure- 
ment of Losses (G), Sec. 112. ; 

h. Fretp Exciration Loss. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 109. 

z. Loap Lossgs. , These can generally be neglected, owing to the ab- 
sence of field distortion. 

3. THE ErricieNcy oF Two SIMILAR CONVERTERS may be determined 
by operating one machine as a converter from direct to alternating, and 
the other as a converter from alternating to direct, connecting the alter- 
nating sides together, and measuring the difference between the direct- 
current input, and the direct-current output. This process may be modi- 
fied by returning the output of the second machine through two boosters 
into the first machine and measuring the losses. Another modification 
is to supply the losses by an alternator between the two machines, using 
potential regulators. 


(D) SyncHRONOUS MACHINES. 

In SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES the losses are: 

a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. 

b. MoLtecuLaR Macnetic Friction aNnD Eppy CuRRENTS. See Measure- 
ment of Lossess (D), Sec. 105. 

c. ARMATURE ResIsTANCE Loss. See Measurement of Losses (£), Sec. 
110. 

d. CoLtLtector-Rinc Brusu Friction. See Measurement of Losses (C), 
Sec. 104. 

e. COLLECTOR-RiInG BrusH Contract ReEsIsTtaANcEe Loss. See Measure- 
ment of Losses (G), Sec. 112. 

7 Fretp Excitation Loss. See Measurement of Losses (17), Sec. 113. 

g. Loap Losses. See Measurement of Losses (J), Sec. 114. 


(Z) Stationary INDUCTION APPARATUS. 

In Stationary INDUCTION APPARATUS, the losses are: 

a. MotecuLtarR MaGnetic FricTion AND Eppy CURRENTS measured at 
open secondary circuit, rated frequency, and at rated voltage — I 1, where 
I = rated current, r = resistance of primary circuit. 

b. Resistance Losses, the sum of the J’r losses in the primary and 
in the secondary windings of a transformer, or in the two sections of the 
coil in a compensator or auto-transformer, where J = rated current in 
the coil or section of coil, and r = resistance. : > 

c. Loap Losszs, i.e., eddy currents in the iron and, especiallv in the 
copper conductors, caused by the current at rated load, For practical 


1808 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


purposes they may be determined by short-circuiting the secondary of 
the transformer and impressing upon the primary a voltage sufficient to 
send rated load current through the transformer. The loss in the trans- 
tormer under these conditions measured by wattmeter gives the load 
losses +J¢ + losses in both primary and secondary coils. 

160 In CLosep Macnetic Circuit TRANSFORMER. , 2ither of the two circuits 
may be used as primary when determining the e..ciency. 

161 In PotentiaL ReGuLarTors; the efficiency should be taken at the max- 
imum voltage for which the apparatus is designed, and with non-inductive 
load, unless otherwise specified. 


(F) Rotary Inpuction Apparatus, OR INDUCTION MACHINEs. 


162 In Rotary InpucTION Apparatus, the losses are: 

163. a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. 

164 6. MoLtecuLaR Macnetic FRIcTION AND Eppy CuRRENTs in iron, copper 
and other metallic parts; also J*r losses which may exist in multiple- 
circuit windings. a and 6b together are determined by running the 
motor without load at rated voltage, and measuring the power input. 

165 c. Primary J? R Loss, which may be determined by measurement of 
the current and the resistance. 

166 3d. SEconpary J? R Loss, which may be determined as in the primary. 
when feasible; otherwise, as in squirrel-cage secondaries, this loss is meas- 
ured as part of e. 

167 ce. Loap Losses; 7.e., molecular magnetic friction, and eddy currents 
in iron, copper, etc., caused by the stray field of primary and secondary 
currents, and secondary J* R loss when undeterminable under (d). These 
losses may for practical purposes be determined by measuring the total 
power, with the rotor short-circuited at standstill and a current in the 

timary circuit equal to the primary energy current at full load. The 
oss in the motor under these conditions may be assumed to be equal ta 
the load losses +J? 7 losses in both primary and secondary coils. 


(G) UwnipoLar or Acyciic MacuInEs. 


168 In Unrpovar Macuines, the losses are: 

169 (a) BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. 

170 =(b) MoLecuLar MaGnetic FricTIon AND Eppy CuRRENTS. See Meas- 
urement of Losses (£), Sec. 106. 

171 ~=(c) ARmaTuRE Resistance Losses. See Measurement of Losses (E), 


Sec. 110. 
172 (d) CoLtLector BrusH Friction. See Measurement of Losses (C), Sec. 
104. 


173 =(e) Cottecror BrusH Contact Resistance. See Measurement of 
Losses (G), Sec. 112. 
174 ue eee ATION as in Sec, 113. See Measurement of Losses (H), 
(oh SUR 
175 (g’ Loap Losses. See Measurement of Losses (J), Sec. 114. 


(H) Rectiryinc Apparatus, PutsaTING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 

176 = Tuis Division INCLUDES: open-coil arc machines and mechanical and 
other rectifiers. 

177 =‘ In Recririers the most satisfactory method of determining the efficiency 
is to measure both electric input and electric output by wattmeter. The 
input is usually inductive, owing to phase displacement and to wave dis- 
tortion. For this reason the power factor and the apparent efficiency 
should also be considered, since the latter may be much lower than the 
true efficiency. The power consumed by auxiliary devices, such as the 
synchronous motor or cooling devices, should be included in the electric 
input. 

178 = In ConstanT-CuRRENT RectiFIERS, transforming from constant poten- 
tial alternating to constant direct current, by means of constant-current 
transforming devices and rectifying devices, the losses in the transforming 
devices are to be included in determining the efficiency and have to be 


tay een 


279 


180 


181 


182 


183 


184 


185 
186 


187 


188 


189 


1907} STANDARDIZATION RULES 1809 


measured when operating the rectifier, since in this case the losses may be . 
greater than when feeding an alternating secondary c:rcuit. In constant- 
current transforming devices, the load losses may be considerable, and, 
therefore, should not be neglected. 

In Open Coit Arc Macuings, the losses are essentially the same as in 
direct-current (closed coil) commutating machines. In this case, how- 
ever, the load losses are usually greater, and the efficiency should prefer- 
ably be measured by input- and output-test, using wattmeters for measuring 
the output. In alternating-current rectifiers, the output should, in gen- 
eral, be measured by wattmeter and not by voltmeter and ammeter, 
since owing to pulsation of current and voltage, a considerable discrepancy 
may exist between watts and volt-amperes. If, however, a direct-current 
and an alternating-current meter in the rectified circuit (either a volt- 
meter or an ammeter) give the same reading, the output may be measured 
by direct-current voltmeter and ammeter. The type of aiternating-cur- 
trent instrument here referred to should indicate the effective or root-of- 
mean-square value and the type of direct-current instrument the arith- 
metical mean value, which would be zero on an alternating-current circuit. 


(I) Transmission LInEs. 

The Erriciency of transmission lines should be measured with non- 
inductive load at the receiving end, with the rated receiving voltage and 
frequency, also with sinusoidal impressed wave form, except where ex- 
pressly specified otherwise, and with the exclusion of transformers or 
other apparatus at the ends of the line. 


(J) Puase-DispLacinc APPARATUS. 

In Apparatus Propucinc Puase DISPLACEMENT as, for example, 
synchronous compensators, exciters of induction generators, reactors, con- 
densers, polarization cells, etc., the efficiency should be understood to be 
the ratio of the volt-amperes minus power loss to the volt-amperes. 

The ErricieNcy may be calculated by determining the losses, subtract- 
ing them from the volt-amperes, and then dividing the difference by 
the volt-amperes. 

In SyNcHRONOUS COMPENSATORS and exciters of induction gener- 
ators, the determination of losses is the same as in other synchronous 
machines. 

In Reactors the Icsses are molecular magnetic friction, eddy losses 
and J? r loss. They should be measured by wattmeter. The efficiency of 
reactors should be determined with a sine wave of impressed voltage 
except where expressly specified otherwise. | : ; 

In ConpDENSERS, the losses are due to dielectic hysteresis and leak- 
age, and should be determined by wattmeter with a sine wave of voltage. 

In PovarizaTION CELLS, the losscs are those due to electric resistivity 
and a loss in the electrolyte of the nature of chemical hysteresis. These 
losses may be considerable. They depend upon the frequency, voltage 
and temperature, and should be determined with a sine wave of impressed 
voltage, except where expressly specified otherwise. 


D. -REGULATION. 


(1) DEFINITIONS. 

DEFINITION. The regulation of a machine or apparatus in regard to some 
characteristic quantity (such as terminal voltage, current or speed) is the 
ratio of the deviation of that quantity from its normal value at rated load 
to the normal rated load value. The term “ regulation,’’ therefore, has 
the same meaning as the term “inherent regulation,’ occasionally used. 

ConsTANT STANDARD. If the characteristic quantity is intended to re- 
main constant (e.g., constant voltage, constant speed, etc.) between rated 
load and no load, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum variation 
from the rated load value to the no-load value. Stas oe 

VARYING STANDARD. If the characteristic quantity is intended to vary 
in a definite manner between rated load and no load, the regulation 1s 
the ratio of the maximum variation from the specified condition to the 


normal rated-load value. 


190 


(92 


193 


194 


195 


196 


197 


198 


199 


200 


201 


202 


204 
206 


1810 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


(a) Norr. Ifthe law of the variation (in voltage, current, speed, etc.) be- 
tween rated load and no load is not specified, it should be assumed to be 
a simple linear relation; i.e., one undergoing uniform variation between 
rated load and no load. : 

(b) Norge. The regulation of an apparatus may, therefore differ according 
to its qualification for use. Thus, the regulation of a compound-wound 
generator specified as a constant-potential generator, will be different 
from that which it possesses when specified as an over-compounded gen- 
erator. ; : 2 

In Constant-PoTeNnTIAL Macuines, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference of terminal voltage from the rated-load value (occur- 
ring within the range from rated load to open circuit) to the rated load 
terminal voltage. ; 

In CoNsTANT-CURRENT MAcHINES, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference of current from the rated load value (occurring 
within the range from rated-load to short-circuit, or minimum limit of 
operation), to the rated-load current. ‘ 

“In ConstaNt-PoweER APPARATUS, the regulation is the ratio of maxi- 
mum difference of power from the rated load value (occurring within the 
range of operation specified) to the rated power. 

In ConsTAN?-SPEED Direct-CURRENT Motors and Inpuction Mo- 
Tors the regulation is the ratio of the maximum variation of speed from 
its rated load value (occurring within the range from rated load to no- 
load) to the rated load speed. 

The regulation of an induction motor is, therefore, not identical with 
the slip of the motor, which is the ratio of the drop in speed from syn- 
chronism, to the synchronous speed. 

In Constant-PoTENTIAL TRANSFORMERS, the regulation is the ratio of 
the rise of secondary terminal voltage from rated non-inductive load to 
no-load (at constant primary impressed terminal voltage) to the secondary 
terminal voltage at rated load. 

In Over-CoMPOUNDED Macuines, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference in voltage from a straight line connecting the no-load 
and rated-load values of terminal voltage as function of the load current, 
to the rated-load terminal voltage. 

In CoNvERTERS, DyNAmotTors, MotTor-GENERATORS AND FREQUENCY 
CoNVERTERS, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum difference of ter- 
minal voltage at the output side from the rated-load vol.age, to the rated- 
load voltage on the output side. 

In Transmission Lines, FEEDERS, ETC., the regulation is the ratio of 
the maximum voltage difference at the receiving end, between rated non- 
inductive load and no load to the rated-load voltage at the receiving end 
(with constant voltage impressed upon the sending end). 

In Stream Encings, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum varia- 
tion of speed in passing slowly from rated-load to no-load (with constant 
steam pressure at the throttle) to the rated-load speed. For variation 
and pulsation see Secs. 59-64. 

In a Hyprautic TurBINe or OTHER WaTER-MoTorR, the regulation is 
the ratio of the maximum variation of speed in passing slowly from rated- 
load to no-load (at constant head of water; 7.e., at constant difference of 
level between tail race and head race), to the rated-load speed. For 
variation and pulsation see Secs. 59-64. 

In a GeneraAtTor-UNIT, consisting of a generator united with a prime- 
mover, the regulation should be determined at constant conditjons of the 
prime-mover; 72.e., constant steam pressure, head, etc. It includes the 
inherent speed variations of the prime-mover. For this reason the regu- 
lation of a generator-unit is to be distinguished from the regulation of 
either the prime-mover, or of the genesator contained in it, when taken 


separately. 
(II) CONDITIONS FOR AND TESTS OF REGULATION. 
SPEED. The REGULATION OF GENERATORS is to be determined at con- 
stant speed, andof alternating apparatus at constant impressed frequency. 
Non-Invuctive Loap. In apparatus generating, transforming or trans- 


206 


207 


208 


209 


210 


2i1 


212 


213 


214 


215 


1907} STANDARDIZATION RULES 1811 


mitting alternating currents, regulation should be understood to refer to 
non-inductive load, that is, to a load in which the current is in phase with 
the e.m.f. at the output side of the apparatus, except where expressly 
specified otherwise. 

Wave Form. In alternating apparatus receiving electric power, regu- 
lation should refer to a sine wave of e.m., except. where expressly speci- 
fied otherwise. 

Excitation. In commutating machines, rectifying machines, and syn- 
chronous machines, such as direct-current generators and motors, alter- 
nating-current and polyphase generators, the regulation is to be deter- 
mined under the following conditions: 

(1) At constant excitation in separately excited fields. 

(2) With constant resistance in shunt-field circuits, and 

(3) With constant resistance shunting series-field circuits; i.e. the 
field adjustment should remain constant, and should be so chosen as to 
give the required full-load voltage at full-load current. 

ImpepDANcE Ratio. In alternating-current apparatus, in addition to the 
non-inductive regulation, the impedance ratio of the apparatus should be 
specified; 7.¢., the ratio of the voltage consumed by the total internal im- 
pedance of the apparatus at full-load current, to its rated full-load voltage. 
As far as possible, a sinusoidal current should be used. 

CoMPUTATION OF REGULATION. When in synchronous machines the 
regulation is computed from the terminal voltage and impedance voltage, 
the exciting ampere-turns corresponding to terminal voltage plus armature- 
resistance-drop, and the ampere-turns at short-circuit corresponding to 
the armature-impedance-drop, should be combined vectorially to obtain 
the resultant ampere-turns, and the corresponding internal e.m.f. should 
be taken from the saturation curve. 


E. INSULATION. 
(Il) INSULATION RESISTANCE. 


INSULATION RESISTANCE is the ohmic resistance offered by an insulating 
coating, cover, material or support to an impressed voltage, tending to 
produce a leakage of current through the same. 

Oumic RESISTANCE AND DIELECTRIC STRENGTH. The ohmic resistance 
of the insulation is of secondary importance only, as compared with the 
dielectric strength, or resistance to rupture by high voltage. Since the 
ohmic resistance of the insulation can be very greatly increased by baking, 
but the dielectric strength is liable to be weakened thereby, it is preferable 
to specify a high dielectric strength rather than a high insulation resist- 
ance. The high-voltage test for dielectric strength should always be ap- 

lied. 
RECOMMENDED VALUE OF RESISTANCE. The instillation resistance of 
complete apparatus shculd be such that the rated voltage of the apparatus 


1 
1,000,000 
terminal voltage, through the insulation. Where the value found in this 
way exceeds 1 megohm, it is usually sufficient. 

INSULATION Resistance Tests should, if possible, be made at the 
pressure for which the apparatus is designed. 


(I) DIELECTRIC STRENGTH. 
(A) Test VOLTAGES. 

Derinition. The dielectric strength of an insulating wall coating, 
cover or path is measured by the voltage which must be applied to it in 
order to effect a disruptive discharge through the same 

Basis FOR DETERMINING Test VotTaceEs. The test voltage which 
should be applied to determine the suitability of insulation for commer- 
cial operation is dependent upon the kind and size of the apparatus and 
its normal operating voltage, upon the nature of the service in wich it 
is to be used, and the severity of the mechanical and electrical stresses ta 


will not send more than of the rated-load current, at the rated 


216 


217 


218 


219 


220 


221 


222 


223 


224 


1812 STANDARDIZATION RULES ‘June 21 


which it may be subjected. The voltages and other conditions of test 
which are recommended have been determined as reasonable and proper 
for the great majority of cases and are proposed for general adoption, 
except when specific reasons make a modification desirable. ; 

CONDITION OF APPARATUS TO BE TESTED. Commercial tests should, in 
general, be made with the completely assembled apparatus and not with 
individual parts. The apparatus should be in good condition and high- 
voltage tests, unless otherwise specified, should be applied before the 
machine is put into commercial service, and should not be applied when 
the insulation resistance is low owing to dirt or moisture. High-voltage 
tests should, in general, be made at the temperature assumed under nor- 
mai operation. High-voltage tests considerably in excess of the normal 
voltages to determine whether specifications are fulfilled are admissible 
on new machines only. 

Points oF AppLiCATION OF VOLTAGE. The test voltage should be suc- 
cessively applied between each electric circuit and all other electric cir- 
cuits including conducting material in the apparatus. 

The Frequency of the alternating-current test voltage is, in general, 
immaterial within commercial ranges. When, however, the frequency 
has an appreciable effect, as in alternating-current apparatus of high 
voltage and considerable capacity, the rated frequency of the apparatus 
should be used. 

TABLE OF TesTING Vo.ttacEs. The following voltages are recommended 
for testing all apparatus, lines and cables, by a continued application 
for one minute. The test should be with alternating voltage having an 
efiective value (or root mean square referred to a sine wave of voltage) 
given in the table and preferably for tests of alternating apparatus at 
the normal frequency of the apparatus. 


Rated Terminal Voltaze of Circuit. Rated Output. Testing Voltage. 
Not exceeding 400 volts...............Under 10 kw.......1,000 volts. 
Z “ MP Ga erate oor te 10 kw. and over....1,500 “ 
400 and over, but less than 800 volts..... Under 10 kw... .2.1;500 5 
Z s 2 Bon Ses ated ky. and over. 7e2;D00—ee 
800 “ 2 #8 20078 wees Anysen tee. ate OU Ene 
1520014 ‘ ; 2,500 “See Ge ADL eae ee eee 5,000\ee8 
2,500 “ - Any...Double the normal rated 
voltages. 


ExcEPTION.—TRANSFORMERS. Transformers having primary pressures. 
of from 550 to 5,000 volts, the secondaries of which are directly con- 
nected to consumption circuits, should have a testing voltage of 10,000 
volts, to be applied between the primary and secondary windings, and 
also between the primary winding and the core. 

Exception.—Fie_p Winpincs. The tests for field windings should be 
based on the rated voltage of the exciter and the rated output of the 
machine of which the coils are a part. Field windings of synchronous 
motors and converters, which are to be started by applying alternating 
current to the armature when the field is not excited and a high voltage 
is induced in the field windings, should be tested at 5,000 volts. 

RateD TERMINAL VOLTAGE.—DEFINITION. The rated terminal voltage 
of circuit in the above table, means the voltage, between the conductors 
of the circuit to which the apparatus to be tested is to be connected,—for 
instance, in three-phase circuits the delta voltage should be taken. In 
the following specific cases, the rated terminal voltage of the circuit is 
to be determined as specified in ascertaining the testing voltage: 

(a) TRANSFORMERS. The test of the insuiation between the primary and 
secondary windings of transformers, is to be the same as that between 
the hich-voltage windings and core, and both tests should be made simul- 
taneously by connecting the low-tension winding and core together during 
the test. Ifa voltage equal to the specified testing voltage be induced 
in the high-tension winding of a transformer it may be used for insulation 
tests instead of an independently induced voltage. These tests should be 
made first with one end and then with the other end of the high-tension 
winding connected to the low-tension winding and to the core. 


ae 


225 


226 


227 


228 


229 


231 


236 
237 
238 
239 


240 


1907] STANDARDIZATION RULES 1813 


(0) ConsTanT-CuRRENT Apparatus. The testing voltage is to be 
based upon a rated terminal voltage equal to the maximum voltage which 
may exist at open or closed circuit. 

(¢) APPARATUS IN SERIES. For tests of machines or apparatus to be 
operated in series, so as to employ the sum of their separate voltages the 
testing voltage is to be based upon a rated terminal voltage equal to the 
sum of the separate voltages except where the frames of the machines 
are Separately insulated, both from the ground and from each other, in 
which case the test for insulation between machines should be based upon 
the voltage of one machine, and the test between each machine and ground 
to be based upon the total voltage of the series. 


(B) Meruops or TESTING. 


Cuasses oF Tests. Tests for dielectric strength cover such a wide 
range in voltage that the apparatus, methods and precautions which are 
essential in certain cases do not apply to others. For convenience, the 
tests will be separated into two classes: 

Crass 1. This class includes all apparatus for which the test voltage 
deos not exceed 10 kilovolts, unless the apparatus is of very large static 
capacity, ¢.g., a large cable system This class also includes all apparatus 
of small static capacity, such as line insulators, switches and the like, for 
all test voltages. 

MeTHOD or TEsT FoR Crass 1. The test voltage is to be continuously 
applied for the prescribed interval,—(one minute unless otherwise speci- 
fied). The test voltage may be takeri from a constant-potential source 
and applied directly to the apparatus to be tested, or it may be raised 
gradually as specified for tests under Class 2. 

Crass 2. This class includes all apparatus not included in Class 1. 

MeruHop oF Test For Cuiass 2. The test voltage is to be raised to the re- 
quired value smoothly and without sudden large increments and is then 
to be continuously applied for the prescribed interval,—(one minute, 
unless otherwise specified), and then gradually decreased. 

CONDITIONS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR CLAss 1 and Crass 2. The follow- 
ing apply to all tests: ; : : 

The Wave Suape should be approximately sinusoidal and the apparatus 
in the testing circuits should not materially distort this wave. — 

The SuppLy Circuit should have ample current-supply capacity so that 
the charging current which may be taken by the apparatus under test 
will not materially alter the wave form nor materially affect the test volt- 
age. The circuit should be free from accidental interruptions. mS 

RESISTANCE OR INDUCTANCE in series with the primary of a raising 
transformer for the purpose of controlling its voltage is liable seriously 
to affect the wave form, thereby causing the maximum value of the volt- 
age to bear a different and unknown ratio to the root mean square value. 
This method of voitage adjustment is, therefore, in general, undesirable. 
It may be noted that if a resistance or inductance is employed to limit 
the current when burning out a fault, such resistance or inductance should 
be short circuited during the regular voltage test. be! 

The INSULATION under test should be in normal condition as to dry- 
ness and the temperature should when possible be that reached in normal 
S ADpinionan ConDITIONS AND PRECAUTIONS FoR Ciass 2. The following 
conditions and precautions, in gapiton to the foregoing, apply to tests 

included in Class 2. 
= Es eer oF TESTING VOLTAGE on the apparatus under test 
should be avoided, particularly at high, voltages and with apparatus having 
considerable capacity, as a momentarily excessive rise in testing voltage 
Maen VARIATIONS IN TESTING VoLTaGE of the circuit supplying the 
voltage during the test should be avoided as they are likely to set up 
injuri illation. * 

PGs6d CONNECTIONS in the circuits supplying the test voltage are es- 
sentiat in order to prevent injurious. high frequency disturbances from 
being set up. When a heavy current 1s carried by a small water rheostats 


241 


242 


244 


245 


246 


247 


248 


249 


250 


1814 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


arcing may occur, causing high-frequency disturbances which should be 
carefully avoided. 

TRANSFORMER Coits. In high-tension transformers, the low-tension 
coil should preferably be connected to the core and to the ground when 
the high-tension test is being made, in order to avoid the stress from 
low-tension to core, which would otherwise result through condenser 
action. The various terminals of each winding of the high-tension trans- 
former under test should be connected together during the test in order 
to prevent undue stress on the insulation between turns or sections of the 
winding in case the high-voltage test causes a break-down. 


(C) MerHops ror MEAsuRING THE Test VOLTAGE. 


For MEASURING THE TEST VOLTAGE, two instruments are in common 
use, (1) the spark gap and (2) the voltmeter. 

1. THe Spark Gap is ordinarily adjusted so that it will break down witha 
certain predetermined voltage, and is connected in parallel with the in- 
sulation under test. Itensures that the voltage applied to the insulatiom 
is not greater than the break-down voltage of the spark gap. A givem 
setting of the spark gap is a measure of one definite voltage, and, as its 
operation depends upon the maximum value of the voltage wave, it is 
independent of wave form and is a limit on the maximum stress to which 
the insulation is subjected. The spark gap is not conveniently adapted 
ies comparatively low voltages. } 

n SparK-Gap MEASUREMENTS, the spark gap may be set for the re- 
quired voltage and the auxiliary apparatus adjusted to give a voltage at 
which this spark gap just breaks down. The spark gap should then be 
adjusted for, say, 10 per cent. higher voltage, and the auxiliary apparatus 
again adjusted to give the voltage of the former breakdown, which is to 
be the assumed voltage for the test. This voltage is to be maintained 
for the required interval. 

The Spark Points should consist of new sewing needles, supported 
axially at the ends of linear conductors which are each at least twice the 
length of the gap. There should be no extraneous body near the gap 
within a radius of twice its length. -A table o* approximate striking dis- 
tances is given in Appendix D. This table should be used in connection 
with tests made by the spark-gap methods. 

A Non-Invuctive Resistance of about one-half ohm per volt should be 
inserted in series with each terminal oi the gap so as to keep the discharge 
current between the limits of one-quarter ampere and 2 amperes. The pur- 
pose of the resistance is to limit the current in order to prevent the surges 
which might otherwise occur at the time of break-down. 

2. The VoLTMETER gives a direct reading, and the different values of the 

voltage can be read during the application and duration of the test. It is 
suitable for all voltages, and does not introduce disturbances into the test 
circuit. 
_ In Vo-trmeterR Measurements, the voltmeter should, in general, derive 
its voltage from the high-tension testing circuit either directly or through 
an auxiliary ratio transformer. It is permissible, however, to measure the 
voltage at other places,—for example, on the primary of the transformer, 
provided the ratio of transformation does not materially vary during the 
test; or that proper account is taken thereof. 

Spark Gap AND VOLTMETER. The spark gap may be employed as a 
check upon the voltmeter used in high-tension tests in order to determine 
the transformation ratio of the transformer, the variation from the sine 
wave form and the like. It is also useful in conjunction with voltmeter 
measurements to limit the stress applied to the insulating material. 


(D) Apparatus For SuppLyinc Test VOLTAGE. 


The GENERATOR OR CiRcuIT suppiying voltage for the test should 
have ampie current carrying capacity, so that the current which may 
be taken for charging the apparatus to be tested will not materially u.ter 
the wave form nor otherwise materially change the voltage. 

‘The TEsTING TRANSFORMER should be such that its ratio of trans- 
formation does not vary more than 10 per cent. when delivering the charg- 


a 


251 
252 
253 
254 
255 
256 
257 


258 


259 


260 


261 


262 
263 


264 


1907] STANDARDIZATION RULES 1815 


ing current required by the apparatus under test. (This may be deter- 
mined by short-circuiting the secondary or high voltage wimding testing 
transformer and supplying 1/10 of the primary voltage to the primary 
under this condition. The primary current that flows under this condition 
is the maximum which should be permitted in regular dielectric tests.) 

The VottacE ConTROL may be secured in either of several ways, which, 
in order of preference, are as follows: 

1. By generator field circuit. 

2. By magnetic commutation. 

3. By change in transformer ratio. 

4. By resistance or choke coils. 

In GENERATOR VOLTAGE CONTROL, the voltage of the generator should 
preferably be about its approximate normal rated-load value when the 
full testing voltage is attained, which requires that the ratio of the raising 
transformer be such that the full testing voltage is reached when the gen- 
erator voltage is normal. This avoids the instability in the generator 
which may occur if a considerable leading current is taken from it 
when it has low voltage and low field current. 

In Macnertic Commutation, the control is effected by shunting the mag- 
netic flux through a secondary coil so as to vary the induction through 
the coil and the voltage induced in it. The shunting should be effected 
smoothly, thus avoiding sudden changes in the induced voltage. 

In TRANSFORMER VOLTAGE CONTROL, by change of ratio, it is neces- 
sary that the transition from one step to another be made without inter- 
ruption of the test voltage, and by steps sufficiently small to prevent 
surges in the testing circuit. The necessity of this precaution is greater 
as the inductance or the static capacity of the apparatus in the testing 
circuit under test is greater. 

When RESISTANCE Co1Ls oR Reactors are used for voltage control, it 
is desirable that the testing voltage should be secured when the controlling 
resistance or reactance is very nearly or entirely out of circuit in order 
that the disturbing effect upon the wave form which results may be negli- 
gible at the highest voltage. 


EF. CONDUCTIVITY. 


Copper. The conductivity of copper in electric wires and cables should 
not be less than 98% of Matthiessen’s standard of conductivity, as defined 
in the Copper Wire Table of the American INsTITUTE oF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS. 


G. RISE OF TEMPERATURE. 


(Il) MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE. 


(A) Meruops. 

There are two methods in common use for determining the rise in tem- 
perature, viz.: (1) by thermometer, and (2) by increase in resistance of 
an electric circuit. : 

1. By THERMOMETER. The following precautions should be observed 
in the use of thermometers: 

a. Protection. The thermometers indicating the room temperature 
should be protected from thermal radiation emitted by heated bodies, or 
from draughts of air or from temporary fluctuations of temperature. 
Several room thermometers should be used. In using the thermometer 
by applying it to a heated part, care should be taken so to protect its bulb 
as to prevent radiation from it, and, at the same time, not to interfere 
seriously with the normal radiation from the vart to which it is applied. 

b. Buts. When a thermometer is applied to the free surface of a ma- 
chine, it is desirable that the bulb of the thermometer should be covered 
by a pad of definite area. A convenient pad may be formed of cotton 
waste in a shallow circular box about one and a half inches in diameter, 
through a slot in the side in which the thermometer bulb is inserted. An 
unduly large pad over the thermometer tends to interfere with the natural 
liberation of heat from the surface to which the thermometer is applied. 


265 


266 


267 


268 


269 


270 


271 


272 


273 


1816 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


2. By IncrEASE IN RestsTANce. The resistance may be measured either 
by Wheatstone bridge, or by drop-of potential method. A temperature 
coefficient of 0.42 per cent. per degree C., from and at 0° C., may be assumed 
for copper. 

The temperature-coefficients from and at each degree cent. between 
0° C. and 50° C. are given in Appendix E. The temperature rise rem be 
determined either (1) by dividing the percentage increase of initial re- 
sistance by the temperature-coefticient for the initial temperature ex- 
pressed in per cent.; or (2) by multiplying the increase in per cent. of the - 
initial resistance by 238.1 plus the initial temperature in degrees C., and 
then dividing the product by 100. 

3. CoMPARISON OF MetuHops. In electrical conductors, the rise of tem- 
perature should be determined by their increase of resistance where prac- 
ticable. Temperature elevations measured in this way are usually in ex- 
cess of temperature elevations measured by thermometers. In very low 
resistance circuits, thermometer measurements are frequently more reli- 
able than measurements by the resistance method. Where a thermometer 
applied to a coil or winding, indicates a higher temperature elevation 
than that shown by resistance measurement, the thermometer indication 
should be accepted. 


(B) Norma ConpDiITIONS FoR TESTS. 


1. Duration or Tests. The temperature should be measured after a run 
o* sufficient duration for the apparatus to reach a practically constant tem- 
perature. This is usually from 6 to 18 hours, according to the size and- 
construction of the apparatus. It is permissible, however, to shorten the 
time of the test by running a lesser time on an overload in current and 
voltage, then reducing the load to normal, and maintaining it thus until 
the temperature has become constant. 

2. Room TEMPERATURE. The rise of temperature should be referred to 
the standard condition of a room temperature of 25° C. 

TEMPERATURE CORRECTION. If the room temperature during the test 
differs from 25° C., correction on account of difference in resistance should 
be made by changing the observed rise of temperature by one-half per cent. 
for each degree C. Thus with a room temperature of 35° C., the observed 
rise of temperature has to be decreased by 5 per cent., and with a room 
temperature of 15° C., the observed rise of temperature has to be increased 
by 5 per cent. In certain cases, such as shunt-field circuits without 
rheostat, the current strength wil be changed by a change of room tem- 
perature. The heat-production and dissipation may be thereby affected. 
Correction for this should be. made by changing the observed rise in tem- 
perature in proportion as the J? R loss in the resistance of the apparatus 
is altered owing to the difference in room temperature. 

3. BAROMETRIC PRESSURE. VENTILATION. A barometric pressure of 760 
mm. and normal conditions of ventilation should be considered as stand- 
ard, and the apparatus under test should neither be exposed to draught 
nor enclosed, except where expressly specified. The barometric pressure 
needs to be considered only when differing greatly from 760 mm. 

_BaroMEtRic PRessuRE CorreEcTION. When the barometric pressure 
differs greatly from the standard pressure of 760 mm. of mercury, as at 
high altitudes, a correction should be applied. In the absence of more 
accurate data, a correction of 1% of the observed rise in temperature for 
each 10 mm. deviation from the 760 m.m. standard is reeommended. For 
example at a barometric pressure of 689 mm. the observed rise of tempera- 
760—680 


ture is to be reduced by 10 8% 


(II) LIMITING TEMPERATURE RISE, 


GrneRAL, The temperature of electrical machinery under regular service 
conditions, should never be allowed to remain at a point at which per- 
manent deterioration of its insulating materia. takes place. 

Limits RECOMMENDED, It is recommended that the following maximum 


284 


285 
286 


287° 


288 


289 


1907] STANDARDIZATION RULES 1817 


values of temperature elevation, referred to a standard room temperature 
of 25 degrees centigrade, at rated load under normal conditions of ven- 
tilation or cooling, chouid rot be exceeded. 

(A) Macuines In GENERAL. 

In commutating machines, rectifying machines, pulsating-current gen- 
erators, synchronous machines, synchronous commutating machines and 
unipolar machines, the temperature rise in the parts specified should not 
exceed the following: 

Field and armature, 50° C. 

Commutator and brushes, by thermometer, 55° C. 

Collector rings, 65° C. 

Bearings and other parts of machine, by thermometer, 40° C. 

(B) Rotary InpuctTion Apparatus. The temperature rise should not 
exceed the following: 

Electric circuits, 50° C., by resistance. 

Bearings and other parts of the machine 40° C., by thermometer. 

In squirrel-cage or short-circuited armatures, 55° C., by thermometer, 
may be allowed. 

(C) Stationary INDUCTION APPARATUS. 

a. TRANSFORMERS FOR CONTINUOUS SERVICE. The temperature rise 
should not exceed 50 degrees centigrade in electric circuits, by resistance; 
and in other parts, by thermometer. 

b. TRANSFORMERS FOR INTERMITTENT SERVICE. In the case of trans- 
formers intended for intermittent service, or not operating continuously 
at rated load, but continuously in circuit, as in the ordinary case of lighting 
transformers, the temperature elevation above the surrounding air-tem- 
perature should not exceed 50° C., by resistance in electric circuits and 
by thermometer in other parts, after the period corresponding to the 
term of rated load. In this instance, the test load should not be applied 
until the transformer has been in circuit for a sufficient time to attain 
the temperature elevation due to core loss. With transformers for com- 
mercial lighting, the duration of the rated-load test may be taken as three 
hours, unless otherwise specified. 

c. Reactors, induction- and magneto-regulators—electric circuits by 
resistance and other parts by thermometer, 50° C. 

a. LARGE Apparatus. Large generators, motors, transformers, or other 
apparatus in which reliability and reserve overload capacity are important, 
are frequently specified not to rise in temperature more than 40 degrees 
centigrade under rated load and 55 degrees centigrade at rated overload. 
It is, however, ordinarily undesirable to specify lower temperature eleva- 
tions than 40 degrees centigrade at rated load, measured as above. 

(D) Rueostats. 

In Rueostats, Heaters and other electrothermal apparatus, no com- 
bustible or inflammable part or material, or portion liabie to come in 
contact with such material, should rise more than fU* C. above t | sur- 
rounding air under the service conditions for which it is designed. 

a. Parts oF Rueosrats.. Parts of rheostats and similar apparatus rising 
in temperature, under the specified service conditions, more than 50° C., 
should not contain any combustible material, and should be arranged or 
installed in such a manner that neither they, nor the hot air issuing from 
them, can come in contact with combustible material. 

(E) Limirs RECOMMENDED IN SPECIAL CASES. 
a. Heat Resistinc INsuLatTion. With apparatus in which the insu- 


_ lating materials have specia) heat resisting qualities a highe: temperature 


290 


291 


elevation 1s permissible 

ob Hiren Arr TeMpPeRATURE In apparatus intended fur service in places 
of abnormally high temperature a lower temperature elevation should be 
specified 

c APPARATUS SCBJECT TO OvERLOAD. In apparatus which by the nature 
ot its service may be exposed to overload, or 15 to be used in very 
high voltage circuits, a smaller rise of temperature is desirable than 
in apparatus not liable to overloads or in low-voltage apparatus. In 
apparatus built for conditions of limited space, as railway motors, a higher 
rise of temperature must be allowed. 


292 


293 


294 


295 
296 
297 


298 
299 


300 


301 


302 


303 


1818 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


d. APPARATUS FOR INTERMITTENT SuRvICE. In the case of apparatus 
intended for intermittent service, except railway motors, the temperature 
elevation which is attained et the end of the period corresponding to the 
term of rated load, should not exceed the values specified for machines 
in general. In such apparatus the temperature elevation, including rail- 
way motors, should be measured after operation, under as nearly as pos- 
sible the conditions of service for which the apparatus is intended, and 
the conditions of the test should be specified. 


H. OVERLOAD CAPACITIES. 


PERFORMANCE WITH OveRLoaAD. All apparatus should be able to carry 
the overload hereinafter specified without serious injury by heating, spark- 
ing, mechanical weakness, etc., and with an additional temperature rise 
not exceeding 15° C., above those specified for rated loads, the overload 
being applied after the apparatus has acquired the temperature corre- 
sponding to rated load continuous operation. Rheostats to which no 
temperature rise limits are attached are naturally exempt frora this addi- 
tional temperature rise of 15° C. under overload specified in these tutes. 

NorMAt Conpitions. Overload guarantees should refer to norma! con- 
ditions of operation regarding speed, frequency, voltage, etc., and to non- 
inductive conditions in alternating apparatus, except where a phase dis- 
placement is inherent in the apparatus. 

OvERLOAD CapacitiIES RECOMMENDED. The following overload capaci- 
ties are recommended: 

a. GENERATORS. Direct-current generators and alternating-current 
generators, 25 per cent. for two hours. 

b. Morors. Direct-current motors, induction motors and synchronous 
motors, not including 1ailway and other motors intended for intermittent 
service, 25 per cent. for two hours, and 50 per cent. for one minute. 

c. CONVERTERS. Synchronous converters, 25 per cent. for two hours, 
50 per cent. for one-half hour. 

d. TRANSFORMERS AND RECTIFIERS. Constant-potential transformers and 
rectifiers, 25 per cent. for two hours; except in transformers connected to 
apparatus for which a different overload is guaranteed, in which case the 
same guarantees shall apply for the transformers as for the apparatus 
connected thereto. 

e. Excirers. Exciters of a%ernators and other synchronous machines, 
10 per cent. more overload than is required for the excitation of the syn- 
chronous machine at its guaranteed overload, and for the same period of 
time. All exciters of alternating-current, single-phase or polyphase gen- 
erators should be able to give at its rated speed, sufficient voltage and 
current to excite the alternator, at the rated speed, to the full-load ter- 
minal voltage, at the rated output in kilovolt-amperes and with 50 per 
cent. power factor. 

ie CONTINUOUS-SERVICE RHEOSTAT, such as an armature- or field- 
regulating rheostat, should be capable of carrying without injury for two 
hours, a current 25 per cent. greater than that at which it is rated. It 
should also be capable of carrying for one minute a current 50 per cent. 
greater than its rated load current, without injury. This excess of ca- 
pacity is intended for testing purposes only, and this margin of capacity 
should not be relied upon in the selection of the rheostat. 

g. An INTERMITTENT SERVICE OR Moror-STARTING RuEOosTAT is used for 
starting a motor from rest and accelerating it to rated speed. Under 
ordinary conditions of service, and unless expressly stated otherwise, a 
motor is assumed to start in fifteen seconds and with 150% of rated cur- 
rent strength. A motor-starter should be capable of starting the motor 
under these conditions once every four minutes for one hour. 

(a) This Test may be carried cut either by starting the motor at four- 
minute intervals, or by placing the starter at normal temperature across 
the maximum voltage for which it is marked, and moving the lever uni- 
formly and gradually from the first to the last position during a period 
of fifteen seconds, the current being maintained substantially constant 


at said 50% excess by introducing resistance in series or by other suitable 
means. 


304 


305 


306 


307 


308 


309 


310 


311 


312 . 


313 


314 


315 


316 


1907] STANDARDIZATION RULES 1819 


(6) Orner RueEostats FoR INTERMITTENT-SERVICE are employed under 
ae special and varied conditions, that no general rules are applicable to 
them. 


III. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES. 
A. VOLTAGES. 


Direct-CuRRENT GENERATORS. In direct-current, low-voltage gener- 


‘ators, the following average terminal voltages are in general use and are 


recommended: 
125 volts. 250 volts. 550 to 600 volts. 


Low-Vo.ttace Circuits. In direct-current and alternating-current low- 
voltage circuits, the following average terminal voltages are in general use 
and are recommended: 


110 volts. 220 volts. 


Primary DistTRiBUTION Circuits. In alternating-current, constant- 
potential, primary-distribution circuits, an average voltage of 2,200 volts, 
with step-down tr-nsformer ratios 1/10 and 1/20, is in general use, and is 
recommended. 

TRANSMISSION CIRCUITS. In alternating-current constant-potential 
transmission circuits, the following average voltages are recommended. 


6,600 11,000 22,000 33,000 44,000 66,000 88,000 


TRANSFORMER Ratio. It is recommended that the standard transformer 
ratios should be such as to transform between the standard voltages above 
named. The ratio will, therefore, usually be an exact multiple of 5 or 
10, ¢. g., 2,200 to 11,000; 2,200 to 44,000. 

RANGE 1n Vo.ttTacr. In alternating-current generatcrs, or generating 
systems, a range of terminal voltage should be provided from rated voltage 
at no load to 10 per cent. in excess thereof, to cover drop in transmission. 
If a greater range than ten per cent. is specified, the generator should be 
considered as special. 


B. FREQUENCIES. 


In ALTERNATING-CURRENT ‘Circuits, the following frequencies are, 
standard: 
25~ 60~ 


These frequencies are already in extensive use and it is deemed ad- 
visable to adhere to them as closely as possible. 


IV. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS. 


Name Purares. Allelectricalapparatus should be provided with a name 
plate giving the manufacturer’s name, the voltage andthe current in 
amperes for which it is designed. Where practicable, the kilowatt capacity, 
character of current, speed, frequency, type, designation and serial 
number should be added. 

DiaGraMs oF Connections. All electrical apparatus when leaving the 
factory should be accompanied by a diagram showing the electrical 
connections and the relation of the different parts in sufficient detail 
to give the necessary information for proper installation. } 

RueostaT Data. Every rheostat should be clearly and permanently | 
marked with the voltage and amperes, or range of amperes, for which | 
it is designed. 

CoLtorEeD INnpicaTING Licurs. When using colored indicating lights 
on switch-boards, red should denote danger such as ‘‘ switch closed,” 
or ‘‘ circuit alive ’’; green should denote safety, such as “‘ switch open,” 
or “‘ circuit dead.” 


317 


324 


1820 STANDARDIZATION RULES {June 21 


When white lights are used a light turned on should denote danger, 
such as ‘‘ switch closed ”’ or “‘ circuit alive *?; while the light out should 
denote satety such as ‘ switch open.’’ or ‘circuit dead.’? Low-effi- 
ciency lamps should be used 

The use of colored lights is recommended. as safer than white lights. 

GrounpDING MetTat WorRK_ It is desirable that all metal work near 
high potential circuits be grounded 

Circuit OPENING Devices ‘The following definitions are recommended. 

a, ACircuiTt-BREAKER is an apparatus for breaking a circuit at the 
highest current which it may be called upon to carry. 

b. A DISCONNECTING SwITCH is an apparatus designed to open a circuit 
only when carrying little or ro current. 

c. An Automatic Crrcurt-BREAKER is an apparatus for breaking a cir- 
cuit automatically under an excessive strength of current. It should be 
capable of breaking the circuit repeatedly at rated voltage and at the 
maximum current which it may be called upon to carry. 


V. APPENDICES AND TABULAR DATA. 
APPENDIX A. NOTATION. 


The following notation is recommended: 

E, e, voltage, e.m.f., potential difterence 
, 2, current 

P, power 
, magnetic flux 

@, B, magnetic density 

R, 7, resistance 

x, reactance 

Z, 2, impedance 

L, l, inductance 

C, c, capacity 

Y, vy, admittance 

b, susceptance 

G, g, conductance 

Vector quantities when used should be denoted by capital italics. 


APPENDIX B.—RAILWAY MOTORS. 


(I) RATING. 


325 


326 


327 


Intropuctory Note oN Ratinc. Railway motors usually operate in 
a service in which both the speed and the torque developed by the motor 
are varying almost continually. The average requirements, however, 
during successive hours in a given class of service are fairly uniform. On 
account of the wide variation of the instantaneous loads, it is impracticable 
to assign any simple and definite rating to a motor which will indicate 
accurately the absolute capacity of a given motor or the relative capacity 
of different motors under service conditions. It is also impracticable to 
select a motor for a particular service without much fuller data with regard 
both to the motor and to the service than is required, for example, in the 
case of stationary motors which run at constant speeds. ; 

Score or Nomrnat Ratinc. It is common usage to give railway motors 
a nominal rating in horse power on the basis of a one-hour test. As above 
explained, a simple rating of this kind is not a proper measure of service 
capacity. This nominal rating, however, indicates approximately the 
maximum output which the motor should ordinarily be called upon to 
develop during acceleration. Methods of determining the continuous 
capacity of a railway motor for service requirements are given under a 
subsequent heading. 

The Nomrnar Ratino of a railway motor is the horse-power output at 
the car-axle, that is, including gear and other transmission losses, which 
gives a rise of temperature above the surrounding air (referred to a room 


328 
329 


330 
331 


332 


$33 


335 


336 


387 


338 


1907} STANDARDIZATION RULES 1821 


temperature of 25 degrees cent.) not exceeding 90 degrees cent. at the 
commutator and 75 degrees Cent. at any other part after one hour’s con- 
tinuous run at its rated voltage (and frequency, in the case of an alter- 
nating-current motor) on a stand, with the motor-covers removed, and 
with natural ventilation. The rise in temperature is to be determined 
by thermometer, but the resistance of no electrical circuit in the motor 
shall increase more than 40% during the test. 


(II) SELECTION OF MOTOR FOR SPECIFIED SERVICE. 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. The suitability of a railway motor for a speci- 
fied service depends upon the following considerations: 

_@. Mechanical ability to develop the requisite torque and speeds as 
given by its speed-torque curve. 

b. Ability to commutate successfully the current demanded. 

_ ¢. Ability to operate in service without occasioning a temperature rise 
in any part which will endanger the life of the insulation. 

OPERATING ConviTions, TypicaL Run. The operating conditions which 
are important in the selection of a motor include the weight of load, the 
schedule speed, the distance between stops, the duration of stops, the rate 
of acceleration and of braking retardation, the grades and the curves. 
With these data at hand, the outputs which are required of the motor may 
be determined, provided the service requirements are within the limits of 
the speed-torque curve of the motor. These outputs may be expressed 
in the form of curves giving the instantaneous values of current and of 
voltage which must be applied to the motor. Such curves may be laid 
out for the entire line, but they are usually constructed only for a certain 
average or typical run, which is fairly representative of the conditions of 
service. To determine whether the motor has sufficient capacity to per- 
form the service safely, further tests or investigations must be made. 

Capacity Test oF RarLtway Motor IN Service. The capacity of a 
railway motor to deliver the necessary output may be determined by 
measurement of its temperature after it has reached a maximum in ser- 
vice. If a running test cannot be made under the actual conditions of 
service, an equivalent test may be made in a typical run back and forth, 
under such conditions of schedule speed, length of run, rate of acceleration, 
etc., that the test cycle of motor losses and conditions of ventilation are 
essentially the same as would be obtained in the specified service. 

METHODS OF COMPARING MoTOR CAPACITY WITH SERVICE REQUIREMENTS. 
Where it is not convenient to test motors under actual service condi- 
tions or in an equivalent typical run, recourse may be had to one of the 
two following methods of determining temperature rise now in general 
use: 

1. MerHop By Losses AND THERMAL Capacity Curves. The heat de- 
veloped in a railway motor is carried partly by conduction through the 
several parts and partly by convection through the air to the motor-frame 
whence it is distributed to the outside air. As the temperature of the 
several parts is thus dependent not on'y upon their own internal losses 
but also upon the temperature o. n_-ighboring parts, it becomes necessary 
to determine accurately the actual value and distribution of losses in a 
railway motor for a given service and reproduce them in an equivalent 
test-run The results of a series of typ’cal runs expressed in the form of 
thermal capacity curves will give the re at on between degrees rise per watt 
loss in the armature and in the field f r all ratios of losses between them 
met with in the commercial applicaiicn o. a given motor. 

This method consists, therefore, in cal.ulating the several internal 
motor losses in a specified service and determining the temperature rise 
with these losses from thermal capacity curves giving the degrees rise 
per watt loss as obtained in experimental track tests made under the same 
conditions of ventilation. 

The following motor losses cause its heating and should be carefully 
determined for a given service: /*R in the field; /’R in the armature; 
I? R in the brush contacts, core loss and brush friction. 

The loss in the bearings (in the case of geared motors) also adds some- 
what to the motor-heating, but owing to the variable nature of such 
losses they are generally neglected in making calculations. 


339 


340 


341 


342 


343 


344 


345 
346 


347 


348 
349 


350 


1822 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


2. MerHop By Continuous Capacity oF Motor. The essential losses 
in the motor as found in the typical run, are in most cases those in the 
motor windings and in the core. The mean service conditions may 
expressed in terms of the current which would produce the same losses 
in the motor windings and the voltage which, with that current, would 
produce th. same core losses as the average in service. The continuous 
capacity of the motor is given in terms of the amperes which it will carry 
when run on a testing stand—with covers on or off, as specified—at dif- 
ferent voltages, say, 40, €0, 80 and 1006 per cent. vf the rated voltage— 
with a temperature rise not exceeding 90 degrees at the commutator and 
75 degrees at any other part, provided the resistance of no electric circuit 
in the motor increases more than 40 per cent. A comparison of the equiva- 
lent service conditions with the continuous capacity of the motor will de- 
termine whether the service requirements are within the safe capacity of 
the motor. 

This method affords a ready means of determining whether a specifiea 
service is within the capacity of a given motor and it is also a convenient 
approximate method for comparing the service capacities of different motors. 


APPENDIX C. PHOTOMETRY AND LAMPS. 


CaNDLE-PowER. The luminous intensity of sources of light is expressed 
in candle-power. The unit of candle-power should be derived from the 
standards maintained by the National Bureau of Standards at Washington, 
D. C., which standard unit of candle-power equals 100/88 of the Hefner 
unit under Reichsanstalt standard conditions for the Hefner. In prac- 
tical measurements seasoned and carefully standardized incandescent 
lamps are more reliable and accurate than the primary standard. 

CANDLE-LUMEN. The total flux of light from a source is equal to its 
mean spherical intensity multiplied by 47. The unit of flux is called the 

1 


candle-lumen. A candle lumen is the —th part of the total flux of light 
4x 
emitted by a source having a mean spherical intensity of one candle-power. 

CaNnDLE-MeTER. The unit of illumination is the candle-meter. THis is 
the normal illumination produced by one unit of candle-power at a dis- 
tance of one metre. 

a. CanDLE-Foor. Illumination is occasionally expressed in candle-feet. 
A candle-foot is the normal i!lumination produced by one unit of candle- 
power at a distance of one foot. 

1 candle-foot = 10.764 candle-metres. 

The use of the candle-metre unit is preferable and is recommended. 

The Erriciency or Evectrric Lamps is properly stated in terms of mean 
spherical candle-power per watt at lamp terminals. This use of the term 
efficiency is to be considered as special, and not to be confused with the 
generally accepted definition of efficiency in Sec. 85. 

a, Erriciency, Auxitiary Devices. Inilluminants requiring auxiliary 
power-consuming devices outside of the luminous body, such as stead ying 
resistances in constant potential arc lamps, a distinction should be made 
between the net efficiency of the luminous source and the gross efficiency 
of thelamp. This distinction should always be stated. The gross effi- 
ciency should include the power consumed in the auxiliary resistance, etc. 
The net efficiency should, however, include the power consumed in the 
controlling mechanism of the lamp itself. Comparison between such 
sources of light should be made on the basis of gross efficiency, since the 
power consumed in the auxiliary device is essential to the operation. 

b. A STANDARD Circuit Vottace of 110 volts, or a multiple thereof may 
be assumed, except where expressly stated otherwise. 

Warts PER CANDLE. The specific consumption of an electric lamp is 
its watt consumption per mean spherical candle-power. ‘ Watts per 
candle ” is the term used commercially in connection with incandescent 
lamps, and denotes, watts per mean horizontal candle-power. 

PHOTOMETRIC TESTS in which the results are stated in candle-power 
should always be made at such a distance from the source of light that 


1907] STANDARDIZATION RULES 1823 


the latter may be regarded as practically a point. Where tests are made 
at shorter distances, as for example in the measurement of lamps with 
reflectors, the results should always be given as “‘ apparent candle-power ”’ 
e ee distance employed, which distance should always be specifically 
stated. 

351 Basis ror Comparison. Either the total flux of light in candle-lumens, 
or the mean spherical candle-power, should always be used as the basis 
for comparing various luminous sources with each other, unless there is 
a clear understanding or statement to the contrary. 

352 INCANDESCENT Lamps, Ratinc. It is customary to rate incandescent 
lamps on the basis of their mean horizontal candle-power; but in com- 
paring incandescent lamps in which the relative distribution of luminous 
intensity differs, the comparison should be based on their total flux of 
light measured in lumens, or on their mean spherical candle-power. 

353 The SPHERICAL RepDucTION-FacrTor of a lamp 


mean spherical candle-power 
mean horizontal candle-power 


364 The Torta Fivx of light in candle-lumens emitted by a lamp = 4 7X 
mean horizontal candle-power X spherical reduction-factor. 

355 The SpHericAL Repuction-Facror should only be used when properly 
determined for the particular type and characteristics of each lamp. 
The spherical reduction-factor permits of substantially accurate com- 
parisons being made between the mean spherical candle-powers of dif- 
ferent types of incandescent lamps, and may be used in the absence of 
proper facilities for direct measurement of mean spherical intensity. 

3856 ‘READING DisTANcE.’”’ Where standard photometric measurements 
are impracticable, approximate measurements of illuminants such as 
street lamps may be made by comparing their ‘“‘reading distances; ”’ 1.e., 
by determining alternately the distances at which an ordinary size of 
reading print can just be read, by the same person or persons, when all 
other light is screened. The angle below the horizontal at which the 
measurement is made should be specified when it exceeds 15°. 

357. In CompariING DIFFERENT Luminous Sources not only should their 
candle-power te compared, but also their relative form, intrinsic brilliancy, 
distribution of illumination and character of light. 


APPENDIX D. SPARKING DISTANCES. 


358 Table of Sparking Distances in Air between Opposed Sharp Needle- 
Points, for Various Effective Sinusoidal Voltages, in inches and in centi- 
metres. The table applies to the conditions specified in Secs. 240-246. 


359 Kilovolts Distance. Kilovolts Distance. 
Sq Root of Sq. Root of 
Mean Square Inches Cms. Mean Square Inches Cms. 
FS sca Bish ope 05225) 057 A Moe LOU UI OO 
iN Ole 0 chemahegarromce te 0.47 1.19 150 eel Oi) 38.1 
Seed sec ohanar Shier 2 0. 725 1.84 WOO see eects. ares 16.05 40.7 
DAG chelayd he Sn eee IAG) 2.54 Okan, Bo cad ores ae 17.10 43.4 
Bon cc Oe eee Oe Oe ies 3.3 MAUR otlogtst ee ee eT 18.15 46.1 
Ue peta es ocsantenerat 1.625 4.1 NGOS eres cons oe ee 19.20 48.8 
yin © ear ctacchcas ral oul Pg aul PVG ee es AIAG. Sco OO oe 20.25 51.4 
“sis Blaltpea.cek cigs 2,45 6.2 DA Oietreecen eee tdcre sisnelss* 21.30 54.1 
Ae ee Meee cceicieboxs 25 2.95 tao UPk Oe ipenastor ce eta 92°35 ~- 66.8 
(eee Naw cope meigsieiacne's 3.55 9.0 D3 (meeieerassee ere « 23.40 59.4 
60.. . 4.65 eas DAs eres etn « 24.45 62.1 
na cOs. 4 Oe) 14.9 PAR O  iecstcecr Bene nga 25.50 64.7 
80.. alas 18.0 D Geert ears ensian a et 26.50 67.3 
(O(0\s aco GORE Me DG 8.35 PHL QA castistoetors Ser rots 27.50 69.8 
MOOR irerteer sls wos ss 9.6 24.4 ONO) itech oat a ae 28.50 72.4 
Ili aes oars 10Gb Seto DO eraceteecerngayede ole. oP 29.50 74.9 
GAD). Sinko once ac epioRaG iaSh ero SO Oe sceteeigacts Goettts ni 30.50 77.4 
POU ye caer Peet 12. 90 oes 


1824 STANDARDIZATION RULES [June 21 


APPENDIX E. TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENTS. 


360 Table of Temperature Coefficients of Resistivity in Copper at Different 
Initial Temperatures Centigrade. 


Initial Temp. coefficient. Initial Temp. coefficient. 
aemperature in percent. per | temperature in percent. per 
cent. degree cent. cent. degree cent. 


The fundamental relation between the increase of resistance in copper 

and the rise of temperature may be taken as 
Ry = R, (1+0.0042 #) 

where R, is the resistance of the copper conductor at 0° C. and R; is the 
corresponding resistance at # C. This is equivalent to taking a tempera- 
ture coefficient of 0.42% per deg. C. temperature rise above 0° C. For 
initial temperatures other than 0° C., a similar formula may be used sub- 
stituting the coefficients in the above table corresponding to the actual 
initial temperature. The formula thus becomes at 25° C, 


ape Ry (14.9:38014 
Ri+r= Ry (1+ 100 


where R; is the initial resistance at 25° C. Rj+, the final resistance a- - 
r the temperature rise above 25° C, 


ow ~ 7 rs 


25 TANDARDIZATION RULES 1825 


In order to find the temperature rise in degrees cent. from the initial ; 
stance R; at the initial temperature 7° C.and the final resistance Rj +, We 

se the formula : 

; RAE POS a 

- r= (238.144) (itr 

R 


-1) degrees C. 


HISTORY OF THE STANDARDIZATION RULES. 


In CONNECTION WITH THE PRESENTATION OF THE STANDARDIZATION 
RULES TO THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
AT THE 23D ANNUAL CoN VENTION Heitp at Nracara FALLs, 
JUNE 27. 1907. 


The first step taken by the Institute toward the standardization of 
electrical apparatus and methods was a topical discussion on ‘‘ The Stand- 
ardization of Generators, Motors and Transformers,’” which took place 
simultaneously in New York and Chicago on the evening of January 26, 
1898. This discussion appears in the Institute Transactions, Vol. 
XV, pages 3to 32. The opinions expressed were generally favorable to 
the scheme of standardization of electrical appratus, although some 
members feared that difficulties might arise. As a result of this dis- 
cussion, a Committee on Standardization was appointed by the Council 
ot the Institute, consisting of the following members: 


Francis B Crocker, Chatrman. 


Cary T. HutcHINsoN CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
ARTHUR E. KENNELLY Lewis B STILLWELL 
Joun W. Lies, Jr. E.Linu THOMSON 


After a careful consideration of the matter and consultation with the 
members of the Institute and interested parties generally, a ‘* Report 
of the Committee on Standardization,” was presented and accepted by 
the Institute, June 26, 1899. Thcse original rules appeared in the In- 
stitute Transactions, Vol. XVI, pages 255 to 268. 

As a result of changes and developments in the electric art, it was 
subsequently found necessary to revise the original report. this work 
being carried out by the tollowing Committee on Standardization: 


Francis B. Crocker, Chairman. 


ARTHUR E. KENNELLY CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
Joun W. Lies, jr. Lewis B STILLWELL 
GC. O. MaILLoux Evinu THOMSON 


1826 


STANDARDIZATION RULES 1827 


This revised report was adopted at the 19th Annual Convention at 
Great Barrington. Mass., on June 20, 1902, and appears in the Institute 
Transactions, Vol. XIX, pages 1075 to 1092. 

In conseguence of still further change and development in electrical 
apparatus and methods, it was decided in September, 1905 that a second 
revision was needed, and the following Committee was appointed to do 
this work. 

Francis B. Crocker, Chairman 
ArtTHUR E. KENNELLY, Secretary. 


Henry S. CarHAarRT CuHarRLeEs F. Scorr 
Joun W. Lies, Jr. CuHaRLEs P. STEINMETZ 
C. O. MaILtoux Henry G. Srorr 
Rosert B. OWENS S. W. STRATEAN 


This Committee held monthly meetings and carried on extensive corre- 
spondence with manufacturers, consulting and operating engineers and 
other interested parties, and as a result, presented its report at the 23d 
Annual Convention, held at Milwaukee, May 28-30, 1906. After con- 
siderable discussion the report was accepted and referred back to the 
Committee for amendment and rearrangement in form. It was then 
to be submitted to the Board of Directors for finaladoption. In Septem- 
ber, 1906, the following Standardization Committee was appointed: 


Francis B. CRocKER Chairman. 
ARTHUR E. KenneELLY, Secretary. 


A. W. BerresFoRD Cuar es F. Scorr 
Dvuca.p C. Jackson CuarRLes P. STEINMETZ 
C. 0. MaILttoux Henry G. Srorr 

R. B. OWENS S. W. STRATTON 


ELinu THOMSON 


This Committee held.monthly meetings, also sub-committee meetings, 
and carefully relterred tne rules as a whole, and each part of them, to 
the members of the Institute. The rules were also entirely rearranged 
as to form, and put in shape to facilitate ready reference to them and 
enable future revisions to be made without breaking up the logical ar- 
rangement. Thus amended the rules were submitted to the Poaid of 
Directors and approved by it on June 21,1907. The Board also directed 
that the rules should be presented, as accepted by the Board. at the 
Annual Convention held at Niagara Falls, June 24 to 27, 1907, which ac- 
tion was taken by President Sheldon on June 26, 1905. By the Con- 
stitution which went into effect on June 10, 1907, this Committee has been 
made a standing Committee with the title *‘ Standards Committee,”’ con- 
sisting of nine members. 


ee Uy | ey» Soe Oh Sena 


INDEX. 


PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS 


trical Hneineerings. -(Henry A? Norris.) 0...2%0s 2-5 es von vs 
Broken Insulators and Other T-ansmission Line Troubles, Loca- 


(EGE, CLE oat Oieescad Git Siu AD © oe oee ae eee a eae ee 


- Cables, Grounded, Lightning-Rods and, as a Means of Protecting 


Transmission Lines Against Lightning... 0.4... .i<. 62.3. 
Chemical and Other Tests of Rubber-Covered Wires............ 
Choice of Frequency for Single-Phase Alternating-Current Railway 

Motors (illustrated) “CAME Armstrong.) occ. asd eo 
Choke-Coils Versus Extra Insulation on the End-Windings of 

siranstotmers: ui CSeull yAriners) ec cae eyelets» 2 lhe a ee 
(OKO rome OO Ote AGING NAY fa at hems ieecus tes Slow tawsanei Rie as aie Sukh, abtele lee 
Codejor i thicch LOPOSEU erste ec oa apices fo. Sica) a dBW Sle enhle wise aie 
@oleronlibicss Proposed. (ReviSed.)) Hoicise sod nce Sieeie cele es 
Commercial Lightning Arresters, Practical Testing of........... 
Commutating-Pole Direct-Current Railway Motors. (Illustrated.) 

Mi, Tels ANGORA ASOLO) cca ee lo reece er eos Cie oe ee ae eae 
Comparative Performance of Steam and Electric Locomotives. 

(@iidiastrateds yee CAlbertels A 1a SUONg.) ate on ee ey ca oe en es 


_Compensated Single-Phase Alternating-Current Motor, The Vector 


IDEA SAREG EE CO hole, oop gucaatO egeed ocean URED iE oak cae ee eC 
Concentric Method of Teaching Electrical Engineering, On the... 
Construction, Line, Some New Methods in High-Tension......... 
Copper Wires, The Heating of, by Electric Currents............ 
Cycles, 25) Verstis-l5, for Heavy Railways. ..%.0. 0.66. ieee 


. Deflocculated Graphite. (Edward G. Acheson.) ................. 


Design, Power Plant, The Ratio of Heating Surface to Grate Sur- 
TD. VAS a) URRVOUGTS. bale eran neh 55 auras Steere ene ee ede ae 
Diagram, Vector, of the Compensated .Single-Phase Alternating- 
(Chispgevogiv ahora. | Ge Nte veer pee case gee cee en ee 
Direct-Current Railway Motors, Commutating-Pole............. 
Discussion on ‘‘ A New CO, Recorder’, at New York, December 
WSS TD cits sate cohol, per ON Oe see eee ey eae eae oe ge 
Discussion on ‘“‘A New Type of Insulator for High-Tension Trans- 
mission Line Construction ’’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 


De. TEGO ARS otk sacl chess Sek, CELA HG OI te tet Oe ae ae ne eee 
Discussion on ‘.. An Exhaust Steam Turbine Plant.’’, at New York, 


Wisesianloeie WS Oke Raror een aera tas, ee nee ae a 


/Discussion on ‘‘ Choke-Coils. Versus Extra Insulation on the End- 


Windings of Transformers ”’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 
HOH. oo pe OE OE AOR Oe, SE Te PE oe A 


937 
997 


1527 
1377 
1739 
1049 
1429 
1319 


1239 
9o7, 


1377 
1169 
1771 
1421 


1789 
1097 


1407 
1643 
1527 


1441 
1263 


1830 INDEX. 


Discussion on ‘‘ Commutating-Pole Direct-Current Railway 
Motors’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907........... 
Discussion on ‘‘ Comparative Performance of Steam and Electric 
Locomotives ’’, at New York, November 8, 1907...... Sete 
Discussion on “‘ Fractional Pitch Windings for Induction Motors”, 
at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907................6. . 


Discussion on High-Tension Transmission Papers, at Niagara 
Falis, Ni. YF June 264190 Toe oe teats eee late tee iether 
Discussion on ‘‘ Interaction of Synchronous Machines”, at 
Niagara, Falls; N.Y. Jane?25, 1907 soe rreere ie earn 
Discussion on ‘‘ Lightning Arresters”’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., 
June 2519073. ceases aes cues > ann is sare iat nari eee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables as a Means 
of Protecting Transmission Lines Against Lightning ’”’, at 
Niagara Falls, N.ZY., June!26, T9072. sce a teeter eer ee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Location of Broken Insulators and Other Trans- 
mission Line Troubles ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907 
Discussion on ‘‘ Notes on Resistance of Gas-Pipe Grounds ’’, at 
Niagara FalisiaN. Yee} une 2691907 vice. eee eee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Notes on Transformer Testing ’’, at Niagara Falls, 
NG; J umes 26 LOOT eect aes oneatoe reteke te alates esa eee 
Discussion on ‘‘ On the Concentric Method of Teaching Electrical 
Engineering ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 27, 1907...... 
Discussion on ‘‘ Power-Factor, Alternating-Current Inductive 
Capacity, Chemical and Other Tests of Rubber-Covered Wires 
of Different Manufacturers ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 25, 


LOOT we od le See a ae Se ee 
Discussion on ‘‘ Proposed Code of Ethics ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., 
Jane 28s L907 a eeaciy wisegat wn otn ets ached atieccd NOS ene cree ene 


Discussion on ‘‘ Protection of the Internal Insulation of a Static 
Transformer Against High-Frequency Strains’”’, at Niagara 
Falls; (N.Y. Pune! 26,1907 sitet es 2c ie caativeN tee oechee 

Discussion on “‘ Regeneration of Power With Single-Phase Electric 
Railway Motors’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 28, 1907.... 

Discussion on ‘‘ Single-Phase High-Tension Power Transmission ”’, 
at) Niagara, Falls; N.Y... June(28,- 1007)... .pemtets saint ane 

Discussion on ‘‘ Single-Phase Versus Three-Phase Generation for 
Single-Phase Railways ’’, at Niagara Falls, N.Y., June 27, 1907 

Discussion on ‘‘ Some New Methods in High-Tension Line Con- 
struction ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907......... 

Discussion on ‘‘ Some Power Transmission Economics’’, at 
Niagara Palle: Noo .,.Juner 28007 caite see reer ee eee 

Discussion on “‘ The Attitude of the Technical School Toward the 
Profession of Electrical Engineering ”’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., 
June :27,, 10072 Sib. o.¥i..6's Peete a ere ere aeons. Ra neers rere 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Choice of Frequency for Single-Phase Alter- 
nating-Current Railway Motors”’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., 
June! 27 LOO cc > ins fs arc eia uae ARE ty lca Reet © ean en 

[S gees on ‘‘ The Grounded Neutral ”’, at New York, October 11, 
WOO YF ie secave ad saat e. 0: « .oarBiygwish shige tha ie salah otarees Acree «fe IAG eres i ae 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Ratio of Heating Surface to Grate Surface as 
a Factor in Power Plant Design ’’, at New York, December 13, 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Transmission Plant of the Niagara, Lockport 
& Ontario Power Company ”’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 

Discussion on ‘‘ The Vector Diagram of the Compensated Single- 
Phase Alternating-Current Motor ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., 
June 28, 1907 

Discussion on ‘‘ Track Circuit Signaling on Electrified Roads ’’, at 
Niagara Falls,-N< Yj e]iame: 28> 1007s jaune ceanare cores eer 

Discussion on ‘ Transmission Line Towers and Economical 
Spans ’’, at Niagara Falls, N. Y., June 26, 1907 


© 0p 0.0 1: Sree & G0he Swe ee ee Gla Oe 6 Ore le b Oi 016 ee Gin & ete ane 


4) 90a, 0, 6 en ere 


INDEX. 


Electrical Engineering, On the Concentric Method of Teaching.... 
Electrical Engineering, The Attitude of The Technical School 
BeowaEa te -PrOlession Off garcia oe cianaieiaen ic dc c's maievigads Kanne 


magmibeting. Protective APPATatuss sco. <.5<cisle + cee cs oa caaeie st 
PENG SE CORO 500 COUC, O6 4H Mac ar) Bak vse nas oiote sin ae deine oes 
ip Emicem Proposed: Coderots (CRE vised.) eens casee aoa aciewie hn « 
ibxauiste tea mime winpime etait mA 05h tc peroneal tau ene sedeueeoncece dae Ses = 
Experience With a Grounded Neutral on the High-Tension Sys- 
tem of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company. (Illustrated.) 
(GCOA CRP OGE SEN tyerpeee tee neers st well pars: cs ate, Soho cues ones 
Fifteen versGs 25 Cycles for Heavy Railways.................. 
Fractional Pitch Windings for Induction Motors. (Illustrated.) 
(C. A. Adams, W. K. Cabot, and G. 4 Irving, Jr.)..... vache 
Frequency, Choice of, for Single-Phase Alternating-Current Rail- 
Rey MO LOTS a Dine peyerrrn cn ciswere ie ensue 6+ ose ied cide peloae s 
Gas-Pipe Grounds, Notes on Resistance of..........0... 000-005 
Generation, Single-Phase Versus Three-Phase, for Single-Phase 
IVEnl ENE G, ota DHEA OO eC CR Crake, CMa Tee Get ee ani ate ena eS 
Crap item Me hoCcttla Le Cieras aytaitecteeedkeieicc &, evel Aberetsloei Sineieercia x ¢ 
Grate Surface, the Ratio of Heating Surface to, as a Factor in 
IBOWe mati GMOCsIS TN pian rane ck cme oter esc ctem a tse ee ap Stare eeayait 
Grounded Cables, Lightning Rods and, as a Means of Protecting 
Mransmission Wines Against Lightning..........0...+...00- 
Grounded Neutral on the High-Tension System of the Inter- 
borough Rapid Transit Company, Experience Witha....... 
Grounded Neutral, The, (Illustrated.) (Ff. G. Clark.)........... 
Grounded Neutral, With and Without Series Resistance, in High- 
Tension Systems, The. (Illustrated.) (Paul M. Lincoln.)... 
Grounds, Gas-Pipe, Notes on Resistance of..........,0 0000.00 
Heating of Copper Wires by Electric Currents, The. (Illustrated.) 
(CAMPER TIVCLLV NANG EIR) SUE POT. ) jee, snd on oe vigient © so se yee 
Heating Surface, Ratio of, to Grate Surface as a Factor in Power 
JES GAR IDES ral ou Beceencd ale» Gor Gag Bee en RR een ee nee 
High-Frequency Strains, Protection Against, of the Internal Insu- 
LVOMMOM A OLAC MUrAnGl OLMICL lle tentue Poel ge gees) owls eps wy ean 
High-Tension Line Construction, Some New Methods in........ 
High-Tension Power Transmission, Single-Phase......../...... 
High-Tension Transmission Lines, A New Type of Insulator for. . 
High-Tension System of the Interborough Rapid Transit Com- 
pany, Experience With a Grounded Neutral on the........ 
High-Tension Systems, The Grounded Neutral, With and Without 
BETIOSE RR CSISEATICER IT ea cnet vcie te ried rarer eis "a. ia) of SELON uaPereas auenaie 
Induction Motors, Fractional Pitch Windings for............... 
Dadtction Motors, Ziezageleakage Of. . o. ot wie ahs ates + gle ole nari 


1831 


1394 


1525 
1155 
1221 
1555 
1441 


1429 
969 
1643 


1469 
1693 
1535 

937 


1832 INDEX. 


Inductive Capacity, Alternating-Current, of Rubber-Covered 
Wires 5.0/5 tds DSF ode ee ele, beck ele che, eter ots) re = ate ee oe 
Inductive Disturbances in Telephone Lines. (Illustrated.) (Louts 
Cohen.) wis ache 5 fee ik 0 ol po bck aee Sion a are eee eee eto 


Insulation, Extra, on the End-Windings of Transformers, Choke- 
Coils Verse. Eee 2 ne en eee fete as ee aes 
Insulation, Internal, of a Static Transformer, Protection of, Against 
High-Frequency SttainS- <->... se sere ere ae oe “eases 
Insulator, A New Type of, for High-Tension Transmission Lines. . 
Insulators, Broken, and Other Transmission Troubles, Location of 
Interaction of Synchronous Machines. A Graphical Solution by 
Means of a New Circle Diagram. (Illustrated.) (Morgan 


Brooks.) \.20 00 OP Pe oe rn a ee. ee 
Interborough Rapid Transit Company, Experience With a 
Grounded Neutral on the High-Tension System of the...... 


Leakage, Zigzag, of Induction Motors. 2 oi. «es or eet eee 
Lightning Arresters, Commercial, Practical Testing of.......... 
Lightning Arrester Test; A’ Proposed\<™ 722-7) ie «str ere 
Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables as a Means of Protecting 
Transmission Lines Against Lightning. (Illustrated.) Nor- 
man Rowe rns so es Pe a ee 
Line Construction, High-Tension, Some New Methods in........ 
Line’ Troubles, ‘Transmiss'on, Location “Of JJ. .- 24. eee 
Lines, High-Tension Transmission, A New Type of Insulator for. . 
Lines, Telephone, Inductive Disturbances in................... 
Lines, Transmission, Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables as a 
Means of ‘Protecting, Against Lightning. Yoo. J-24.- eee 
Location of Broken Insulators and Other Transmission Line 
Froubles: .(Ilustrated.) -(Z..C. iNacholson:)2- 22 ees Oe oe ee 
Locomotives, Steam and Electric, Comparative Performance of. . 
Machines; ‘Synchronous, Interaction”of/ 97.2 9e) 22... es eee 
Method, Concentric, of Teaching Electrical Engineering......... 
Methods, Some New, in High-Tension Line Construction........ 
Motor, Single-Phase Alternating-Current, Compensated, The 
Vector Diagram’ of 22. ier eee one 
Motors, Commutating-Pole Direct-Current Railway............. 
Motors, Induction, Fractional Pitch Windings for.............. 
Motors, Induction, Zigzag: Leakage*of (05.22.55. eee eee 
Motors, Railway, Single-Phase Alternating-Current, Choice of Fre- 
Quency: for. 2... ves ius See elatite es fe uta es a a ee 
eke stale Dace Electric Railway, Regeneration of Power 
he CRE RE RMR Pei ec ire wrMCINIC. Siciucosnter nl eye Socyoienes Bower a 
Neutral, Grounded, Experience with, on the High-Tension System 
of the Interborough Rapid Transit Company.............. 
Neutral The,Grotinded 2.7 .9,, seat eee 
Neutral, The Grounded, With and Without Series Resistance in 
High-Tension: Systems, cscs cee ee eee ee 
New CO, Recorder, A. (Illustrated.) (C.O. Mailloux.)........ 
New Methods, Some, in High-Tension Line Construction........ 
New Type of Insulator for High-Tension Transmission Lines, A. 
(Illustrated.) ~ (Eat Hewlett.) #7. 2 ee 

pita tot Sarge and Ontario Power Company, The Transmission 
ch) gfe) RINE MES Aoti, Sedu ire esos cache et osrmsecn cme ax 

Notes on Resistance of Gas-Pipe Grounds. (Illustrated.) (J. L. R. 
FaydOn,) 0 re Bh Doo Chae ee ne 
Notes on Transformer Testing. (Illustrated.) (H.W. Tobey.).... 
On the Concentric Method of Teaching Electrical Engineering. 
(iilustrated.) (Vi Karapetot, years. cies ee een 
Performance, Comparative, of Steam and Electric Locomotives. . 
Pitch Windings, Fractional, for Induction Motors...... AR 
Plant; An’ Exhaust: Steam: Turbine. ..<:--4:.9. 1.90) ee 
Plant, Transmission, of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power 
Comipantyene: :.i cen AMR Senseo, Sh cad ae nae ee 


997 
1155 
1169 
1173 


1259 
1319 


oe ey 


idee — 


‘ 
—— ss Ve 


es. tpl. aS 


INDEX. 


Power-Factor, Alternating-Current Inductive Capacity, Chemical 
and Other Tests of Rubber-Covered Wires of Different Manu- 
facturers. (Illustrated.) (Henry W. Fisher.) 

Power-Factor of Rubber-Covered Wires 


IN ESN BIRR AT CORO ey aia Aen 2a Re a 


Protecting Transmission Lines Against Lightning, Lightning-Rods - 


andGroundedi Cables ascauMeans-of #0.) 82. his. a ke 
Protection of the Internal Insulation of a Static Transformer 
Against High-Frequency Strains. (lIllustrated.) (Walter S. 
VEO OCI ye Vaan Nee tor oct aece de Man Ly ast hevatht lars iim Ng MADER Serene nk 
Protective Apparatus Engineering. (Illustrated.) (EF. E. F. 
CPC WEOM Mix trie ren ope ee npheat Mae PLAN lade a sick us Meee 
Railroad, Steam, Electrification, Practical Aspects of........... 
Railway Motors, Commutating-Pole Direct-Current............. 
Railway Motors, Single-Phase Alternating-Current, Choice | of 
[CNG HORS ANC yg SHOVEL, ok eles RRS feet RS ee eee Thee ee ae 
Bsc y Motors, Single-Phase Electric, Regeneration of Power 
THOUS cic ea cucitl Sintec aR len hee Stel ote ARN Atte on CO ete SN ae 

Railways, Heavy; 25 Cycles Versus 15 for.........0 6.000522 ee 
Railways, Single-Phase, Single-Phase Versus Three-Phase Genera- 
THEY THOSE, Zin Seer Ope Oa vO Sei ene, AAO cae Eat ae TEN ea oaks er ee 
Ratio of Heating Surface to Grate Surface as a Factor in Power 
Plant Design. (Illustrated.) (Walter S. Finlay.).......... 
IRGEGIRGIEE SINE IN FEN OA OF © Stes are Scar ian et ra RL ee 3 
Regeneration of Power With Single-Phase Electric Railway 
Motors. (Illustrated.) (Wzlliam Cooper.) ............00005 
Resistance of Gas-Pipe Grounds, Notes on..............20)000. 
Resistance, Series, in High-Tension Systems, The Grounded Neu- 
Healey Valier lice WWI EN © tata mute pee ergs uae tes tues Missi csoyecae Sista oes 
Roads, Electrified, Track-Circuit Signaling on................. 
Rubber-Covered Wires, Alternating-Current Inductive Capacity of 
Rubber-Covered Wires, Power-Factor of.........0.". BRB ips? 
Runes otandarcdization, Or the wAC Ie BAR =, scan. ccs byereysucisleveleeen 
Series Resistance in High-Tension Systems, The Grounded Neutral 
Wr ela ae NINEW BI OVOXEU Econ & Aira chen ie ceeiety hacia Mtn a te anne eek ra ae 
pienalnes track,Circeuit, on Blectrified* Roads... ia. i.e lic es 
Single-Phase Alternating-Current Motor, Compensated, The Vec- 
ingie dl DER MegaeWdehs Wha arr gaia uta toes Wie age cits Se ne Cee ce ae 
Single-Phase Alternating-Current Railway Motors, Choice of Fre- 
Cos Sa NAG OR brimk are eye Decor “ifs Rt APN oo ee eRe sei 
Single-Phase Electric Railway Motors, Regeneration of Power With 
Single-Phase High-Tension Power Transmission.  (Illustrated.) 
(Te Nig Fa) BY ou re ce eres cS ce ec tag a ee 


Single-Phase Versus Three-Phase Generation for Single-Phase 


Railways. (A. H. Armstrong.)  (Illustrated.).............. 
Some New Methods in High-Tension Line Construction. (Illus- 
trated.) (Hl. WOBuck.) «0 ives ig eee eS igen ve os 
Some Power Transmission Economics. (lllustrated.) (Frank G. 


THOOIEE ho Ep OC RIE Py MI TS ANTM OT IE sca 


1833 


1834 INDEX. 


Spans, Economical, Transmission Line Towers and............. 
Standardization» Rules‘of thejA LE: ys 22. ieee Sete 
Static Transformer, Protection of the Internal Insulation of, 
Against High=Frequency Strains’) aiare.. « pi\ceal ete ope oie toner aes 
Steam and Electric Locomotives, Comparative Performance of... . 
Steam Railroad Electrification, Practical Aspects of......... e's 
Steam: Turbines Plant, An Exhausts. 22 cise ee ia) ieee tens 
Strains, High-Frequency, Protection of the Internal Insulation of 
a Static Transformer Against sos. = ee tee tal enen eee 
Switchboard Practice for Voltages of 60,000 and Upwards. (Il 
dustrated.)-\ (Stephen OA Mayes. voce. gaol eee ne ee 
Synchronous Machines, Interaction of. ....5...5.2 50s: oceans 
Technical School, The Attitude of, Toward the Profession of 
Electrical Engirieerin gaits cyercie) ott unss ls JS isha, aloe eet 
Telephone Lines, Inductive Disturbances in.................2% 
Test, AeProposéed. Lightning sAtresterii sn 1-)< «1a < aye et sera arena nee 
Testing, Practical, of Commercial Lightning Arresters.......... 
esting. Transformers Notes'Onin 2 sista sel auntie fletens eperetctens) ae tees 
Tests, Chemical and Other, of Rubber-Covered Wires.......... 
Three-Phase Generation for Single-Phase Railways, Single- 
Phase Verstis.': cezc.e Nets ae eee al ee a te zeta ee cia 
Towers, Transmission Line, and Economical Spans...........-.. 
Track-Circuit Signaling on Electrified Roads.  (lllustrated.) 
(Cee Prederrch El owards), auc een tte kee ee eae eran act Lol aa 
Transtormer, esting: Notes oni). seritine cca nie aie ee ep omer eee 
Transformer, Static, Protection of the Internal Insulation of, 
Against, High-Frequency otrainsha., moles mene hee ete 
Transformers, Choke-Coils Versus Extra Insulation on End- 
Wir dings Of. 2 tet Ve cee oiw ete Bho) «CURE aan alta a ene ena 
Transmission, Economics, Somes Powetwn. ...setalesee ieee 
Transmission Line Towers and Economical Spans. (Illustrated.) 
CLD AES SS CHOLESE) shnetp aio Mvecn sy cheek deh ceteate a aie Tee Ee 
(ap ebsiee Line Troubles, Location of Broken Insulators and 
BIOL Se CRASS. Sis hee kote Ae eh orale seus S. a uk Pare ON etl eel ais rtenee eaten 
Transmission Lines, High-Tension, A New Type of Insulator for. . 
Transmission Lines, Lightning-Rods and Grounded Cables as a 
Means -of Protecting, Against. Lightning i...) o-auee eee 
Transmission Plant of the Niagara, Lockport and Ontario Power 
Company, The. (Illustrated.) (Ralph D. Mershon.)........ 
Transmission, Single-Phase High-Tension Power............... 
Durbine- Plant, An Bsxhaush Steams fantncn stl. siete cee tel eee 
Twenty-five Versus 15 Cycles for Heavy Railways. (N. W. Storer.) 
Vector Diagram of the Compensated Single-Phase Alternating-Cur- 
rent Motor, The. (Illustrated.) (W. I, Slichter.).......... 
Voltages of 60,000 and Upwards, Switchboard Practice for...... 
Windings, Fractional Pitch, for Induction Motors.............. 
Wires, Copper, The Heating of by Electric Currents............ 
Wires, Rubber-Covered, Alternating-Current Capacity, Chemical, 
and-~Other ‘Vests of Mei etn esha hen eo an 
Zigzag ceri of Induction Motors. (Illustrated.) (R. E. Hell- 
mund. 


INDEX OF AUTHORS 


Berg, E. in Discussion. . SEA MS ree .1047, 1204, 1314 
Bibbins, ME Ros Dieriesioa Ohh Manure ue Rae RO kr 


Siva Valliamn eDISClssto museca: acne wen seccth aden ia Cealn me nt 
Eelaimoer Geos |r) Misessione cs. ja ious. soak na eeeeen dele 1258, 
inlay Walters. Jr, Paper, 1/097 Discussion ...4 te backs oo. 
Finney, John H. Diidciecicae wien cpa eae My hak. Br. 
Fisher, Henry W., Paper, 997; Discussion . 10215) 10238, 
Fraser, ie Wee Discussion . Ps 1192; 1314, 1315, 
Gill, Lester W., Diccuesionie fer Geel Piste) whiten aera 
Hayden, es R., Raper 209 DisCUssto nis isi te einsse Fin see Ia 
Haves; ovepnem Ov Paper, 1ooo;. DISCUSSION . tile Denis Pay anak 
Melita uintGhe RUE cL OR mia aint) frataxin tee mt atone Wile sock) aed eee PMs MOS 


Peele Gree am Vil: eb ELD CI vine Reap Ren RAEN erat atm Arad “hel « cuPAWAteatlS INS Sede rele oke 
odekinsonus. bramcis. qDiseussiom whi. eee seme oe ele a wei leer ae 

NAOOP esa Cilia Mok MOISCUSSIO IM vampires Bug esheets ak = Aes als Oh ed 
Woward, Li Frederic, Paper: 15353. Discussion. 2.51.05 2. hee ee 
lox oMm Mal| me ISCILSEI OIA vray sheer ty ine ac cclieh Ropes ae aN caylee tomes eonen Loe nace cine 
Hutchinson, Cary Discussion), . 235 «hen PAN aR ARE UNAS iets 
- TEpyalreven «Cr vA Ds | Ss eal 262i oer oer eam ees Seat Na me) Al a ae Ea 
HI ACGO See eT SCUSSIO Mirth se elsr ciate. annals aVoRM OLY MapecOe he hace, scent 
Junkersfeld, Peter, IDHISoi SSO abe d tintog tember Aiea een ce Ree 1402, 

Karapetoff, V., Paper, 1441; Discussion, 1374 1457, 1464, 1466, 
Kennelly, A. E., Ra POL etna Paermats Ges ener Suey cere sends. stNauenot a 
Kintner, S. M., Bee A GLCGSS eM D rst orb (tsi oy oleramauniars Ae er) Rr 1190, 
Kreisinger, Henry, IDISCHESI OM ae reatvon ee A Mee Rt Re. 
Weer We O14, DISCUSSION +. sare seo eh ei anit eat atone ths 1148, 1195, 

Lincoln, iis on DISCUSS OTST aa mine ee COR een ues oan 1418, 1484, 
Lincoin, Pe M., Paper, 1585; Discussion....... 12916-1358, 1873, 
Lucke, Charles Be er eeianit te Cee eS re AO ihe ume rs 

Lyford, OLS: Jrs, ID ee Shera Lark ee aR 1201, 
Lyman, James, al CUTER Cir eg ee te ER cart irk ey, gene 
iC AMISE er eA OM PISCUSSIOM, ex eerry ara ul id cual on arehulble uae «si gwite al Je 


1§36 INDEX. 


McClellan, William, Discussion..1195, 1360, 1374, 1398, 1426, 1684 
McCormick, B. T., Discussion . - 5 RD PRG ASO aR aml aed 
Mailloux, C. O., Paper Re Te Arh CW fea pe eee ERM A engi s ocho 1771 
Mershon, Ralph D., Paper, 1273; Discussion, 1199, 1204, 1215, 1216, eh 
1256, 1270, 1314, 1315, 1330, 1331, 1362 
Moody, Walter S., Paper, 1173; Discussion) bic ane 1203, 1204 
Moultrop, J. E., THScisSGHI Na. ft lne ont RER UR one eee 1736 
Murray, W. S., ‘Diseusston 2 slacte c co54 he Se le aerate 1680, .1691 
Neall, N. J., Paper, 1139; Discussion, 1145, 1149, 1216, 1254, 1256, 1622 
Nicholson, xe C., Paper, 1319; Disctissidmr 2a eee a ae 1360 
Nordstrum, IDE D., PHUSCUSSIOM sso oe ero yc) See renee iain sivas teehee es 1464 
Norris, Henry TER oP apericies 5. thre aerate ge Core eee ie Ba kee 1429 
Osgood, Farley, DSCUSsION eet ed k Le ee 1207, 1257 
Paine, F. B. H., Discussion, 1215, 1216, 1252, 1271, 1314, 1315, 1331, 1358, 
157 : 1628 
Pattersons GS We sDiscussion: as ae: oe oe ccs Oe) Eales haley enone eaeigeds 1462 
Perkins, Charles ic DISCUSSION Kes, ch snerepsiazecea cha onaneee ea Nea seins etane 1552 
Pikler, A. Eee Disctission EAL SON pS oy Ber Gin, raat sei keds cohen ie). Mae nS 1190 
Pope, Ralph W., T)ASCUSSION Pon ihe sash ela ie ee eg 1270 
Pratt, A. C., Discussion BRR EL hs ENR Me eo ACre Ef CS 1206 
Revver Walter tik er DISCUSSION 0 le cased nay hel ec he Oks hte. asta anton ol tara as 1726 
REISE “tsb, DISCUSSION atk No este et ead ae NT Hale te Cae) de he ee 1394 
Rhodes, George I., Paper, 1605; Discussion......... be, eatin 1630, 1640 
Ricken s Wiis] MSOUSSTOMis clan bette eres peetes Se ES ePees) Mie ol Sac be bean oh tae 1252 
(Ra hinsoOrt- saw be ESC USSEOT con at qromimakeiy crow re fsx erehitgsas teen ereee 1330;) 1ask 
TROWE x CNOLNIA LU PAD OU x. \orarsrn, + Canenetcy nt Catalina rtdetons aliccitdis nageiwe aesliue) mutate 1239 
Rstmnren. bts EM SCUSSIOIS, jicue selete tacit sheet mate corps seeshe 1200, 13858 
scholess DER: Papen il22 1: Discussion tse, <.<% lifer: =the -« a efelceerts 1256 
Schwantes catia, WIscussiomyis, 2 2.waccue een ater ee secede aaah ica 1625 
BON WALZ Phu diac IS CUSS1 Of] ssc atk crcige coasted dake een ane eee Sy oC yaa aed 1581 
Scott. Chass Hy + 1SOUSSIOR catia Oe wie hs eas ol clans 1428, 1465, 1551, 1629 
Sheldon, Samuel, Paper, 937; Discussion:.....5........-.....2.. 1428 
WHE PATTER clea POEs Acmahe sevce ete aaa oth ee ae ths ates elas on 969 
SMP MATL TS. Coos MISCUSSTON ch, cc sordctiaaee Gay Ramee Mahe clalt ehevea rene 1205 
Suchter.s Weck ba peri 527° sDISGUSSIOM. nhs acter ouemr ame Sate taate 1481 
Smith, W. N., Paper, 1693; Discussion. ...1192, 1860, 1397, 1418, 1686 
SOSRCOW IK | ks LIISCUGSION as «vaca clan ee aMre aie Ri sash einian coe ea MES 1733 
Steinmetz, Charles P:, Discussion, 1021, 1024, 1047, 1146, 1196, 1215, 1216, 
1271, 1375, 1899, 1525, 1570, 1580, 1581, 1631, 1687 
Stevensom JH W.. Discussion sao diel anette ssc atehaw gs b)e8 wie 1023, 1025 
Stillwell, L. B., Discussion. . Nt RR ner ee .13895, 1482 
Stone, Charles W.., Discussion. . She Lok d ascii sah Me Be ncn, eae "1193, 1394, 1627 
WHOLE INGE Vy eaper, L3S5s- DiSCUSSLOD. siz anly eles. srulcittent <sebelonsis oleae 1405 
Stott G Discussion; 102331374.) 1408 1426; 2551.) 1553. see 
ELAIOS Meise LHSCUSSION 2a suc wet ecu Ms BORER hens Bee 1359, 1874, 1624 
Thomas, Percy H., Paper, 1097; Discussion ........... 1148, 1216, 1250 
obey prea W te aper, 11 7O%« Discussion: fa. srcsdhewnecs cnrya ee eee ies 1204 
Torchio, Philip, PM SCUSHON es ratcbig Pa’ tnidhn vip nieey Tey atone ae aaah 1615 
Wait, Henry PMID AD EL Wet wis eeee, 8 Saray uch emp un TOUTS ant ek SRR 1739 
Waddell, Charles Bras DISCUSSION Moartisia it Ia oak ie. ee: OTe 1150. 
Wells, W. EAT TISCIISSIOTNS Not Vid tov ahstecn ceh-155 Ne RIS aN TOS, RUDI a 1724 
Wheeler Schitwler-okaats; Discussion: «crcacs vs he ue oie a he 1426 
Winitehead «|e ISGUSSLOM ts cht ta haan aie teal ne ena ame 1270 
Wiloue a WVal latin | sy Us Cassiotiits war cigdeeise® asaehins potters Net canes 1675 
WiaLSOM Gay Ly LIISCUSSIONI candies anc ont Beste meueditee Mee eee 1582 


Young, E. J., Paper 


Rewiy Pip Aavelb :¢. 6.0 biimbete. (e) paple iat wr Mlavuyeney 6 16, ase ke Soe with, ae Ma ae im te 


PRINTED IN U.S.A 


DATE DUE 


GAYLORD 


a Sa 


PO bent an FN: 


Mehra > ; " 
ete Sa i TN he pe 


