SS 


LS 
SS 


Sees USERS N ESSER 
SS Ss 
SS SSS 


SS 
SS SSS 


red f aE 


cas tears ubnnnnataqeer aes Cud etme IORNN 


JNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


AT CHICAGO 
vy 


Ft i yy} jy — Hh if ef i | }} 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 
UNDERGRADUATE DIVISION 
CHICAGO 


LIBRARY 


i 
i 
i 
| 
I 
: 
| 
I 
i 
i 
i 


+ 
i 
| 
i 
i 
| 
i 
| 
I 
| 
I 
I 
I 
! 
{ 
I 
I 
i 
i 


! 
| 
| 
+ 


nt te tnt tae 


a | 


i 
Su Yes 


— 


a 


~ TRANSACTIONS 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE. 


Pe vVOl. <xXX, PART-II 


JP “ 
oo. 
; 


Roos PUBLISHED BY THE 
_ AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 
83 WEST THIRTY-NINTH STREET 


NEW YORK, N.Y., U.S. A. 
1911 


3 


io ae scar: ¥ a 
“ ae : 
_ “Fe ea 
: 7 oY, 
- pot 
Soe 


Copyright, 1911 
by the 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


. ‘ 

Press of McIlroy & Emmet, 22 Thames Street, New Y 
A pe 
bee 

; 1 
- . mJ 


CON TENTS 


MEETING AT CHICAGO, JUNE 26-30, 1911 


The Commercial Loading of Telephone Circuits in the Bell System— 
Dp VabancrokvGrmerarci, (LUUSITALed)).2 sheen ee aa ee ce ne 1743 

Discussion by E. H. Bangs, F. B. Jewett, E. H. Colpitts, E. B. 

Crafts, Allard Smith, J. G. Wray, Frank F. Fowle, Bancroft 


CherardigGrD poMepardsone.ceqer. sccm 6 cele et Sates 1765 
Problems in Telephone Traffic Engineering—By F. P. Valentine, 

ULUSET ALCO) enn aE ele aes Be ee, wh. Sa, SUR 1775 
Discussion by A. P. Allen, W. Lee Campbell, Bancroft 

CrhenataivanGelerese Valentines sk. sesso cate ce beeee Ooo Pons 1797 

. Electric Line Oscillations—By G. Faccioli, (Illustrated) ............ 1803 


Discussion by C. P. Steinmetz, Max H. Collbohm, D. B. 
Feushmonresande mercy stl LhOMas: «214s, 46 Nercss eriamie wie sie 1851 


The Electric Strength of Air-II—by J. B. Whitehead (Illustrated)... 1857 


The Law of Corona and the Dielectric Strength of Air—By F. W. 
BSC MMe CLULESTRCICD) eauctatac, @c, ae wcvans ety fie sk sietasr ak didaehen oe whee 1889 
Discussion by C. P. Steinmetz, Cassius M. Davis, A. B. 
Hendricks, Charles F. Scott, Harris J. Ryan, J. B. Whitehead, 
1, Why SSP GS ee OE gc:64 coe Bam Gee Gita 6/0 SRE Cte ee eer eee ee mo 1966 
High-Tension Transmission, Introduction—By Percy H. Thomas.. 1989 


Transmission System of the Great Western Power Company—By 


EEN Oy arteal, MEWS ICU) ro oo recn ae eee ae est ne ee ewes 1994 
Transmission System of the Southern Power Company—By W. 5. 
WSCC HME CLELUSERGICM) Scpueteran tae etn ethers ncdtemee ae ahe sake ea) ix tae. she 1998 
Transmission System of the Great Falls Power Company—By M. 
ERE Dee riemee CLILUSETOLCE Norte ciate ens cre ere 1s rain e snerer8 obs lols oy3 gia Wide ase 2002 
Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company 
——Bygbdeelanscomes (LUUStrated)). cee oe tahoe see 2007 
Discussion by M. H. Collbohm, Paul M. Lincoln, L. C. 
Nicholson, N. J. Neall, J. F. Vaughan, Hugh Pastoriza....... 2015 
The Economical Design of Direct-Current Electromagnets—By R. 
VV Allcatn Gl Lemme CL ILIESERGLEC: eh icieuh ces v.02 8s eicbaes oe <ats Sie ieee Stale iv ere 2019 
Discussion by Frank F. Fowle, Charles R. Moore............ 2052 
Electrolytic Corrosion in Reinforced Concrete—By C. Edward 
Magnusson and G.H. Smith. (lilustrated)............0.00.. 2055 


Discussion by Burton McCollum, E. W. Stevenson, G. D. 
Shepardson, George A. Hoadley, A. S. Langsdorff, Maxmilian 
Toch, Guy F. Shaffer, Harry Barker and W. L. Upson.......... 2080 


Single-Phase Induction Motor—By H. Weichsel. (J/lustrated) gine 


Discussion by Theodore Hoock, H. Weichsel................ 2125 
Choice of Rotor Diameter and Performance of Polyphase Induction 
Motors—By Theodore Hoock. (Jllustrated).......... oe 2127 
Discussion by E. F. W. Alexanderson, C. J. Fechheimer, S. 
Haar, J. D. Nies, TheodoreHoocks< 2.0.0. ee ghia 2159 
The Application of Current Transformers to Three-Phase Circuits— 
* By J.R. Craighead. (Jiustrated).... 0... ccc cece eee eee . 2167 


111 


iv 


Cost of Transformer Losses—By E. C. Stone and R. W. Atkinson, 


(THlustrated) ... 6... c seen cee nee nee ne tens ee eens ce ne cece 2181 
Discussion by A. H. Pikler, W. C. Smith, E. A. Wagner, H. 
B. Gear, R..W: Atkinson. Sam 02) aes cnekes pies eee ee 2200 
Solution to Problems in Sags and eg ee Wm. Le eos Robert- 
son. (ilustrated).. 2209 
Sag Calculations for Suspended Wires By ‘Perey fer Tienias! ; 
(Tllabs trated sc. jacere os ein 0 eit he noua betnet oy te geto tel iene eee ee 2229 


The Mechanical and Electrical Characteristics of Transmission 
Lines—By Harold Pender and H. F. Thomson. (Jllustrated).. 2241 

Discussion by Paul M. Lincoln, L. C. Nicholson, N. J. Neall, 

Jean Bart Balcomb, W. L. R. Robertson. H. F. Thomson, Hi. V. 

Carpenter, Hugh Pastoriza, R. S. Brown, Frank F. Fowle, R. C. 


Darrow, P. H. Thomas, Harold Petidetasccc2 st oe cee 2280 
The High Efficiency ray tae ote Insulator—A. O. Austin. (Illus- 
W7GLed) eres 2303 
Discussion by ES Ee ‘Creighton, Paul M. ‘Lincoln, Pp. H. 
Thomas, E. M. Hewlett, N. J. Neall, A. O. Austin. . 2329 
Tentative Scheme of Organization and Adminiatratian! for. a State 
University—By Ralph D. Mershon. (Jilustrated)............. 2337 


Discussion by A. H. Ford, C. F. Harding, B. B. Brackett, A. S 
Langsdorf, George D. Shepardson, M. C. Beebe, W. L. Upson, 
Ralph: D. Mershon : ticre. saccuciets ws then olecetcne re ievaie alls eo eee 2345 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, OCTOBER 13, 1911. 


A Theory of Commutation and its Application to Interpole Machines 
——By By GoLamme./ (Hiusivated) ia. cack concer seers 2359 

Discussion by H. F. T. Erben, Geo. L. Hoxie, H. M. Hobart, 

Malcolm MacLaren, C. A. Adams, C. F. Scott, James Burke, 


RiBstreat: GE, Wilson, 5:.Gs.samme. ones emia eters 2405 
MEETING AT NEW YORK, NOVEMBER 10, 1911. 
aenaneue eas of Iron at Frequencies up to 200,000 Cycles— ; 
By Eo K. W. Alexanderson., (ilusiraied)....... + «mnie cone 2433 

Discussion by Harold Pender, B. A. Behrend, Charles P. 
Steinmetz, Reginald, A. Fessenden, F. B. Silsbee.............. 2449 


MEETING AT NEW YORK, DECEMBER 8, 1911. 


Methods of Varying the Speed of Alternating-Current Motors—By 
Gus.A. Maier’y “Zilustrated)\). 0.8 sees ee a ee eee 2455 
Discussion by H. W. Buck, R. N. Dickinson, W. N. Smith, 
G. A. Maier, C. e Fechheimer, BuG; ee CaP; - Steinmetz, 
C. O. Mailloux. . . 2485 


COMMUNICATION. 


Tables of Hyperbolic Functions in Reference to Long Alternating- 
Current Transmission Lines—By A. E. Kennelly. (Jilustrated) 2495 


APPENDIX 
Turin Meeting of the rieerae es Electrotechnical Commission 
September'7-13, 1911.00. ew ee ee 2507 
The International Electrotechnical Congress of Turin.............. 2519 
Standardization Rules of the A, I. E. E..... 05.00.00 cc cecccccces 2535 


Report of the Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 
90) LONG janis 15 i a dice ss be «aunts eee “ie eeittiertey LOGO 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- | 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 28, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. BE. 


THE COMMERCIAL LOADING OF TELEPHONE 
CIRCUITS IN THE BELL SYSTEM 


BY BANCROFT GHERARDI 


The year 1900 may be considered to have marked the be- 
ginning of a very important period in the development of tele- 
phony. For some time prior to that date it had been known 
to those. who gave study to the matter that the transmission 
efficiency .of long telephone circuits would be improved by in- 
creasing the uniformly distributed inductance of the circuit. 
This knowledge, however, did not lead to any direct commercial 
results for the reason that no one was able to point out any 
practical method of increasing the distributed inductance of a 
telephone circuit without bringing in difficulties of one kind 
or another which were fatal. 

This apparently insuperable difficulty in obtaining improved 
results by the use of distributed inductance directed the atten- 
tion of the mathematicians and physicists to the question of 
whether the results sought for might not be attained by the use 
of inductance coils placed at intervals in the circuit instead of 
by undertaking to distribute the inductance uniformly along 
the circuit. Vaschy, Heaviside and others either suggested or 
unsuccessfully tested the insertion of self-induction in coils on 
actual lines as a means of increasing their transmission efficiency. 
No practical results followed from their work and no actual 
progress was made in the matter of using lumped inductance 
to improve the transmission efficiency of telephone circuits 
until the year 1900, when the patents of Professor M. I. Pupin, 
dealing with the reducing of attenuation of electrical waves, 

1743 


1744 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


were issued. Professor Pupin,! and Dr. George A. Campbell,” 
who had also worked on this problem, have published several 
papers dealing with it. These authors discuss fully the mathe- 
matical theory of improving the transmission efficiency of tele- 
phone circuits by means of placing thereon inductance coils at 
intervals. The papers referred to establish the fact that in- 
ductance in coils spaced suitably along a telephone circuit 
will produce the same effects as uniformly distributed inductance 
and show us how to suitably locate these inductance coils. 
The matter of suitably spacing the inductance coils is of vital 
importance and must be kept in mind because the spacing of the 
inductance coils is the key to the use of lumped inductance and 
it is from the failure to establish this fact and give due weRAS 
to it that the earlier workers failed. 

I shall not undertake here to go over the theoretical ground 
which has already been so well covered in the papers referred to, 
but before describing some of the practical applications of load- 
ing to open wire lines and cables, and discussing the results 
which have been obtained and mentioning some of the diffi- 
culties which have been overcome, I will state the results of the 
fundamental work on this question for those who do not care to 
follow through the mathematical papers on this subject. 

In the study of any telephone line, with reference to its effi- 
ciency as.a means of transmitting speech, two important factors 
suse be considered. These we ordinarily characterize as 

“volume” and “ quality.” 

Volume refers to the loudness of the sound which may be 
obtained from the telephone receiver at the distant end of the 
line, and the efficiency of the line as regards this factor is de- 
termined by the ratio of the amount of energy received at the 
distant end of the line to the amount of energy put into the line 
at the transmitting end. 

Quality refers to the clearness of the speech which may be 
obtained from the current at the receiving end of the line. The 
efficiency of the line as regards quality is determined by the degree 
that the shape of the current wave at the receiving end of the 
line approximates to that of the current wave impressed upon 


1. Transactions of American Mathematical Society, page 259, July, 
1900; Transactions A. J. E. E., 1900, XVII, p. 445; TRANSACTIONS 
A.I. E. E., 1899, XVI, p. 93; Electrical World and Engineer, October 
12, 1901, page 587. 


2. Philosophical Magazine, March, 1903. 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1745 


the line at the sending end. A line which would transmit all 
the frequencies concerned in the telephonic current with equal 
attenuations of all these frequencies and with the same velocity 
would transmit without distortion, and its quality might be 
considered to be perfect. 

For the present I will confine my attention to the matter of 
the volume of speech transmitted. The formula for the at- 
tenuation of a telephone circuit, excluding the effects of terminal 
conditions which react on the portions of the line near the ends, is 


~a=/s VRP L) (SHRP C)+E(SR-PLO) () 


in which the symbols have the following significance: 
a=attenuation constant per unit length. 


R=resistance s & £ 
L=inductance s 
C=capacity ri - 4 


S =conductance 

p=2 7 (frequency). 
This attenuation constant is a measure of the efficiency of the 
line, for on any line if the amount of current impressed on it at 
the sending end is known, and the attenuation constant is known, 
the amount of current at any point along the line may be de- 
-termined by the formula 


1=I] e7me (2) 


in which i=the current at any point; 
IT=the initial current, and 
m=the distance from the initial point of the line to the 
point at which the current (2) is to be ascertained. 
Equation (1) may be simplified somewhat by making 


S=0, 


as this item S, representing leakage and dielectric dissipation, 
is always made as small as is commercially practicable and is, 
in most cases, sufficiently small to be negligible in its effect 
upon the general result obtained. With this simplification, 
equation (1) becomes 


ee PL (VR +p L?— pL) (3) 


1746 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


An examination of this equation shows that the attenuation 
constant will be reduced as the inductance of the circuit, L, is 
increased. I have already mentioned the fact that no satis- 
factory commercial method has been suggested or devised for 
uniformly increasing the inductance. The result of the work 
published about 1900 shows us, however, that we can obtain 
the same favorable effects by placing suitably spaced lumped 
inductance in the circuit as would be obtained from uniformly 
distributed inductance without the fatal difficulties encountered 
in endeavoring to place any considerable amount of distributed 
inductance. This work shows us that if more than inductance 
coils per wave length are placed upon a telephone circuit the 
effect of these coils will be approximately the same as the effect 
of an equal amount of inductance uniformly distributed along 
the circuit. If less than a coils per wave length are placed the _ 
results are unfavorable. As the number of coils per wave 
length is increased above 7 the effect very rapidly approaches 
the effect produced by uniformly distributed inductance so that 
if as many as six coils per wave length are placed on the circuit 
the effect of the inductance thus placed is within 4 per cent of 
that of uniformly distributed inductance. The wave length in 
a telephone circuit is easily computed by the following formula: 


2 2 
/ 4 V (R+ tp L’) (+p C2) 4 (SR - p? * / ©) (4) 


in which the symbols have the same meaning as in (1) above. 
To apply this formula to a circuit which it is proposed to load, 
it is necessary of course to take account of the reaction of the 
inductance which is to be added to the circuit in the form of 
loading coils, because this inductance affects the wave length. 
Therefore, the inductance value in the formula given above must 
include the proposed loading. In order that all frequencies 
which are of importance in connection with the transmission of 
articulate speech shall be cared for by the proposed loading, the 
frequency employed in this formula must be the highest fre- 
quency which takes a necessary part in the clear transmission of 
speech. It is not found that it is necessary that this spacing of 
the loading coils should be absolutely uniform. It is important, 
however, that the spacing should not depart substantially from 
uniformity. 


Without undertaking here to give the equations dealing with 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1747 
the effects of loading on the quality or clearness of speech, it 
may be stated that it is found both mathematically and ex- 
perimentally that loading makes the attenuation more nearly 
equal as between the different frequencies which are important 
in connection: with speech transmission and that loading, there- 
fore, increases the clearness of such speech and improves the 
quality of the line, particularly on underground cable circuits 
where, on account of the relatively large amount of capacity 
in relation to the other characteristics of the circuit, the quality 
without loading is noticeably inferior on long circuits. 

Broadly speaking, it may be stated that what we have done 
in applying loading to long telephone lines is to adopt the neces- 
sary measures to enable us to obtain the advantages of a high 
potential transmission system, that is, of transmitting the 
electrical energy from the sending end to the receiving end of 
the line with a high voltage and a small current as compared 
with the smaller voltage and higher current which is found on 
unloaded lines. That this is the result which we are actually 
aecomplishing by loading our lines is shown not only from the 
study of the equations dealing mathematically with the propaga- 
tion of telephone currents over loaded and unloaded lines, but 
it is also further established by actual studies and tests on 
working lines. We have, therefore, broadly speaking, taken the 
same step which electric light and power people have taken to 
improve the efficiency of their long lines. On account, however, 
of the very different electrical characteristics of telephone lines 
and currents and high tension electric light and power lines and 
currents the means which it has been necessary for us to adopt to 
accomplish this result have been very different from those 
adopted by the electric light and power engineers. 

In the case of power which is to be transmitted at relatively 
low frequencies, usually 66 cycles a second or less, over lines of 
relatively short length, say, cables 10 miles long and open wire 
circuits 100 miles long, it is sufficient in order to transmit the 
energy with a high voltage and a small current to arrange the 
receiving end of the line by means of a transformer or otherwise 
so as to give a great reactance, and to place high potential ap- 
paratus at the sending end of the line. Electrically the line is so 
short that the reactance at the receiving end may be consid- 
- ered to be working directly against the high potential gen- 
erating apparatus at the sending end and hence the desired 
result is obtained. With the telephone current, however, which 


1748 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 © 


is of high frequencies, and telephone lines which are often very 
long, the situation is entirely different. Increased reactance 
placed at the receiving end of the line does not make itself sub- 
stantially felt at all at the sending end of the line. To obtain 
the proper reactance for high potential sending apparatus to work 
against, it is necessary, therefore, in the case of telephone lines 
to distribute the reactance along the line. 

The electrical characteristics of open wire lines and of tele- 
phone cables are substantially different from each other. The 
following table gives the constants of two typical telephone 
cables and of a typical open wire line: . 


Type of circuit Cable Cable Open wire | 
} 
Loop resistance, ohms per mile...........++.+0. 88 28 10.5 
Mutual tapacity, microfarads per mile.......... 0.07 0.07 0.008 . 
Inductance, henrys per mile... 2... 02-00. 0see 0.001 0.001 0.004 — 
Insulation resistance, megohms per mile......... 500 + 500 + 1 to 100 


The essential differences between the characteristics of these 
circuits, from, the point of view of loading, will be seen by 
examining the figures in the above table. In the case of under- 
ground cable, the capacity is relatively high and the inductance, 
on the other hand, is relatively small. On overhead lines, 
however, the capacity is relatively small and the inductance of 
the circuit, even before it is loaded, is not negligible. The insu- 
lation of cables is constant while that of aerial lines varies with 
the weather conditions. On account of these differences in the 
electrical characteristics of these two types of circuit the design 
of the loading coils used on them, the proper spacing of the load- 
ing coils, and the results obtained from loading are somewhat 
different in the two cases. The principles employed are the ~ 
same in both cases, but the different characteristics of the lines 
bring about in the loading different dimensions both electrical 
and mechanical. 

The problem of loading underground cables is as a whole 
easier than that of loading open wire lines and will, therefore, 
first be discussed. 

LOADING TELEPHONE CABLES 

At the present time we are making very general use of two 
styles of loading for telephone cables, one of which is charac- 
terized as “‘ medium ” loading and the other “ heavy ”’ loading. 


oe 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1749 


In a few cases a third style of loading, known as “ light” loading, 
is employed. These three styles of loading differ in the amount 
of inductance placed upon the lines and hence in the improve- 
ment in transmission obtained from the loading. The heavy 
loading, as the term would suggest, places the greatest amount of 
inductance on the line and requires coils placed at closer intervals. 
This heavy loading employs about 0.2 henry per mile and the 
spacing between coils is about 1} miles; medium loading pro- 
vides 0.1 henry per mile with the coil spacing of about 12 
miles; light loading employs 0.05 henry per mile with a spacing 
of about 25 miles. The coils for these various loadings are 
made up on similar cores so that the coils differ only in reference 
to the windings placed thereon. A description of the coil em- 


WINDING 
A ( 
Sa 
= 
PLAN OF CORE. CROSS SECTION OF CORE 
DIAGRAM OF WINDING, AND WINDING ON A-B, 


Fic. 1.—Cable loading coil 


ployed for medium loading and the method of applying it to the 
lines is as follows: 

The coil is of the toroidal type, that is, it has an iron core 
like a ring. Fig. 1 shows a cable coil. The core is made up of 
very fine iron wires. Two copper windings are placed on the 
core, one to go on each side of the line. These windings are also 
indicated on Fig. 2 which shows the way the coils are connected 
‘in to the line. The windings magnetize the core in the same 
direction, that is, the mutual induction is added to the self- 
induction. Over these windings there is placed a layer of tape for 
mechanical protection and the whole coil is then thoroughly 
dried and immersed in a compound to keep out moisture. 

Before leaving the design of the coil it is interesting to consider 


1750 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


the precautions which are taken to reduce losses init. Thisisa 
very important matter as, while the inductance added-to the 
circuit by the coil produces an improvement in the transmission 
efficiency of the circuit, any loss of energy in the coil means, of 
course, a reduction in the efficiency of the circuit, and with 
poorly designed coils it would be easily possible to bring in 
losses so large that they would over-balance all the gain from 
the loading and leave the circuit poorer than before. These losses 
must be particularly guarded against because they are cumula- 
tive. 

The first loss to be considered is a dissipation loss resulting 
from the resistance of the copper winding of the loading coil 
itself. This loss cannot be entirely eliminated, but it may be 
reduced as much as may be desired by increasing the cross-section 
of the winding. There are, however, practical limits to this, as 
the increase in the size of the winding increases all the mechanical 
dimensions of the coil and also tends to increase certain other 
losses. 


Fic. 2.—Diagram of loading coil windings and method of connecting 
into a line 


A second possible loss in loading coils may also develop in the 
copper winding. If the cross-section of the conductor used for 
winding the coil is large, eddy currents may form within the 
conductor itself and these would produce substantial losses. 

Practically this factor is small in cable loading coils, but in 
open wire coils where a conductor of greater cross-section must,be 
employed it has been found necessary to strand this conductor 
and to insulate the various strands from each other. 

In the iron core of the loading coil there are also several possible 
losses. In the first place, there is the hysteresis loss. After a 
great deal of work it has been found practicable to obtain special 
grades of iron which when worked within certain limits of mag- 
netization are substantially free from hysteresis losses. This at 
once imposes a limitation on the design of the loading coil and 
affects the proportioning of all of its parts. 

Another loss which may take place in the core of a loading coil 
is that due to eddy or Foucault currents which may develop in 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1751 
the material of the core itself. In the case of loading coils it has 
been necessary to construct the cores of extremely fine wire and 
to coat this wire with a film of insulating material. 

Certain other losses must also be guarded against. Ifa loading 
coil when magnetized gave an external magnetic field and there 
were any conducting materials in this field, eddy currents would 
be produced in this conducting field and would represent @ loss 
of energy through the circuit. Similarly, if there were any iron 
or other magnetic substances in this field there would be likely 
to be hysteresis losses in this iron. These losses have been 


Fic. 3.—Underground. man-hole containing loading coils 


guarded against by adopting the toroidal form of coil already 
described and placing the windings on it in such a manner that 
practically no external magnetic field is in any case produced. 


The designing of loading coils in this manner has not only elim- 


inated external losses but makes it possible to place loading coils 
in close proximity to each other without introducing cross talk 
between the circuits involved. It is interesting to consider that in 
so far as the losses in loading coils are concerned they very closely 
resemble the losses which must be guarded against in the con- 


structioti of, for example, dynamo armatures in electric light and 


1752 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 
power practice. The resemblance, however, stops at this point 
and the experiences of electric light and power people in connec- 
tion with these losses have not been of great assistance in the de- 
sign of loading coils because the magnitude of current, its fre- 
quency and other characteristics have been so different from those 
involved in electric light and power practice. The great im- 
portance of reducing losses, which from the nature of loading are 
cumulative in character, has made the problem very different. 

The direct current resistance of the medium loading coil is 
about four ohms. The alternating current resistance of this 
coil, at a frequency of about 800 periods a second, is about nine 
ohms. This relatively small increase of resistance at such a 


MILES OF STANDARD CABLE 


0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 Qt 26 28 30 32 3k 36 38 40 


LENGTH OF CIRCUIT IN MILES 


Fic. 4.—Efficiency of No. 19 B. & S. gauge cable unloaded and medium 
loaded, with substation apparattis located directly at the ends of 
the circuits 


high frequency is a good indication of the skillful design and 
careful manufacture of these coils. 

The method of placing loading coils in cable circuits is il- 
lustrated by Fig. 3, which shows the photograph of a manhole 
containing loading coil cases. The cases which you see in this 
photograph each contain 49 loading coils. These are arranged 
in the case on seven spindles, there being one spindle in the 
middle of the case and six spindles arranged around it. The 
case is filled with insulating compound and special precautions 
are taken between the flanges to exclude water. Extending from 
the case to the main cable is a stub cable containing the wires 
leading into and out of the loading coils. This is spliced into 
the main cable so as to loop a loading coil winding into each side 
of each circuit which it is desired to load. In some cases where 


¥ 


1911} GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1753 


it is desired to load aerial cables, cases similar to those shown 
in Fig. 3 are buried at the base of the pole and the stub containing 
the wires run up the pole to connect with the aerial cable. 

The results obtained by applying medium loading to No. 19 
B. & S. gauge underground cable, having a capacity of about 
~ 0.070 microfarads per mile, are shown in Fig. 4. In this figure 
is also shown the transmission efficiency of the unloaded cable. 
All of these transmission efficiencies are measured in terms of 
what we call standard No. 19 gauge cable. This standard 19 
gauge cable is cable having a resistance of 88 ohms per loop mile 
and a mutual capacity of 0.054 microfarads per mile. Cables 
as now manufactured have in general higher capacities than 
this, but when the earlier transmission tests were made cable 
having a mutual capacity of 0.054 was in common use and was 
therefore adopted as the standard and it has been convenient 
to retain it as such. Wherever in this paper, unless otherwise 
stated, the efficiency of a circuit is spoken of as being equivalent 
to so many miles of standard cable or of so many miles of cable, 
the cable referred to as the unit of measurement is 19 gauge 
standard cable as defined above. It is for this reason that 
the efficiency of the unloaded cable in Fig. 4 is not quite 
- equal to that of the standard cable used as the unit of 
measurement. 

The efficiencies of the loaded circuits, shown in Fig. 4, are 
those obtained with substation instruments located directly at 
the ends of the loaded circuits. One curve is given showing the 
results obtained by the use of terminal transformers and the 
other without the use of such devices. These curves bring out 
clearly a peculiarity of loaded circuits which should be consid- 
ered at this point. The loading of a circuit, either underground 
or aerial, brings in at the ends of the loaded circuit whether the 
circuit is connected directly to substation instruments or to un- 
loaded circuits an effect which we have called reflection losses. 
That is to say, at the ends of the loaded circuit there are certain 
losses which take place which are substantially independent 
of the length of the loaded circuit involved. These losses as 
between loaded and unloaded circuits are dependent upon the 
relative electrical characteristics of the loaded and unloaded 
circuits. In the case of substation instruments, connected di- 
rectly to the ends of a loaded circuit, the terminal losses are de- 
pendent upon the relative electrical characteristics of the sub- 
station instrument and of the loaded line. Terminal or reflec- 


1754 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS _ [June 28 


tion losses, of course, also exist between unloaded lines of dif- 
ferent characteristics, for instance, as between unloaded under- 
ground cable and unloaded aerial lines. They would also be 
found between substation instruments and unloaded lines of 
various kinds. In all these cases, however, they are small in 
magnitude and it is only in the case of loaded lines that they 
assume such proportions that they must be given consideration 
in connection with general engineering. 

I have been speaking of the terminal losses observed in 
connection with loading as though they pertained particularly 
to the loaded line. It has been convenient to so speak of them 
but, of course, they actually pertain to the combination of loaded 
lines with unloaded lines or standard substation equipment, and 
properly are no more associated with one than with the other 
but rather result from a combination of the two. As, however, 
the substation instrument and the unloaded lines were in service 
for a considerable time before the use of loaded lines, it has been 
convenient to associate these reflection losses with the loaded 
lines and consider the electrical efficiencies of the unloaded lines 
and the substation instruments to remain unchanged. 

Various devices have been successfully employed to reduce 
terminal losses, although no plan has been worked out which 
would completely eliminate them. The plan used most suc- 
cessfully to-day for eliminating terminal losses is a device known 
as a terminal transformer. This is a transformer or repeating 
coil which differs from the standard telephone repeating coil in 
that there are more turns on one winding than on the other. 
It is used in the same way as an ordinary transformer in electric 
light practice, the high potential side being connected with the 
loaded line and the low potential side with the unloaded line. 
For ordinary conditions of loading the ratio of the two windings 
is usually either 1 to 1.4 or 1 to 2. The effect of the terminal 
transformer in reducing terminal losses is well shown in Fig. 4. 
The terminal loss for the two ends of a medium loaded line 
without terminal transformers is about 5.75 miles of standard 
cable. With terminal transformers this is reduced to 2.5 miles. 
These figures are for cases where the telephone substation ap- 
paratus is located directly at the ends of the loaded line. Where 
there is a length of unloaded line between the loaded line and 
the substation apparatus it is found that terminal losses are not so 
great as if the terminal apparatus were directly at the ends of the 
loaded line. The extent to which the varying amounts of un- 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS “1755 


loaded line reduce terminal losses is shown by the following 
figures: 


Amount of terminal losses at both ade 
of a loaded circuit—medium loaded 
Amount of 19 gauge unloaded cable ‘ Without terminal | With terminal 
at each end of loaded circuit transformers transformers 
None) — 5.75 2.5 
1 mile 4.0 2.0 
2 miles 3.0 1.50 
3 miles 2.2 1.15 
4 miles 1.6 1.0 
5 miles 1.25 0.9 


While terminal losses are substantially independent of the 
length of the loaded line, they are affected by the character’ of 
‘the loading of the line. The heavier the loading the greater the 
reflection losses. While with medium loading the reflection 
losses, as shown by the above table, with no unloaded cable at the 
ends of the circuit, are 5.75 miles without terminal transformers 
and 2.5 miles with terminal transformers, the corresponding 
figures for heavy loading are 7.8.miles and 3.5 miles. These 
figures are, of course, reduced as in the case of medium loading, 
by having unloaded cable at the ends of the loaded circuit. 
If it were not for these terminal losses, and neglecting leakage, it 
would be practicable, theoretically at any rate, to indefinitely in- 
crease the efficiency of a 19 gauge circuit by adding more and more 
inductance to it. Even without terminal losses, however, this could 
not practically be done, because more and more loading coils would — 
have to be added as more inductance was added, and these would 
in turn bring in larger and larger losses until finally . the further 
gains from adding inductance would be offset or more than offset 
by coil losses. The increasing effect of leakage as the weight of 
loading is increased also has a limiting effect. Aside from these 
effects, terminal losses, which increase »as the amount. of in- 
ductance added to the circuit is increased, place a limitation 
beyond which it is not advantageous to increase the amount of 
loading on the circuits. This is illustrated by Fig. 5, which gives 
the efficiency of medium and heavily loaded 19 gauge conductors 
and on which, for the purpose of comparison,” ‘the efficiencies’ of 
various gauges of unloaded circuits are also given. It will he 
seen from this that by taking into account the reflection losses 


1756 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


which are here given at about an average for various conditions, 
the medium loaded circuit is more efficient than the heavily 
loaded circuit in lengths up to four miles. Beyond that point 
the heavily loaded circuit is more efficient, although even at 12 
miles the difference is not largely in favor of the heavy loading. 

It is interesting to consider from this diagram what results 
have been obtained from loading 19 gauge conductors. For a 
length of circuit equal to 4.5 miles the 19 gauge conductor with 
medium loading is as good as a 16 gauge conductor unloaded; 
that is to say, loading has made the circuit containing half the 
copper as good as the larger circuit without loading. For a 
length of 11 miles a loaded 19 is as good as unloaded 13 weighing 
four times as much as the 19 gauge conductor. 


cna 
4 | 
foe Fi 


MILES OF STANDARD CABLE 


024 6 8 101214 ieseecce fee a 
LENGTH OF CIRCUIT IN MILES 


Fic. 5.—Efficiency of No. 19 B. & S. gauge cable loaded, (medium and 
heavy), with terminal transformers and one mile unloaded loop 
at each end; also efficiency of unloaded cables of various gauges 


For underground circuits, requiring a greater transmission 
efficiency than can be obtained by the use of heavily loaded 19 
gauge cable circuits, it has been found best, all things consid- 
ered, to employ a larger gauge of wire rather than to load more 
heavily. Many cables containing 16, 14 and 13 B. & S. gauge 
conductors have been laid and loaded. 

The most interesting existing cable containing large gauge 
conductors is the New York-Philadelphia cable which was laid 
several years ago between these two points in order to provide 
additional circuits and to insure the service against storm damage. 
Most of the circuits in this cable are of 14 B. & S. gauge and they 
are heavily loaded. That is, there is 0.2 henry per mile added to 
the cable circuits by means of loading coils. The results obtained 


1911] GHERARD1: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1757 


on these circuits are given in Fig. 6, assuming average terminal 
conditions. The results obtained by this loading are ‘most satis- 
factory. The distance between New York and Philadelphia, 
following the route of the cable, is 90 miles and this distance is 
indicated on the diagram. It will be seen that for this distance 
the circuits have an efficiency of 13 miles of standard cable. 
If unloaded, these circuits would have an efficiency of about 
60 miles of standard cable. Over such circuits no commercial 
service could be given between New York and Philadelphia. 
Without loading, even 10 gauge conductors would have given 
unsatisfactory results, so that by means of loading we have been 
able to obtain results between New York and Philadelphia over 


a 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 £0 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100 
* LENGTH OF CIRCUIT IN MILES 


Fic. 6.—Efficiency of No. 14 B. & S. gauge cable with heavy loading, 
(New York-Philadelphia cable); terminal losses with terminal 
transformers and one mile loop; also unloaded cables of various 
gauges 


14 gauge conductors that could not have been obtained with con- 
ductors of much greater weight without loading. 

While this New York-Philadelphia cable represents the longest 
loaded underground cable to-day in use anywhere in the world, 
a project has been approved and is now under way which will 
far surpass it. This project is for an underground cable ex- 
tending between New York and Washington in one direction 
and New York and Boston in the other. The largest conductors 
in this cable will be No. 10 B. & S. gauge and by means of loading 
we confidently expect that we will be able to obtain thoroughly 

‘satisfactory results between New York and either Boston or 
- Washington, and that it will even be possible to obtain service 
through this cable between Washington and Boston should storm 


1758 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


datnage to the open wire lines render this necessary. The loading 
of this cable will be of particular interest as it will represent the 
first large application of the phantoming of loaded cable circuits 
dnd the loading of phantom cable circuits. In order to ac- 
complish these results it is necessary to adopt special arrange- 
ments of the windings of the loading coils. The windings on the 
loading coil used for loading the side circuits are arranged as 


Fic. 7.—Diagram of winding of loading coil for circuits forming the 
sides of phantom 


- shown in Fig, 7. With this arrangement of winding, the effect 
of the telephone current in the side circuit, which current flows 
in opposite directions in the two sides of the circuit, is to mag- 
netize the core of the loading coil in the same direction throughout 
_ and-to produce no consequent poles. The loading coil thus acts, 
- in as far as the side circuit is concerned, exactly like the loading 
coil with the simple winding shown in Figs. 1 and 2. In building 


\ SIDE 2 
NOTE!-TO AVOID CONFUSION THE WINDINGS 

FOR BUT ONE SIDE OF THE PHANTOM 

ARE SHOWN. 


Fic. 8.—Diagram of winding of loading coil for use on phantom circuits 


up a phantom circuit this side circuit, however, becomes one 
side of the phantom, and the telephone current in the phantom 
circuit traverses the two wires of the side circuit in parallel. 
Such a current flowing through the windings of such loading 
coils as are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 would magnetize the two 
sides of the core in opposite directions and produce consequent 
poles at the two sides of the core. This would not_only bring in 


* 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1759 


serious losses, but also crosstalk which would be very difficult 
to deal with. The current in the phantom circuit flowing through 
a coil with windings on it as shown‘in' Fig. 7 does not magnetize 
the loading coil at all, as each winding is: neutralized by a cor- 
responding winding on the other side of the line. Such coils 
may be used to effectively load the side circuits of a phantom 
combination and in as far as the phantom itself is concerned 
they act only as resistance which is very smallin amount. This, 
however, does not load the phantom circuit, which of course 
is a desirable result to attain. To load the phantom circuit a 
coil with windings as shown in Fig. 8 is employed. It will be 
seen by tracing out the winding of this coil that to the current 
flowing in the phantom circuit it acts like an ordinary loading 
coil, that is, all windings magnetize the core in the same direction. 
To currents flowing in either of the side circuits, however, it acts 
only as dead resistance. The arrangements described above 
in connection with the application of loading coils to phantom 
circuits and to the side circuits of phantom circuits have been 
successfully applied to open wire lines as well as to underground 
cables. 
LOADING OPEN .WIRE LINES 

Gratifying as have been the results obtained from the use of 
loading on underground cables, its application to open wire cir- 
cuits has also resulted in most noteworthy improvements in 
their efficiency. The general plan of loading open wire circuits 
is similar to that used on underground cable wires. On account 
of the differences in the electrical characteristics of open wire 
circuits, as compared with cable circuits, however, the design - 
and spacing of the loading coils is materially different from the 
coils and the spacings used on underground cables. In general, 
only heavy loading is used on open wire lines on account of the 
greater length of these lines. The coils themselves are sub- 
stantially larger than those employed on cable circuits for two 
reasons—in the first place the coil is subject to damage by light- 
ning. In order to minimize this difficulty the coils must be 
built to have high breakdown strengths against lightning 
discharges. All aerial coils are built so that they will stand a 
breakdown test of 8,000 volts. This, of course, considerably 
increases the size of the coil. The coil is further increased in 
size by the fact that, as an aerial circuit is initially a good deal 
more efficient than an underground circuit, it is necessary that 
the coils used in loading it should have smaller losses than are 


1760 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


permissible in underground cable loading coils. The outside — 
diameter of the aerial loading coil is about 10 inches and the re- 
sistance of the two windings of the coil to direct current is 
2.5 ohms while to alternating currents of a frequency of 800 
periods a second it is 6.5 ohms. In addition to building the coil 
so that it has a breakdown strength of 8,000 volts, each coil is 
protected by a pair of lightning arresters adjusted to operate 
at 3,500 volts. These precautions have proved sufficient. to 
reduce trouble from lightning on aerial loading coils to a negli- 
gible amount. 

Low insulation which is sometimes encountered on open wire 
lines, particularly in periods of bad weather, proved at the start 


Fic. 9.—Loading coils placed on an open wire line 


a serious difficulty in connection with the loading of open wire 
lines. This, however, has been overcome by removing the 
worst causes of low insulation and in some cases by the use of 
improved insulators, and at the present time low insulation is not 
proving a serious factor in connection with the application of 
loading to overhead lines. In wet weather the transmission 
efficiency of overhead lines is not quite as good as in dry weather, 
but it may be stated that it is very seldom that the loaded circuits 
fall in efficiency sufficiently to seriously affect the transmission, 
except in cases where the lines are in actual trouble from branches 
of trees falling into the line or other similar causes. 

In connection with the loading of open wire lines the problem 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1761 


of arranging them so that they will be free from substantial cross- 
talk has required attention. Due to the fact that much of the 
crosstalk disturbance in telephony is from electrostatic induc- 
tion it is to be expected and it is found in practice that the 
loading of a circuit increases its tendency to crosstalk. In the 
early applications of loading to open wire lines some trouble was 

- experienced from crosstalk and special transposition systems 
were devised to overcome these difficulties and it was further 
found necessary to locate the loading coils with special reference 
to the transpositions. On underground cables it has been found 
that loading also increases the crosstalk somewhat, and in these 
we arrange to reduce the capacity unbalances in order to reduce 
crosstalk to a sufficiently low point. 


Fic. 10.—Loading coils placed on an open wire line on ‘‘ H”’ Fixtures 


The loading coils for use on open wire circuits are placed in 
individual cast iron cases and these are placed on the poles or 
crossarms as in Figs. 9 and 10 which show illustrations of two 
common arrangements. ‘The line is carried to the loading coil 
by means of bridle wire. The lightning arrester is placed in 
a separate case and bridle wire is also extended to Lt 
- The results obtained by the use of loading coils on the No. 8 
B. W. and No. 12 N. B. S. gauge wires, which are the standard 
sizes used in ‘the long distance plant of the Bell system, are 
shown in Fig. 11, in which for the purpose of comparison the 
efficiencies of the unloaded circuits are also given. This diagram 


1762 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


shows terminal losses with the conditions which may be consid- 
ered as average. The general reflection loss problem with over- 
head lines is the same as with underground cables, and having 
been discussed in detail in connection with such circuits it need 
not be repeated here. As will be seen from Fig. 11 the results 
obtained from loading open wire lines have been to more than 
double their transmission efficiency when used in considerable 
lengths. 

One of the very valuable results which has followed from the 
loading of open wire lines has been that it has made a ‘very sub- 
stantial extension to the distance over which long distance 
service can be given. Up to the time that loading was success- 
fully applied to No. 8 B. W. G. wires, about 1,000 miles repre- 


Seely OF CIRCUIT IN MILES ay r 


Fic. 11.—Efficiency of No. ‘8 B. W.G. ‘and No. 12 N. B.S. G. open 
wire lines loaded and unloaded with average terminal conditions 


sented the greatest distances over which commercial service was 
maintained. By the loading of No. 8 circuits this has just been 
extended to 2,000 miles, so that to-day it is practicable to obtain 
a successful telephone conversation from New York to Denver. 

The actual distance between these two points by the route which 
the line follows is 2,010 miles. 

A very important use has been made of loaded cables in 
bringing loaded open wire lines into large cities. Loaded cables 
have also been used to bring unloaded open: wite lines into 
thickly. settled communities, but in this case the gains have not 
been so great because-it is not practicable to place terminal 
transformers for reducing the reflection losses between the outer 
end of the underground cable circuits and the aerial lines, and 
hence reflection losses are experienced. 


1911] GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS 1763 


This practical impossibility of placing reflection reducing 
devices between open wire and cable has also made it impossible 
to obtain the full benefits from loading in those cases where 
short stretches of cable are placed in the, middle of ,toll lines— 
é.g., in communities where the appearance of the open wires is 
objected to and requests are made to place. them underground. 
If the open wires are loaded the trouble is not so great as a 
comparatively heavy loading can be used without excessive 
reflection losses. For non-loaded open wires, the loading of the 
cable if attempted at all must be very light if the reflection losses 
are not to offset any gain from the reduced attenuation. i 

For these reasons and also because cable circuits loaded or 
non-loaded are inherently less efficient than open wire circuits 
it is important that every effort be made to keep toll lines as 
free as possible from cable. 


LOADING OF SUBMARINE CABLES 

The problem of loading submarine cables is a mechanical one 
rather than one concerning the principles of loading. In this 
country a 16 B. & S. G. dry core paper submarine cable about 
5 miles long and containing loading coils spaced about 2 miles 
apart has been successfully laid across the Chesapeake Bay and 


_ is now in operation. There has also been talk of laying a dry 


core loaded submarine cable across Puget Sound for a distance 
of 16 miles. The situation in the United States, however, is 
not such that large numbers of loaded submarine cables of any 
great length are required. Abroad, however, particularly be- 
tween England and the continent and between England and 
Ireland submarine cables of considerable length are needed for 
telephone purposes and in these situations loaded gutta-percha 
submarine cables have been employed with successful results. 


EXTENT OF APPLICATION OF LOADING 
It is evident that a device making such great improvements in 
the transmission efficiency of telephone circuits’ as does loading 
would have a large place in the plant of any company providing 
a comprehensive system of telephone service over a large area, 
a condition necessarily requiring long cables and long open wire 


fines. Although the loading art was born in 1900, and its suc- 


cessful commercial application on an extensive scale to our plant 
dates only from about 1903, there are already in the United 


States over 85,000 miles of loaded open wire circuits and over 


1764 GHERARDI: TELEPHONE CIRCUITS [June 28 


170,000 miles of loaded underground cable circuits. To load 
these circuits there have been employed about 125,000 loading 
coils. The day-by-day experience with this enormous loaded 
line plant has fully demonstrated that we are in practice ob- 
_ taining the successful results which the engineering data that I 
have set forth would lead us to expect. 

The facts which have been herewith developed have, I think, 
been more than sufficient to justify the statement at the be- 
ginning of this paper, that the year 1900, in which the loading 
patents were issued to Professor Pupin, marked the beginning cf 
an important era in telephone work. I do not know of any prob- 
lem in electrical science and electrical engineering which has 
required greater skill, technical ability and diligence on the part 
of those engaged in its solution—inventors, engineers, manu- 
facturers and construction people—than has the working out 
and the application of loading, and it is a pleasure to be able to 
present to you a statement of the results which they have 
accomplished. 


= 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1765 


Discussion on ‘‘ CoMMERCIAL LOADING OF TELEPHONE CIR- 
CUITS IN THE BELL System.” Cuicaco, JUNE 28, 1911 


E. H. Bangs: One of the most valuable features of Mr. 
Gherardi’s paper is its frank admissions in regard tothe practical 
limitations of circuit loading. In the past there have been some 
extravagant claims made for the possibilities of this practice, 
and this paper, in its description of the actual results obtained in 
the best practice is most welcome. 

Mr. Gherardi answers, in a way, a question that has been put 
to me on several occasions by engineers experienced in power 
transmission as to why it was that the telephone engineers did 
not long ago take advantage of the common knowledge of the 
power transmission engineers, on the subject of added inductance. 
In asking this question the power engineers say, in effect, ‘“ We 
gave you the idea. All that you had to do was to work out the 
details.”” This statement contains its own answer, an answer 
which is illustrated by Mr. Gherardi’s paper. As a matter of 
fact, it has taken from 10 to 15 years of very earnest effort on the 


-part of a number of people to simply “‘ work out the details.” 


Telephone transmission is only power transmission in its most 
minute form, and of course the same laws apply to both methods 
of conveying energy. The difficulties encountered have not 
been found so much in applying known laws, as in perfecting 
practical details, and the ingenuity displayed in simply that 
portion of the problem relating to the loading of phantom cir- 
cuits and the phantoming of loaded circuits is of a high order. 
I think that the development of this whole problem has proceeded 
with dispatch, along logical lines, and abreast of, or well in 
advance of the economical demand for its solution. 

F. B. Jewett: While there is not much that I can add to what 
Mr. Gherardi has said on the subject of commercial loading of 
telephone circuits in the plant of the Bell system, there are one or 
two points which I think may be of interest to those who are not 
familiar with loading. One of these is with regard to the 
mathematical development which forms the foundation upon 
which our present loading practice has been built. All of our 
experience has tended to confirm this mathematical theory and 
so far as I am aware it is entirely rigorous. Although the first 
results on actual loaded circuits seemed not to agree with the- 
oretical expectation, we soon learned that discrepancies which 
existed resulted from a lack of reliable data as to line constants 
at high frequencies and not to any imperfection in the mathe- 
matical theory of loading. With increasing knowledge as to the 
high frequency constants of different classes of circuits, the dis- . 
crepancies between the computed results and the results of 
actual transmission tests are each day becoming less, and the 
theoretical forecasts more amply verified. 

Mr. Gherardi shows that the general equation for the attenua- 
tion constant, which involves the four factors, series resistance, 


1766 TELEPHONE CIRCUIT LOADING [June 28 


series inductance, shunt capacity and shunt éonductance or 
leakage can be greatly simplified by the elimination of the last 
of these constants. In the early stages of our work it was as- 
sumed that on both cable circuits and open wire lines having high 
insulation, this could be done. Later work showed us, however, 
that the direct current insulation was not necessarily a criterion 
for the high frequency shunt conductance even in the case of open 
wire circuits where dissipation of energy in the dielectric would, 
at first sight, seem to be almost negligible. 

High frequency measurements during the last few years on 
‘both open wires and cable circuits have given us values of the 
shunt conductance which, when substituted in the general form- 
‘ula, tend to bring the computed and measured attenuation 
constants into close agreement. I have every reason to believe, 
therefore, that when we are able to determine the four line 
constants at high frequencies with the accuracy with which we 
can now determine direct current resistance, capacity and insu- 
lation, we will find that the formule used in our computation 
work are rigorously in accord with the results of actual observa- 
tions on loaded lines. 

The other point which I wish to mention briefly has to do with 
the enormous change which the introduction of loaded circuits 
has brought about in the terminal apparatus and outside plant, 
both in the original installation and in the matter of main- 
tenance. The deleterious effect of low line insulation is so much 
more pronounced on loaded circuits than on non-loaded circuits 
that the introduction of loading on a large scale has neces- 
sitated a very much higher grade of line maintenance than was 
ever found necessary in the case of non-loaded circuits even of 
large gauge. Also in the case of any extensive loading, es- 
pecially on cable circuits, the necessity of placing a large number 
of loading coils in the plant has made it absolutely essential that 
the loading applied to the various circuits be such as to give a 
resultant plant of maximum simplicity. It was early seen that 
any general attempt to engineer the loading for each particular 
line so as to give maximum efficiency to this line would result in 
a plant that was unmaintainable on account of its complexity. 
The result has been that for both open wires and cables a system 
of standard loadings has been developed and the loading of any 
particular circuit is that standard which most nearly conforms 
to the theoretical best loading. 

In the case of cable loading, especially on congested runs where 
a great number of circuits are to be loaded, it is very desirable 
that the loading coils for all circuits having a given type of load- 
ing be placed at the same points. This factor has reacted on the 
art of cable manufacture to the extent that all cable for loading 
is now manufactured to meet a standard capacity requirement 
irrespective of gauge or the number of conductors in the sheath 
—the standard capacity being that which will result in the lowest 
annual charge on the loaded circuits of given efficiency. 


~~ % 
‘ 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1767 


_ Also the fact that the sending end impedance of loaded lines 
is very much larger than for non-loaded lines and varies greatly 
with the type of loading, with resultant high and variable reflec- 
tion losses, has meant that we cannot connect loaded lines to- 
gether and to non-loaded lines in the indiscriminate fashion per- 
missible with non-loaded circuits. We have, therefore, been 
forced to design our loading so that the circuits of various char- 
acter, whether loaded or non-loaded, may be connected together 


-or to the terminal apparatus with the minimum amount of re- 


flection loss. Further the necessity for having maximum circuit 
flexibility in a large and growing plant has made it imperative 
that all loading be planned with the view to future growth and 
the necessity for avoiding special operating practices as much as 
possible. 

Although a great step in advance has been made since the 
first introduction of loading on commercial circuits, there is 
still a large amount of development work to be done before 
we have succeeded in deriving all of the benefits possible from 


~ the use of inductance coils on telephone circuits. 


E. H. Colpitts: I wish to call attention to one or two features 
connected with loading; that is, the necessary engineering 
studies and scientific investigation in connection with the applica- 
tion of loading are making telephony, from the standpoint of line 
transmission, an exact art. 

Ten years ago when the rule for loading was first given us by 
Professor Pupin, the only method of determining whether a 
certain piece of apparatus introduced into the telephone line 
would cause a transmission loss or a transmission gain, was to 
actually make a transmission talking test over the circuit. 
When the art of loading was introduced it was recognized that 
much more refined methods of measuring the electrical constants 
of telephone apparatus and telephone lines under the electrical 
and magnetic conditions of telephone service must be developed. 
It was seen that actual telephone currents could not be employed, 
but that it would be necessary to employ alternating currents of 
telephonic frequencies and amplitudes. At that time no high 
frequency generators had been designed which would satis- 
factorily deliver the necessary high frequency currents. There- 
fore, one of the first problems the telephone engineer had to 
undertake was to design high frequency generators capable of 
delivering alternating currents at frequencies of from 200 to 
3,000 periods per second. In order to employ this current in the 
methods which seemed most practical and desirable it was 
necessary that the open circuit electromotive force of these 
generators should be as nearly as possible free from harmonics. 


Such generators were designed. 


Among the problems of a physical nature which confronted 
the telephone engineer it was necessary to devise methods of 
measuring accurately the losses in iron and its various alloys 
when subjected to magnetizing forces as small as 0.005 c.g.s. 


1768 TELEPHONE CIRCUIT LOADING [June 28 


units and when fluctuating corresponding to alternating currents 
at frequencies of from 200 to 3,000 periods per second. _The 
telephone engineer today is able to measure such losses with a 
high degree of accuracy. The engineer had to devise methods 
of measuring losses in dielectrics at the telephonic frequencies 
which I have mentioned and at the low potentials which are in- 
volved in actual telephone transmission. 

In addition to this, methods of measuring very accurately 
the inductance and effective resistance of loading coils were 
developed. The measurement of inductance accurately in 
terms of inductance standards is not at all difficult, but the meas- 
urement of effective resistance with a small current and at a 
high frequency requires most carefully designed apparatus and 
a complete knowledge of all the factors involved, many of which 
factors it would seem at first sight to the ordinary engineer 
could be neglected. 

In connection with loaded lines themselves, as Dr. Jewett has 
already indicated, we soon found that we had to take account of 
facts which had hitherto been neglected. As an instance, it 
became evident that we had to measure accurately and consider 
the effect of bridged impedances on the efficiency of loaded 
circuits; whereas, in case of unloaded circuits the effects of such 
bridges could very generally be neglected. Also, in the design 
of cables which are to be loaded it is very important that elec- 
trical symmetry or balance be preserved, and the engineer is 
interested in capacities and differences of capacities as small as 
one-millionth of a microfarad in lengths of 400 or 500 ft. of cable. 
He can today measure and take account of these small dif- 
ferences in capacities between the wires of one pair and the 
adjacent pairs. . 

So far I have referred merely to measurements upon the ele- 
ments used in loading. A large amount of work has been done 
in connection with the development of methods of making meas- 
urements upon telephone circuits, in order to determine the 
various terms involved in their transmission efficiency. I men- 
tion these merely as illustrations of the general nature of the 
development work necessary to the present condition of the 
loading art. R 

E. B. Craft: It may be of interest to note some features in 
the construction and design of the loading coils themselves. 
The art of constructing inductance coils is an old one. The use 
of inductance coils in loading, where we must deal with currents 
of very high frequency, however, involves a consideration of 
details and methods of reducing losses to a point which I doubt 
is reached in ordinary practice. 

As an example we may consider a coil such as is being used in - 
loading the new New York-Washington underground cable 
circuits. The core of this coil consists of a toroid built up of 
approximately 90,000 turns of No. 38 gauge iron wire. To 
reduce losses each of these turns must be insulated from the | 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1769 


other. This in itself was a problem of considerable magnitude 
and it eventually led to the development and use of an insu- 
lating enamel coating having a thickness of less than 0.0005 in. 

In working out the design of the coil windings we also had 
to consider means for reducing losses, that led to departures 
from ordinarily used methods. In order that the copper losses 
might be reduced to a permissible figure, the conductor was sub- 
divided, using a number of strands of enamel insulated wire, 
which, in turn, were insulated in the usual manner to provide 
a stranded copper conductor. The winding itself was then 
subdivided into sections to properly control capacity balances 
between adjacent sections of the windings. 

In the construction of the coil such as we are using in the 
New York-Washington cable there is required a total length of 
24 miles of copper wire wound around a core composed of 30 
miles of iron wire. The mechanical problems involved in the 
application of these windings were quite difficult. Toroidal 
coils have been used in the past and were usually wound up by 
hand, involving a great deal of time and labor. In order that 
‘coils of this type might be turned out in large quantities on a 
commercial basis, it was necessary to develop special machinery 
by which thse windings could be applied automatically. This 
has resulted in a considerable reduction in cost and increase in 
efficiency. 

After the cores are prepared and the windings applied, it is 
necessary also to give consideration to the proper control of the 
losses in the dielectrics. This has led to the application of re- 
fined methods of manufacture in the way of vacuum drying and 
impregnation. 

Consideration of the amount of material used in their construc- 
tion will indicate that, when completed, these loading coils are 
of no mean proportions. As they are applied to the line or 
cable they are usually grouped in pots or cases similar to trans- 
former cases, and the larger cases containing 21 coils weigh 
in the neighborhood of 2,000 lb. and because of size and weight 
are usually located in the manhole of the subway. 

Various speakers have dwelt upon the necessity for adhering 
to accurate mathematical methods in calculating the electrical 
constants of the completed circuits, and the development of the 
design of the coils themselves has reached the stage where we 
can, by the application of proper methods of calculation, predict 
with certainty the various electrical characteristics of the com- 
pleted coil. When we consider that these electrical charac- 
teristics involve not only the ohmic resistance and inductance 
of the coil, but such factors as capacity unbalance and alter- 
nating current conductance as well, it can be seen that it has been 
necessary to employ methods that have not heretofore been 
commonly used in the design and construction of inductance 
~ coils for various commercial uses. O. 

_ Allard Smith: It might be of interest to get a brief idea of 
how we have applied loading in conjunction with the A. $2 aes be 


1770 TELEPHONE CIRCUIT LOADING [June 28 


Co. engineers to a large telephone system like that in Chicago. 
We have developed a comprehensive loading plan for the entire 
city, and have advanced the work under that plan as rapidly 
as conditions would permit. Briefly, only 16 and 19 gauge cables 
in Chicago are loaded, although there is one cable which carries 
14 gauge loaded conductors between Chicago and Milwaukee. 

Radiating out from the Chicago Telephone Co’s. toll building, 
in the center of Chicago, there are six loading paths, and these 
paths bring into the center of Chicago the trunk and toll lines 
from the outside and outlying exchanges., All of the work is 
underground. We have no aerial loading because the lines going 
out into the country are not long enough. 

There are distributed around Chicago about 10,000 loading 
coils, which load about 19,000 pair miles of wire. These coils are 
incased in sealed iron pots and are placed in manholes, spaced 
one mile and three-quarters apart, except the coils on the Chicago 
Milwaukee cable, which are placed one mile and a quarter apart. 
These cables run out north as far as Waukegan, with 16 gauge 
conductors, and with 19 gauge conductors to Evanston—about 
12 miles. Waukegan is about 25 miles. 

Another cable runs south to Hammond, about 25 miles, with 
16 gauge conductors and 19-gauge conductors as far as South 
Chicago, about 16 miles. Also one directly west, going to May- 
wood, with 16 guage conductors; another southwest, along the 
C. B. & Q. R.R. to La Grange; another directly south to West 
Pullman. All of these cables bring the 19 gauge pairs from 
the outlying Chicago exchanges within a belt line, say, four to 
five miles out from the city, into the toll board. The 16 gauge 
conductors bring in the exchanges still further out called the 
“neighborhood exchanges ’’’ and the immediate suburban ex- 
changes. Now we are just starting another loading path, which 
will be a belt line, continuing in a radius between exchanges 
about five miles from the center of the ‘city. 

J. G. Wray: I would supplement what Mr. Smith has said 
by stating that in Chicago if our trunk lines were not equipped 
with loading coils, it would be impossible to carry on commercial 
conversations between offices on opposite sides of the city. If 
loading coils were not available and there were no satisfactory 
substitute, it would be necessary to provide over-head open wire 
construction for trunk lines between such offices. Such con- 
struction would involve high pole lines with many cross arms, 
would congest the streets and alleys and make them unsightly 
and would add greatly to the cost of construction and main- 
tenance and would provide a less satisfactory service than is 
provided at present. As a matter of fact, it would be physically 
practically impossible to provide pole lines enough to carry the 
open wire construction which would be necessary. 

The problem of local telephone transmission in a big city like 
Chicago or New York would be exceedingly difficult if it were not 
for the loading coil. I believe that this fact is not generally 


- 1911] ~ DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1771 


realized by engineers who have considered the advantages of the 
loading coil usually from the standpoint of long line trans- 
mission such as the New York-Denver circuit which Mr. Gher- 
ardi has just described. 

The problem of telephone transmission in a big city, I think, 
however, has hardly received the attention that it deserves. 

Frank F. Fowle: One of the very earliest practical tests of 
Dr. Pupin’s system of inductance loading was made on a 670- 
mile circuit of No. 12 N. B.S. G. (173-lb.) open wire (hard drawn 
copper), in 1900. The coils then employed had an ohmic re- 
sistance of 9 ohms, an inductance of 0.225 henry and a shunt 
capacity of 0.0042 microfarad. These coils had no iron and were 
enclosed in wooden boxes, filled or impregnated with an insu- 
lating compound. They were spaced 23 miles apart. Com- 
parative transmission tests conducted during clear dry weather 
showed that this loaded circuit was substantially equal to a 
non-loaded circuit of No. 8 B. W. G. (435 lb.) open copper wire. 

The successful result of this trial gave immediate impetus to 
the development of better loading coils, with the result that the 
original type was abandoned in favor of the coil described by 
Mr. Gherardi. In coils of the type now used extreme precautions 
are necessary to keep the effective resistance at a minimum 
and not in excess of the resistance stated in the paper. 

_ It is interesting to note that the toroidal coil finally developed 

is identical in its form with Faraday’s original experimental 
transformer, which consisted of a simple iron ring with two 
windings, one on either half of the ring. 

Quite extensive loading was soon undertaken on commercial 
circuits, but two prominent difficulties arose. The first was the 
effect of lightning, which necessitated the development of suitable 
protection. The second arose from low insulation. It was quite 
generally assumed at first that the leakage conductance, S, 
could be neglected, as Mr. Gherardi points out. But it de- 
veloped that this was not the case. This fact was not clearly 
demonstrated until several thousand miles of line had been 
loaded and the commercial operation had shown clearly that dur- 
ing extremes of wet weather the insulation of open lines was in- 
adequate. The reasons for this are clear both mathematically 
and physically. 

This trouble affected the No. 8 circuits most, because they had 
lower resistance and impedance, non-loaded, than No. 12 cir- 
cuits and were therefore more efficient initially. Being the 
more efficient circuit to start with, the gain due to loading was 
relatively less and the injurious effect of leakage was felt sooner. 

Substantial improvements in line insulators did not follow for 
several years and then glass was abandoned in favor of glazed 
porcelain. ; : 

Experiments were also carried on in relation to the effect of 
different spacings, varying from two miles to eight miles. It was 
found that there was little or no gain by short spacing and heavy 


1772 TELEPHONE CIRCUIT LOADING [June 28 


loading, because the gain secured by increased inductance was 
practically nullified by the increased apparent resistance of the 
coils. This will be seen by comparing the apparent resistance 
of the coils with the resistance per mile of No. 8 conductors. 

It was first pointed out by the writer that the proper location 
of coils with respect to cross-talk disturbances was every eight 
miles, at the junction of 8-mile transposition sections, or every 
S pole in Barrett’s 1898 standard transposition system. This 
fact, taken in conjunction with the advantages of light loading 
in respect both to the effects of leakage, and the cost of installa- 
tion, led to the adoption of the 8-mile spacing. ; 

The increase in cross-talk as a result of loading is the direct 
consequence, in a large measure, of the increased transmission effi- 
ciency, which increases the volume of cross-talk as well as direct 
talk. At the same time the relative proportions of electrostatic 
and electromagnetic induction are disturbed and the former is 
increased. This necessitates increased attention to the electrical 
balance of loaded metallic circuits, both in open wires and cables. 
Barrett’s earlier system of transposition, known as the A B C 
system, has certain untransposed exposures and in some cases 
will permit considerable cross-talk between non-loaded circuits, 
so that its use is not to be reeommended. The standard system 
of 1898 contains no untransposed exposures, and in general 
is much superior to the early system. 

The use of loaded circuits undoubtedly calls for a high stand- 
ard of maintenance, and increases the maintenance expense in 
comparison with non-loaded circuits. While this slightly dim- 
inishes the net commercial gain secured by loading, it presents 
no particular difficulties and its consequences need not be feared. 

There is a lower limit of line length which it pays to load, just 
as in the case of cables. Therefore loaded circuits cannot eco- 
nomically be cut up into short-haul lines, for use part of the time. 
Equally true, loaded circuits should not be connected to inter- 
mediate or way stations, both for the reason just given and 
further because bridged impedances are of harmful effect on 
loaded circuits in general. 

Some difficulty was experienced with the coil shown in Fig. 1, 
of the paper, from magnetization caused apparently by tele- 
graph currents when a loaded circuit was composited. Morse 
currents in either side of the coil magnetized it at once, of course, 
and in some cases set up a permanent flux which impaired the 
properties of the coil telephonically. The dividing current of 
the simplex system was much less harmful, tending only to pole 
the core at opposite ends of the diameter dividing the windings. 
The coil shown in Fig. 7 prevents any magnetization by the 
simplex, through its balanced arrangement of windings. There 
is probably some advantage in using a polar duplex on either side 
of the composite, because of the very frequent reversals in the 
direction of current. 

Bancroft Gherardi: Professor Shepardson has asked a 
question concerning the connecting of loaded cable circuits with 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1773 


open wire circuits. As I understand the question it refers to 
what special arrangements, if any, are needed when loaded 
cable circuits are to be connected to open wire lines. Is that 
the question, Professor Shepardson? 

G. D. Shepardson: The question in my mind is whether you 
use the transformer or use the tapered loading to minimize the 
reflection. 

Bancroft Gherardi: In general we do not do either. There 
are practical difficulties in the placing of terminal transformers 
at the outer end of underground cable circuits; there are also a 
large number of practical difficulties brought in by undertaking 
to taper off the loading of a circuit. One of the greatest of these 
difficulties in connection with tapering off the loading would be 
the extensive changes and re-arrangements which would become 
necessary from time to time as it became advisable to increase 
the length of the loaded cable involved, or otherwise change the 
layout of circuits. Suppose you had a cable that ran out five 
miles and later was going to be extended two miles more. In 
case the loading on this cable was tapered there would be a 
variation in the inductance of the loading, the spacing, or both. 
When, however, the cable was to be extended, substantial 
changes would have to be made in the loading coils and their 
arrangement. In general, we aim as far as possible, to load open 
wire circuits and cables so that the sending end impedance on 
the different classes of circuits will be the same, and so that the 
spacing of the loading coils on the two types of circuits are 
relatively the same electrically, that is to say, the relative 
spacings bear a definite relation to the relative electrical charac- 
teristics of the two circuits. If these conditions are attained 
there are no reflection losses where loaded underground cable 
circuits are connected with loaded open wire circuits. In 
practice these conditions are so nearly attained that the re- 
flection losses in the case mentioned above are negligibly small. 

The discussion of this paper has taken so much the form of a 
statement of additional facts in regard to loading and so little 
question has been raised in regard to any of the points brought 
out in the paper that I do not see that I can add anything in 
closing except to thank those who have participated in the dis- 
cussion for bringing out many points of interest in connection 
with the subject which for the sake of keeping the paper down 
to a reasonable length were either omitted from the paper or only 


touched upon briefly. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 28, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I.E. E. 


PROBLEMS IN TELEPHONE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING 


BY F. P. VALENTINE 


It is the purpose of this paper to deal with a few of the many 
operating problems that confront a telephone company, serving 
a territory made up of several hundred communities of varying 
types ranging from a large Metropolitan area to sparsely settled 
rural districts. 

A telephone company has but one line of goods to sell, 7.e., 
service. The entire capital investment in telephone plant and 
all running expenses are for the purpose of handling the telephone 
traffic of its subscribers or customers, and from this service is 
derived the revenue of the company. 

Under the prevailing form of telephone operating organiza- 
tion, the responsibility for handling the telephone traffic de- 
volves upon the Traffic Department, which usually represents 
about one-half the employees and payroll expense of a. telephone 
company. 

In carrying out its duties, the traffic department has a two- 
fold responsibility; first, to the subscribers for the quality of the 
service that it renders to them; second, to the stockholders and 
subscribers for the economy with which it renders such service. 

The quality of the service is directly dependent upon the 
effective application of suitable methods of operation. The 
effective application of suitable methods also bears directly 
upon the economy, for only by the use of such methods is it 
possible to obtain the maximum efficiency of force and plant. 
- Further, both the quality and economy of service bear directly 
upon the satisfaction of the telephone user or customer. The 
quality should be such as to meet every reasonable requirement; 
- the economy such as to enable the company to supply service to 
1775 


1776 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


its customers at lowest possible rates compatible with a rea- 
sonable return on the investment, in order to encourage increase 
in subscriber development, thus constantly enhancing the value 
of the service to the individual subscriber. 

To meet these requirements it is essential that a traffic 
department should have, in addition to a proper administrative 
force, an efficient traffic engineering staff. As the work of this 
staff is what might be termed the production engineering of the 
telephone business, it is obvious that it requires a qualitative and 
quantitative analysis of all factors in any way related to the 
production of telephone service. 

The principal factors entering into the production of tele- 
phone service, which must be the subject of engineering study, 
are as follows: 

1. Quality of service. 

2. Efficiency of labor. 

3. Efficiency of operating methods. 

4, Production efficiency of central office equipment. 

5. Production efficiency of trunk and toll circuits. 

The following discussion of certain phases of traffic engineering 
problems, in the order above indicated, is based upon some of the 
results of studies made in the territory of the New England 
Telephone & Telegraph Company, as it is with the work in this 
territory that the writer is most familiar. This engineering work, 
however, is a part of and is carried on in conjunction with that 
of the engineering staff of the American Telephone & Telegraph 
Company, for the purpose of making comprehensive funda- 
mental studies. 

QUALITY OF SERVICE 

From the standpoint of the telephone user, the essential qual- 
ities of telephone service are accuracy, speed of connection, and 
uniformity in both speed and methods of handling calls. These 
requirements are equally essential from the standpoint of the 
telephone company. Accuracy and speed of connection mean a 
minimum of waste effort, motion and time. Uniformity in 
speed and in the method of handling calls trains the telephone 
user to codperate with the operator to the same end, with the 
resultant effect of satisfaction to the telephone user in smooth, 
speedy service, and for the company a maximum production 
efficiency by the operating force and an economical use of 
switchboard equipment. . 


As the result of constant study there has been developed a 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC WHER 


systematic method of service inspection which is now practically 
standardized among the larger operating companies. By means 
of suitable apparatus, observations are made on every step in 
the handling of a telephone call. By the use of stop watches 
the time intervals of each step in the operation are accurately 
observed and a code record made, sufficiently comprehensive 
to permit the analysis of the tabulated results of these observa- 
tions. A sufficient number: of calls is observed during the hours 
of regular traffic to insure the results being representative of the 
general grade of service being given in the office under observa- 
tion. This service observation is practically continuous in all 
large exchange districts. 

Equally careful analysis is made of the phraseology used by 
the operator in dealing with the subscriber. This latter is no 
small factor in accurate and speedy service. A telephone opera- 
tor has to handle calls from subscribers of all types and charac- 
teristics and under all conditions. Every word and phrase used 
by the operator in dealing with a subscriber is the result of long 
and careful study and is designed to convey essential and sig- 
nificant information or direction in briefest possible form. 

Another record essential to the analysis of service quality is 
what is termed the “record of service criticisms.’ This is 
especially valuable as it furnishes a record of the subscribers’ 
opinions of the quality of service. This is a record not only of all 
formal complaints which are received, but also of data collected 
by all supervising employees in the central offices who have 
occasion to deal with any subscriber in connection with an ab- 
normal telephone call. The record is made by noting in code, 
on a proper form, any comments received indicating the fact and ~ 
nature of any unsatisfactory service that the subscriber has hac, 
either then or at some previous time. Every one of these cases 
is followed up and before the record is filed for summarizing, 
- the reasons for the unsatisfactory condition are entered thereon. 
Besides affording an opportunity to adjust matters to the satis- 
faction of the subscriber, the analysis of these criticisms fur- 
- nishes valuable data as to the most frequent causes of unfavorable 

opinion of service quality, and affords the opportunity of elim- 
inating or minimizing these causes. It is of the utmost im- 
portance, not only as good business policy, but also to assist 
in the analysis of service quality, that every effort be made to 
obtain fair criticisms from the viewpoiat of the customer. 

Continuous study and analysis of the results of service ob- 


1778 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


servations together with the data obtained from the record of 
criticisms, has made possible the adoption of standard operating 
methods designed to give satisfactory service. All calls of 
abnormal type involving special handling, are transferred to 
special operators whose sole duty is to care for this class of 
traffic. This results in removing the most disturbing elements 
from the work of the ‘‘ A” or subscribers’ operators, and in 
providing special attention for such calls on the part of employees 
especially trained for that work. 

The adoption of standard methods of operation and the setting 
of standards of speed and accuracy, has made it possible to 
reduce all operating procedure to standard sets of instructions 
for the guidance of all employees concerned. The tabulated 
results of service observations furnish the administrative force 
with the information as to how nearly the standards are at- 
tained, while the instructions furnish information as to how to 
attain them. 

EFFICIENCY OF LABOR 

In determining the efficiency of labor, or the production effi- 
ciency of an operating force, it is necessary that standards of 
labor production be established, and that provision be made for 
significant reports or summaries which will indicate how nearly 
these standards are approached. It is not sufficient merely 
to compare results in various exchanges or in the same exchange 
at different times on the basis of the traffic handled regardless 
of the conditions attendant upon its handling. Such a compari- 
son assumes to set as a standard the operation in some particular 
case. It assumes that at some other place or time an operation 
was performed with greater efficiency, and, therefore, it should 
be performed here or now at the same efficiency regardless of 
whether it is exactly the same proposition in both places or at 
both times. 

The operation of a telephone switchboard comprehends the 
handling of many different kinds of traffic, and a separate stan- 
dard is required for the handling of each. To express the degree 
of efficiency attained as a per cent of these various standards 
would not only be an interminable task but would give so many. 
individual results that their study and co-relation would be 
impracticable. 

It is necessary, therefore, that a method be employed which in 
a single percentage figure will show the degree of efficiency at- 
tained. This result is accomplished in the following way: 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1779 


All calls handled are expressed as though they had been of a 
single class. This is done by multiplying the number of calls 
of each class by a factor representing the ratio of the labor of 
handling the calls of a particular class to the labor of handling 
calls of the class selected as the unit class. 

The standard number of these unit calls which should be han- 
dled being determined, the per cent of efficiency is readily ob- 
tained by comparing the results obtained with those specified 
as a standard. From the foregoing, it will be seen that this 
method involves not only the selection of some unit, but the 
determination of the number of unit calls and the number of 
calls of other types that may be handled by average skilled 
operators within a given period, and the establishment of 
coefficients representing the ratio of the loads of each type of 
call to that of the unit class. 

A flat rate non-trunked call handled on a No. 1 relay board 
was selected as the unit call for two reasons. It is a very simple 
type of call and one which predominates in number in most 
offices. Furthermore, it is of such a class of call that the number 
an operator can handle depends primarily upon her ability, and 
not upon circuit conditions. 

The determination of the number of unit calls and the number 
of calls of other classes that operators could handle, involved a 
most exhaustive study of operating loads. This study con- 
sumed a period of over two years during which many thousands 
of observations were made covering all types of calls, normal 
and abnormal, from all classes of service. As a result of this 
‘study, it was found that an average skilled operator, working in 
a team of five or more operators, could carry 230 unit calls per 
hour and maintain that rate during the entire working day, 
without undue physical or nervous strain, at the same time 
giving a standard quality of service. Furthermore it was found 
that, for a single hour in each half day period an operator could, 
without material impairment of the service, handle 25 per cent 
more than this number. Even this load could be exceeded at 
times of unusually sharp peaks. 

The ability of the force to carry the peaks at loads in excess 
of the average busy hour loads, is an important factor in de- 
termining operating force requirements. Fig. 1 shows in per- 
centages the actual distribution of traffic in two offices for the day 
“hours. The curve marked A is that of an office of the best type 
of residential subscribers, while the curve marked B is that of 


1780 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


an exclusively business office. The operators at A can carry 
the busy hour traffic at loads exceeding those of the average 
busy hours, while the operators at B will carry the standard 
load. With an equal amount of daily traffic in both offices, 
the same number of operators will handle the busy hour traffic 
of A as are required to handle the busy hour traffic of B. 

In the evolution of this system of equating calls covering 
two years of exhaustive study and some four years of practical 
application, its value and accuracy have been thoroughly tested. 
Its value lies not only in the fact that it furnishes a means of 
measuring the efficiency of labor, and is essential in measuring 
the efficiency of some of the other four factors mentioned in open- 


a1 wo 


PER CENT 


Boot aan 


ing this discussion, but in the fact that it has opened the way 
to a most exhaustive analytical study of the human element 
upon which telephone operation is so dependent. 

As a result of the establishment of standards of service quality 
and labor efficiency, it has been possible to institute methods 
of selecting and training an operating force with a degree of 
success otherwise impossible. The question of fitness is of 
primary importance and the matter of intelligent selection of 
operators is the result of many years of careful study of the 
qualities essential to success. All accepted candidates for oper- 
ating positions are required to spend one month in the operators’ 
training school, listening to lectures in regard to the handling of 
all types of calls, with the necessary study and examination 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1781 


hours, and in practical operating work under capable instructors 
on a regular working switchboard representing a typical central 
office, the calls being originated by instructors. No operator 
is allowed to work at a central office and handle the calls of 
telephone users until she has graduated from the school course 
and met a certain standard of requirement. With this training 
she has a thorough knowledge of how all classes of calls should 
be handled and only needs experience to settle that knowledge 
and acquire speed. This same course of training in modified 
form, is carried on in the smaller central offices where it is not 
economical to maintain a regular operators’ school. 

On an average it takes about a year for an operator to attain 
maximum efficiency. In view of the fact that, as in any large 
body of employees, there are constantly resignations and occa- 
sionally dismissals for cause, together with the steady growth in 
subscribers and traffic, it is obvious that the problem of maintain- 
ing at all times an adequate and suitably trained operating force 
is a very important one. Even with the most constant care in 
selection incompetency will develop in a certain percentage of 
the cases either during the school training course, or later, in the 
work in the central offices. On account of the reasons enumer- 
ated, it has been found that in order to produce a force of one 
year’s average experience it has been necessary to start and 
partially train, or train and keep in service for a short period 
only, at least three for every one who stayed a year. As it costs 
over $200,000 per year to train central office operators in the 
territory of the New England Telephone and Telegraph Com- 
pany, it is obvious that this is a problem well worthy of careful 
study. 

In order to meet this problem, all conditions of employment and 
work have-received most critical analysis. The operating loads 
have been most carefully determined, having in mind the physical 
well-being of the operating force. Working conditions have been 
made as pleasant and comfortable as possible. In addition to a 
liberal lunch hour, a fifteen minute relief period is insisted upon 
in the midst of each half day period. Commodious and taste- 
fully furnished rest rooms are provided, magazines and peri- 
odicals supplied, and everything possible done to make the work 
attractive and free from excessive nervous strain. Vacations, 
with pay, are allowed once during each calendar year. To 
further the careful study of working conditions and of the human 
“element as it enters into the problem, for over two years the 


1782 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


New England Company has employed a physician of highest 
standing to make a special study of all phases of these conditions. 

A careful record is kept of each employee from the time she 
enters the service of the company to the time she leaves. This 
record shows the character of the employee’s work, comments of 
her superiors, results of service observations, and every detail 
that has a bearing on her efficiency. Such a record is essential 
in the determination of proper wage increases, and the record of 
reasons for resignation or dismissal is of especial value in the 
study of ways and means of maintaining a stable operating force. 

This carefully studied system of selection, training and caring 
for employees, with adequate compensation for efficient work, 
based solely on merit, has had good results, as is indicated by the 
fact that during the past four years, it has been possible to in- 
crease the average length of employment of the operating forces 
by 20 per cent, while there is always a waiting list from which to | 
select candidates. It would seem obvious, therefore, that as a 
large factor in the efficiency of labor the study of the develop- 
ment and maintenance of a proper operating force is essential. 


EFFICIENCY OF OPERATING METHODS 


The efficiency of operating methods is in their adaptability to 
produce the required quality of service with the minimum of 
effort, labor and operating time per call, together with an 
economical use of switchboards, trunk and toll circuits. 

The methods of handling local calls have been fairly uniform 
for a number of years, the greatest improvements having been 
made in specializing the operation for irregular calls, or those which 
cannot be completed at once by the A or subscriber’s operator. 
Another step toward the application of efficient operating 
methods, brought about by the careful study of recent years, 
is the gradual elimination or diminution of abnormal types of 
service, such as heavily loaded party lines in congested centers, 
etc., which tend to degrade the quality and economy of service. 

In the field of toll service, except in a few notable instances, 
progress was not as great until comparatively recently. 
Toll service must be considered in two classes—‘‘ short-haul,”’ 
or suburban toll, and ‘long-haul,’ or ‘long distance ’’ toll. 
Within a comparatively short radius of most large telephonic 
centers are usually found a number of smaller communities 
closely related to the large center and to each other in a 
business and social way. The telephone traffic between such 


~ 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1783 


offices is of the class first mentioned and usually constitutes a 
very substantial portion of the toll business, the traffic to more 
distant points, covered by the second class mentioned, being in 
the minority. 

Toll operating methods have been the subject of most critical 
analysis for the past few years, resulting in the standardization 
. of several different types of toll operation, each designed to be 
applied under given conditions. 

The subject of operating methods is so fundamental to efficient 
operation in all its phases that it has received and is receiving 
very comprehensive study. Every suggestion must receive most 
careful and critical consideration in order to detect any inherent 
weakness and to guard against the introduction of a method 
which, while apparently harmless and even efficient under 
existing conditions, might fail to meet the requirements of .a 
constantly increasing traffic. 

So far as concerns the production efficiency of various opera- 
ting methods, the use of the unit system, hereinbefore outlined, 
provided a means of determining the relative efficiency of the dif- 
ferent methods. The effect of any change from one method to 
another can be predetermined by the application of the proper 
coefficients to the traffic involved. 


PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY OF CENTRAL OFFICE EQUIPMENT 


The amount of central office equipment necessary is directly 
dependent upon the number of equated or unit calls to be 
handled during the average busy hours, or, in other words, upon 
the number of employees for whom it is necessary to provide 
switchboard positions during the average busy hours. With 
service of standard quality, labor production at standard eff- 
ciency, and efficient operating methods, by use of the unit 
system applied to the amount of traffic to be handled the 
switchboard requirements can be accurately determined. The 
discussion of operators’ loads and Fig. 1 in the preceding section 
apply also to the determination of amount of switchboard. 
In engineering central office equipment it is customary to 
engineer on a basis of a fifteen to twenty year ultimate capacity 
and to install initial equipment sufficient to cover from two and 
one-half to three years’ growth. As it is necessary to know the 
ultimate requirements for buildings, etc., these are developed 
through special studies or “‘ fundamental plans ”’ which include 
the consideration of all factors that have a bearing on the future 


1784 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


development. In order to determine the probable growth in 
subscribers, it is necessary to maintain curves of growth for 
past years for each class of service sold. These curves are pro- 
jected to the ultimate period, and corrected periodically from 
actual growth. With the curves of station growth is maintained 
a curve of the station calling rate in each class of service. From 
these records, supplemented by the yearly estimates of growth, 
can be determined the number of stations, and volume and type 
of traffic to be expected at any future period. By application of 
the equating process to the various classes of traffic and ob- 
taining the number of unit calls to be handled, it is possible to 
forecast accurately the amount of switchboard required. 

The production efficiency of central office equipment is de- 
termined by the output per position, or per dollar of investment. 
The unit system furnishes means of determining the relative 
efficiency of different types of switchboard for handling particular 
classes of service under given conditions. Given the desired 
standard quality of service, the production capacity of a given 
switchboard unit of any type can be predetermined, and actual 
results attained can be checked, by the proper use of the unit 
system. The relative economy of different types of boards 
must be balanced against other costs incidental to the case under 
consideration. 


PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY OF TRUNK AND TOLL CIRCUITS 


The production efficiency of trunk and toll circuits is affected 
by the quality of service which it is desired to produce, by the 
efficiency of operating labor, and by the efficiency of operating 
methods, and to a certain degree, by the efficiency of central 
office equipment. It is also affected by the volume of traffic 
to be handled and the contract conditions under which the service 
is sold. 

Analysis of this subject has demonstrated that while operating 
and equipment costs vary directly with the number of unit calls, 
circuit costs vary indirectly with the number of calls, due to the 
varying efficiency of circuits in groups of different sizes, and more 
or less directly with the length of haul under a given amount of 
traffic, except so far as qualified by variation in type of plant 
necessary to meet transmission requirements. 

The production capacity of a circuit under any method of 
operation is determined by the average circuit holding time per 
call and the number of calls to be handled over the particular 
group of circuits in a given time. 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1785 


For proper consideration of the subject of circuits, distinction 
will be made between trunk and toll circuits. Trunk circuits 
may be considered as local circuits connecting offices covering 
an area of too great telephonic density to be served economically 
from one central office, and in which case local service, so called, 
is sold covering intercommunication between the several central 
offices. Toll circuits will be defined as circuits between offices 
more distant from each other and between which the service 
is sold on a message basis, the charge being graded according ta 
duration of connection and distance involved. 

Toll circuits, however, must be considered in two classes, one 
embracing the ‘short-haul’ or suburban toll traffic, and the 
other the ‘‘ long-haul ” or “‘ long distance ”’ traffic. The former 
class may be considered on the same basis as trunk circuits, so 
far as concerns production efficiency and engineering. 

The trunk circuits and ‘‘ short-haul ” toll circuits are provided ~ 
for the purpose of handling calls on a local basis; that as, the 
telephone subscriber passes the desired number to his operator 
and remains at the telephone until the connection is completed 
or a report returned to him of inability to complete. This 
feature of the trunk and “‘ short-haul ’’ toll operation necessitates 
providing a sufficient number of circuits between two offices to 
handle the traffic offered during the busiest period so that there 
is always a circuit available when a call is to be handled. 

The “‘ long-haul ’’ circuits are for economical reasons provided 
on a less liberal basis which contemplates that the calls will 
not be handled while the subscriber remains at his telephone. 

A comprehensive series of studies on the subject of circuit 
use has resulted in the development of methods by the use of 
which all the elements entering into circuit use can be given proper 
consideration, and the most efficient operating methods applied 
to existing conditions. 

In figuring circuit loads, as a matter of convenience, it is 
usual to consider the load for a given group of circuits, rather 
than for a single circuit. As the circuit holding time is made up 
of the time of conversation plus the use of the line for operating 
purposes, the total holding time for a call will differ according to 
the operating method used; for example, the local or “ short- 


haul” toll requires less holding time than that handled on the 


“Jong-haul” basis. Also the efficiency of the individual cir- 
cuits increases as the size of the group increases. These various 


factors have been studied and reduced to known quantities. 


1786 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


Having ascertained the production capacity of circuits under 
various conditions of volume of traffic and methods of operation, 
it is possible to set the proper standards to apply, and with which 
to check actual results, so far as concerns individual groups of 
circuits. The study of this matter, however, has developed the 
fact that in order to properly engineer the circuit plant for hand- 
ling the traffic between several hundred offices, the subject is 
far more complex than would appear at first sight. In con- 
sidering the circuit efficiency between two offices, as these 
same circuits may carry in addition the traffic to other points, 
the plant must be considered as a whole. The comprehensive 
study which has been referred to, has developed methods by 
which the circuit plant can be intelligently laid out with pre- 
determined results. The problem in laying out a circuit plant 
is to furnish the proper standard of service as to accuracy, speed 
and transmission, with a minimum investment in line plant. 
It is obvious when one considers the variety of types and grades 
of trunks and toll circuits that this is no small matter. 

The production efficiency of a trunk and toll circuit plant has 
usually been figured either by computing the number of calls 
handled per circuit or the earnings per circuit mile. Neither of 
these methods, however, gives the true measure of circuit pro- 
duction efficiency, inasmuch as for economical reasons it is 
often necessary to switch long-haul calls through one or more 
intermediate offices, and on account of the varying size of the 
circuit groups and the consequent variation in the capacity of 
individual circuits, the real production efficiency of the circuits 
cannot thus readily be determined. On the other hand, com- 
parison of the earnings per circuit mile would be very misleading 
if any change in rates had been made between the periods under 
consideration. 

A far more logical means of measuring the production effi- 
ciency of a trunk and toll circuit plant is afforded by computing 
the number of message miles produced per circuit mile. By 
computing the former on a basis of air line measurements be- 
tween points of connection and the latter on the basis of actual 
circuit route mileage, a means is afforded of checking the effi- 
ciency of circuit plant layout, not only from the standpoint of 
the efficiency of labor and methods, but also from the standpoint 
of economical plant layout. 


In the foregoing sections there have been discussed in a some- 
what incomplete way some of the principal factors entering into 


, 


bone 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1787 


the consideration of traffic engineering problems. Each of 
these factors has involved most comprehensive study, a discus- 
sion of which would involve a paper of considerable length. 
There is a close relation and inter-dependence between them all. 
The quality of service is affected by all the other factors, and 
itself has to be considered in connection with each one. To 
illustrate the complexity of the problems, and to indicate the 
possibilities in constructive application of the principles de- 
duced from their comprehensive analysis, it is proposed to discuss 
the concrete application of some of the results of the engineering 
studies of the last few years in the development of a toll operating 
system and plant. 

From the standpoint of the telephone user, the ideal toll ser- 
vice would afford connection with the most distant point with 
substantially the same celerity as obtains in case of a local con- 
nection. ‘The development of a toll operating system should be 
toward this ideal as far as economically consistent. 

The handling of toll business at special toll boards, or at 
separate positions on the local board, developed for two reasons. 
While the operating and equipment charges, under a given toll 
operating method, are fairly constant, the circuit charges in- 
crease in weight with the length of haul. In view of the large 
investment involved in long toll circuits, it was deemed necessary 
for economical reasons, to make each circuit handle all the mes- 
sages possible, and it was generally customary to handle such 
calls on the basis of arranging to have both parties ready to 
talk before the circuits were put up for the actual conversation. 
From the nature of operating procedure involved in handling 
traffic on such a basis, it was obviously necessary to remove the 
handling of this type of call, involving extra labor, from the A 
or subscriber’s operator, as it would, if handled by the latter, 
prevent the smooth, quick answering and handling of local con- 


nections. Further, on account of the extra labor involved, the 


productive efficiency of the operator and switchboard were very 
substantially reduced. It was therefore necessary to specialize 
and segregate this business. Where the local board was of fair 
size or an expensive multiple board, it was economical to set up 
an entirely separate board carrying only the toll circuits, the 


connection with local subscribers being made through the medium 


of switching circuits betweén the boards. 
For a clear understanding of the explanation to follow, it 
will be well to briefly describe some of the most generally used 


methods of toll operation. J Or ¥ 


LIBRARY 


1788 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


The operating methods employed in handling the toll traffic 
may be divided into two classes, “ short-haul’? and “ long- 
haul”’. In the case of the ‘‘ short haul ’’ method the subscriber, 
who must pass his call by number, waits at his telephone until 
the called station answers, as he would on a local call. In the 
‘long-haul ’’ method, however, the subscriber, having given his 
call to a recording operator—specifying a particular party if he 
so desires—hangs up his receiver and waits for the toll operator to 
call him. 

Calls of the latter class are further subdivided according to 
the operating method employed, namely, the two-ticket method, 
single ticket ring down method, and single ticket call circuit 
method. 

Under the two-ticket method of tol! operating the subscriber 
signals his local operator, asks for and is switched to the toll 
recording operator, to whom he passes informatiort sufficient 
to insure the completion of his call, hangs up his receiver and 
waits to be called. The recording operator having written the 
. necessary information on the toll ticket, forwards it to the line 
operator, who secures a toll line to the called office, rings, and 
when the inward operator answers, passes the details of the call, 
which are again recorded by the inward operator. The latter 
operator assumes the responsibility of obtaining the particular 
party; having done this she notifies the outward operator, who 
thereupon rings the calling subscriber. Both operators super- 
vise and time the call, entering on the tickets the length of con- 
versation and both are responsible for the prompt release of the 
toll circuits after conversation ends. 

The single ticket ring down method of handling a toll call is the 
same as the two-ticket as far as the recording of the call is con- 
cerned and up to the time of passing the call by the outward 
operator. The latter does not pass the details of the call, 
but simply the called number to the inward operator, who, with- 
out making a second ticket, rings the desired number. The 
outward operator announces the call to the called subscriber, 
and assumes sole responsibility of timing and supervising the 
call, and of releasing the circuits after conversation ends. 

The operation of the single ticket call circuit method is similar — 
to the single ticket ring down. It is faster in that the outward 
operator secures the called station over call circuit trunks to a B 
switching operator in the distant office, thereby eliminating the 
services of an inward toll line operator. 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1789 


The ‘short-haul ’’ methods are subdivided into the “ toll 
board” and the ‘“ A-B”’ method. 

Under the former, the A or local operator receiving from the 
subscriber the number desired, passes the calling and called 
numbers directly to a toll line operator, thus eliminating the 
recording operator as a separate operator. The toll line opera- 
tor records the call and after ordering the calling subscriber’s 
line to be held on a trunk to the local switching operator, secures 
the called number as under thé single ticket methods of oper- 
ating. 

Under the A-B method the toll operator is eliminated, the A 
operator recording the toll ticket and completing the call over 
a trunk to the distant office. She alone is responsible for 


TWO TICKET . SINGLE TICKET SINGLE TICKET TWO NO. 
RING DOWN Cc 


nd ALL OKT.) TOLL BOARD RING DOWN, 


aay, “Ye 
“LONG HAUL" METHODS ‘SHORT HAUL" METHODS 


Fic. 2—-Relative amount of operating labor required to handle 
a toll call by the various operating methods 


supervising and timing the call. This A-B method may be on 
either a ring down or call circuit basis as may be most economical. 

There are further refinements of these methods, in the way of 
“tandem”’ toll operation, etc., which are purposely omitted 
from this discussion, as it is impossible to go too much into de- 
til, and the typical methods shown will serve to illustrate the 
processes described. 

Considering first the efficiency of labor involved in handling 
a toll call, Fig. 2 shows the relative requirements of operating 
labor under each of the above described methods. 

Considering the production efficiency of central office equip- 
ment under the same operating methods, Fig. 3 shows the com- 
_parison of relative requirements in the way of switchboards and 
accessory equipment for the operation under each method, 


1790 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


It will be noted that in case of both the central office labor 
and central office equipment, the ‘‘ short-haul’’ methods are 
relatively more economical than the “long-haul’’ methods. 
Bearing in mind that the toll circuit efficiency is affected by 
many variables, as has been explained, chiefly volume of traffic, 
length of haul and circuit holding time, it is necessary to con- 
sider this factor in connection with the efficiency of labor and 
equipment. Obviously, to handle traffic on a “short haul” 
basis, requires more circuits than to handle the same traffic 
on the ‘‘long-haul’’ basis. It is necessary, therefore, to ascer- 
tain under what conditions it will be economical to apply the 
more efficient operating methods, considering all factors involved. 

The process by which the principles deduced from engineering 


TWO TICKET SINGLE TICKET SINGLE TICKET TWO NO. 2 
RING DOWN CALL CKT. «_ TOLL BOARD RING DOWN , 


“LONG HAUL"’ METHODS “SHORT HAUL" METHODS 


Fic. 3.—Relative amount of switchboard required to handle 
a toll call by the various operating methods 


studies are applied to a territory involving a large number of 
offices of varying sizes and volumes of traffic, may be best il- 
lustrated by taking a hypothetical case, as shown in Fig. 4. 

A and B are fair sized offices 30 miles apart. C, D and E are 
offices separated from B by 5, 8 and 20 miles respectively. 
F is between A and B and slightly off the direct line, being 24 
miles from A and 8 miles from B. ‘The traffic between these 
offices is indicated in the table adjoining Plan 1. This traffic 
is shown in number of calls per day rather than per busy hour, 
for the sake of clearness. In the actual engineering, the busy 
hour loads are used. 

It will be noted in Plan 1, Fig. 4, that the circuits are laid out 
in a way generally typical in past practice, the tendency being 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1791 


to furnish direct circuits between points having a fair volume of ° 
daily traffic. Under this Plan 1, there are toll positions or toll 
boards at each of the offices. It will be noted that there are 
14 circuits between A and B divided into several groups, also 
that there is a fair amount of traffic between B and C and B and 
D, with slightly less between B and D. 

Under Plan 2, the traffic between B and C, B and D and B 
and F, has been taken from the toll position or toll board and is 
handled on the local boards on the “ short-haul’? A-B basis. 
C, D, E and F continue to handle their toll traffic with A on 


RELATIVE 
REQUIREMENTS 
CALLS PLANS 1, 2, & 3 
PER DAY ] 


o 

S 
A-B = 250 Fe 
A-C = 110 @ 
A-D= 90 2 
A-E= 40 ms 

°o. 
A-F= 30 3 
C-B= 140 Zz 
D-B = 200 é 
E-B= 80 ro) 
F-B= 50 


Fic. 4 


toll positions and over direct circuits. At the right of Fig. 4 
are shown the comparative requirements under the two plans. 
It will be noted that, in order to handle the traffic between B 
and C, B and D and B and F on a local basis through the local 
board, additional circuits had to be provided to place this traffic 
on a ‘short-haul’ basis. This increased the circuit require- 
ments, but made a material reduction in the operating require- 
ments as shown, while the equipment requirements increased 
slightly owing to the transfer of the toll business to the more 
expensive local board. The composite result, however, is a 
substantial gain in economy. 


1792 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


Having placed the traffic between B and C, B and FE, B and 
D and B and F on a “short-haul "’ operating basis, the, way is 
open for still further modification. Plan 3, Fig. 4, shows the 
next step, which is the centering of all toll operation for B, C, D, 

-E and F on the toll board at B. Placing the traffic between’ 
these tributary offices and B on a “short-haul” basis will 
permit of recording at B all toll calls from these points to A, 
practically without loss in time. The operators on the toll 
board at B can order up connections through toll switching opera- 
tors at the tributary offices with the same efficiency and speed 
as with subscribers at B. 

This plan, which has been termed “toll center operation ”’, 
has several advantages. Applying the principles outlined’in the 
section on the production efficiency of trunk-and toll circuits, 
by combining into one group all toll circuits between A and B, 
each circuit can handle more calls than was the case where they 
were split into smaller groups asin Plan 1. The offices tributary 
to B receive practically local service with B and among them- 
selves. They receive the benefits of the large team of toll opera- 
tors at B, and the net result is a great improvement in the 
quality of service and greater economy in operating and in the 
use of equipment and circuits, as indicated in comparison No. 3 
of ‘‘ Relative Requirements ’’. It will be noted that the cir- 
cuits between A and B have been reduced from 14 to 8, while the 
total circuit mileages involved under Plans 1, 2 and 3 are 551, 
620 and 4386 miles respectively. 

This hypothetical case illustrates the application of the engi- 
neering principles which have been outlined in the discussion of 
the various factors entering into efficient production. As indi- 
cating how substantial may be the results of the application 
of these principles to a large territory, it will be of interest to 
state that in the territory of the New England Telephone and 
Telegraph Company are over 730 central offices, nearly every one 
of which formerly had its own separate toll position or toll 
board, although in the smallest offices the toll operation was 
handled in combination with the local. The application of the 
above principles has been carried to the extent that to-day the 
toll traffic between these 730 offices is handled at 79 toll centers. 
The general effect on service has been to place all short-haul 
traffic on an approximately forty second or better basis; to con- 
centrate the longer haul high grade circuits in large groups 
between centers; to concentrate the long-haul toll operation at 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1793 


these centres, with the increased economy and efficiency of a 
larger and more highly developed toll force; to remove from the 
small offices the burden of labor entailed in handling toll calls, 
this resulting in a smoother local service; and, through making 
available large groups of trunks on main routes, affording a 
more speedy, dependable long-haul toll service to all offices. 
Thus by the use of the comparative values established through 
development of the unit system of equating traffic and the es- 
tablishment of standards.of production efficiency for force, equip-~ 
ment and circuits, it has been possible to improve the quality of 
service, conserve the investment and reduce operating expenses. 

Undoubtedly the most striking development in the analysis 
of the toll problem is that which has pointed out the way for 
the evolution and systematic development of the ‘‘ short-haul ” 
system of handling toll calls. 

Reference has been made to, the fact that from the viewpoint 


of the telephone user the ideal toll service would be that which 


afforded the same speed of connection to a distant point as that 
given in making a local connection. Having this ideal in mind, 
studies were made to determine to what extent this type of ser- 
vice could be developed economically. It was demonstrated that 
laws could be derived from these analyses whereby it could be 
predetermined, with a given volume of traffic and given average 
holding time per call, up to what point a suitable number and 
grade of circuits could be provided and furnish this type of service 
economically. 

It was found essential, in order to furnish this ‘‘ short-haul ”’ 
toll service, that the calling subscriber should pass his call for the 
distant point by number and not for a designated party. This 
brought out two important factors as requisite to furnishing the 
means and the incentive to the subscriber for so placing his calls: 
first, the matter of the telephone directory, that the subscriber 
might ascertain the number desired in the distant place; second, 
whether the subscriber could fairly be asked to place his call by 
number and pay for the connection if the distant station were 
reached, whether his party were there or not. 

Investigation of the first factor showed that, as the toll calls 
originated from a comparatively small proportion of the sub- 
scribers, where the amount of business warranted, directories for 
such other places as would meet the needs could be furnished 
without great expense, or special lists could be made up for 
subscribers doing considerable business with the distant points. 


1794 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


In case of the second factor, analysis of several thousand 
toll calls to points at varying distances from the originating office 
showed that in 89 per cent of the calls where the station was 
reached, the desired person either answered the telephone or 
was on the premises and available to talk, and that in 6 per cent 
more there was some one at the station with whom the business 
could be transacted. It was thus demonstrated that in 95 per 
cent of the calls, business could be successfully transacted. It 
further developed that there was less demand and necessity for 
locating a particular person on the short-haul calls than on the 
long haul calls, which is logical in that the more expensive 
long haul toll calls are not usually made unless the matter is of 
more importance than is the case in the ordinary short haul toll 
calls. 

Based on these results, a plan was developed by which the 
‘“‘ short-haul ”’ traffic would be handled on an exclusively ‘‘ two 
number-no delay ’’ basis; while for greater distances, the par- 
ticular person “‘ long-haul ’’ methods would be employed. 

This plan has been gradually developed with the result that 
while in the year 1906 but 17 per cent of the toll traffic of the New 
England Company was handled on the “ short-haul” basis, in 
1910 over 50 per cent was handled on that basis, while the plans 
under development and already partially in effect for 1911, con- 
template that by the end of the year at least 85 per cent of the 
toll traffic of the Company will be so handled. The results so 
far indicate that the telephone users greatly prefer this type of 
fast service to the slower “‘ particular person ’’ service and do not 
find it a serious disadvantage to forego the “‘ particular person ”’ 
privilege. 

It is probable that the New England territory, with its great 
density of towns and cities, offers ideal conditions for the de- 
velopment of this type of service, but it seems reasonable to 
expect that the telephone using public generally will eventually 
express preference for toll service of this character. 

As the volume of traffic increases with the growth in the busi- 
ness, it will be possible to offer such service on an economical 
basis to a far greater extent than would seem possible without a 
full knowledge of the facts. : 

It is possible to obtain a view of some of the future possibili- 
ties in the development of ‘‘ short-haul ”’ toll service by exam- 
ing the chart in Fig. 5. 

The curve shown in Fig. 5 is one of a set of curves made up to 


1911] VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 1795 


cover various conditions. The basic assumptions for this curve 
are, the use of No. 12 copper line circuit, common battery type 
of central office equipment, with standard operating, equip- 
ment and line production efficiency, and an eight hour telephone 
day: 1.e., one-eighth of the day’s traffic is handled during the 
busiest hour. 

The comparisons are between the generally used single ticket 
particular party ‘‘long-haul’’ method, and the “ short-haul ’”’ 
A-B ring-down method. From this chart may be determined, 
assuming a given number of messages per day, up to what dis- 
tance it will be possible to furnish enough circuits to permit of 
operating on the ‘short-haul’? A-B ring-down basis more 


MILES 


50100 200 300 400 500 600 700 Sv0 00 1000 
MESSAGES PER DAY 


Fic. 5 


economically than on the “long-haul” particular party single 
ticket basis. This takes into account all the factors involved 
that are necessary to a fair comparison. 

It would seem obvious that once there is an appreciation 
of the latent possibilities developed by this analysis, there will 
be steady progress toward the development of this highly de- 
sirable type of service, which can be supplied economically in 
case of a substantial majority of the toll calls in a territory where 
there are a number of closely related communities within rea- 
sonable distance of each other. 


The foregoing discussion has simply covered in a broad way a 


- few of the important problems which have been the subject of 


1796 VALENTINE: TELEPHONE TRAFFIC [June 28 


traffic engineering study for the past few years. The general 
problem of telephone service is so broad, and its full considera- 
tion involves so many and such a diversity of factors, that it is 
difficult, within the limits of a paper of this nature, to discuss 
comprehensively any one of its phases. 

It should be apparent that the problems in connection with 
the production of telephone service are of sufficient importance 
to call for most careful analysis. The fact that the gross annual 
revenue of a telephone company is but a fraction of its capital 
investment, wherein it differs from most lines of commercial 
endeavor, makes such analysis a necessity. Solution of the 
problems of handling the traffic is fundamental to the construc- 
tion engineering and equally so to intelligent consideration of 
matters affecting the economic and public policies of a telephone 
company. The determination of values in a problem affected 
by so many variables, and the development of simple methods 
of making use of them, have offered and still offer endless op- 
portunities for a high grade of engineering. 

The results of the studies so far made have demonstrated 
that it is not necessary to rely solely on opinion or judgment 
from a certain point of view; that by analytical process many 
factors of apparently intangible values may be reduced to known 
quantities; that relations between them can be definitely and 
accurately established; and that from these relations certain 
laws can be derived which are capable of general application in 
the solution of telephone traffic problems. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO \ 1797 


Discussion ON ‘‘ PROBLEMS IN TELEPHONE TRAFFIC. ENGI- 
NEERING.” CHICAGO, JUNE 28, 1911. 


A.P. Allen: The “ problems of telephone traffic engineering ”’ 
used to be to guess what was going to happen—and we are only 
just a little bit better off today. As I listened to some of the 
other papers, I wanted to congratulate the light, power, and 
construction engineers because they could fix at least something 
and depend on it. This paper is, however, comforting to a man 
in my position, because it gives the idea that even in telephone 
traffic engineering things are coming around so that you can 
depend on them; so that you can say that an average operator’s 
load ought to be so much, and expect to get it; you can say that 
the public will give you more calls between nine and ten in the 
morning than they will between three and four in the afternoon, 
and have it come true. 

But in practice almost eyerything that the traffic engineer 
touches goes back on him sooner or later. He gets figures that 
_ show that the normal load in a city residence district is heaviest 

in the morning, and some day he gets the larger load in the middle 
of the afternoon—larger than he ever had in the morning. That 
is something that we cannot control. It is the same way with 
the handling of the toll traffic. The business between two towns 
will be, perhaps, only 15 per cent taking place in the busy hour, 
while the business between other towns that have apparently 
the same conditions will be 25 per cent in the busy hour. It is 
very hard to establish standards, or formulae, that you can de- 
‘pend upon on all occasions, when the conditions simply /ook 
similar. 

A few papers out of my files illustrate that point. For in- 
stance, in Chicago, the long distance business—making a series 
of tests every day for one week: on Tuesday the busy hour, in 
the afternoon, was 103 per cent of the busy hour in the morning. 

(Of course we have to plan our operators for the busy hours.) 
The very next day the afternoon busy hour was only 64 per 
cent as heavy as it was in the morning. In the same way with 
long distance traffic of New York City, comparing different 
months. Taking April as 100 per cent; one year, the August 
business is 91 per cent while the next year it is only 85 per cent; 
but in both years December is 110 per cent of the April business. 

All such figures demonstrate that the use of the service by the 
public is very uncertain. We get up formulas and say that if 
the average holding time is two minutes and fourteen seconds, a 
group of ten trunks will carry so many calls. As a matter of 
fact, our average is not a reliable average, because the varia- 
tion between the shortest and the longest connection is very great. 
The formula holds true if they are all nearly alike, as to the 
average time; but as they are plotted out, they run from five- 
second calls up to about ten minutes. Can we, under such con- 
- ditions, accurately foretell how many trunks we will need to give 


1798 TELEPHONE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING [June 28 


instantaneous service to a given number of patrons? That is 
what we have to contend with in city traffic: we have to give in- 
stantaneous connection, we cannot wait for circuits. Between 
two offices a certain number of calls will require a certain number 
of trunks; between two other offices the same apparent load may 
take nearly twice as many. 


PER CENT OF POSSIBLE LOAD ACTUALLY HANDLED 


_ 
re wo sewwees 
ooo solo oO ote Coma 


avo 319g1SSOd WNWIXVW 


OLF OSF OSF OTF O68 OLE OSE OSE OTE 06% OLS 096 0EB OTS 


The charts shown in Figs. 1 and 2 are original, perhaps—at least 
I have never seen anything just like them. They show the 
“‘ guessing ’’ we have to do on the ability of the average operator. 
Each line represents roughly, a group of operators, graded as to 
what they can do in fifteen minutes, and also showing what 


100 —— T ™ 
© 
Ceo TE 
4) y es, / 
a >= 7 / 
[e) 80 ot 6 — SS 
E ry, 4 eh 40 
<0 & © ze Secs 
S, eS) Pa 
a Got—+- baba! Sl Vf le Yo SS" & 
fo) ny cy cy & y iS of ey 
uw 50}-—- + {9 of 1$ - | $ eo 
| | 1S) y 3 alla 1O 
3S | JS |V IF| Jl) WKF 
- 49+ 4~—+_1 1 Ni >f__|$ S g 
‘i ls rs) is} 7 
is ¥ S ° & SE 
¢ 30 = “| a) o 
4 
tc & 
u) 20 = “G 
o 
10 | sees | | = 7 = 


0 
105 115 125 135 145 155 165 175 185 195 205 215 225 235 245 255 205 275 285 295 305 315 326 335 
CALLS PER HOUR ACTUALLY HANDLED PER OPERATOR 


Prea2 


they did do in the total hour. A total of 1250 operators were 
thus analyzed, their ability being represented by what they did 
in fifteen minutes. It is reasonable to suppose that they could 
do four times as much in an hour if they had it to do; and that 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1799 


the fluctuation in their hourly load is due to the fact that the 
total loads vary so much during an hour. Due to that fact, the 
per cent of efficiency that all grades give is almost exactly the 
same. Girls that handle 55 calls per quarter hour reach 82 per 
cent efficiency for the total hour. Girls that can handle 50 per 
cent more in 15 minutes have only the same relative efficiency 
for the total hour. 

__I certainly hope that Mr. Valentine’s paper gives the right 
idea, that in the end we will be able, by analysis and careful 
tabulation and watching of results, to get some real, accurate 
data on which to base fundamental plans; but it does not appear 
to me that we have yet reached that condition. And a great 
many of the problems that we have to contend with are not within 
our control at all—that is, they depend entirely upon the use of 
the service by the public. 

W. Lee Campbell: In manufacturing, mining, bricklaying 
and similar occupations great advances have been made in the 
last few years by engineers studying efficiency methods and mak- 
ing motion studies with the idea of increasing the efficiency of 
‘ the individual operator. To one who has been familiar with this, 
the question naturally occurs what can be done along this line, 
or what has been done in manual telephone work toward in- 
creasing the efficiency of the operators? I suppose the principal 
difficulty is in supplying each operator with as much work as she 
can do. As Mr. Allen has just brought out, in one moment 
the operator may have all she can do; the next moment she may 
not have as much as she can do. The result is that if standards 
were set, the operators could not be compelled to come up to 
them by force, nor could they be coaxed to come up to them 
by increased remuneration. Consequently, it would appear 
to me that if some device should be introduced between the sub- 
scriber’s lines and the operator, which would furnish her with 
work at the greatest speed she could take it, as determined 
scientifically, that the operators could be brought to a very 
much higher standard of efficiency. The work could be dis- 
tributed, starting at one end of the board, to the operators as 
far as it would goand at the other end of the board a certain per 
cent of operators could be kept for emergencies. I am not a 
manual telephone engineer, but I should like to ask of some of 
these gentlemen who are, if there are not possibilities in such a 
scheme. 

Bancroft Gherardi: I feel that we are all very much indebted 
to Mr. Campbell for raising the question which he has and for 
pointing out to us such an interesting problem concerning traffic 
engineering. It is a most valuable illustration of the type of 
problem which traffic engineers are sometimes confronted with 
because it requires not solely the work of traffic engineers, but 
also the work of plant engineers and requires the codperation of 
these two sets of engineers to obtain satisfactory results. The 
traffic engineer can point out what kind of call distributing sys- 
tem he would like to have from an operating standpoint, and the 


1800 TELEPHONE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING [June 28 


results which he would expect such a system to attain. Based . 


upon this, the plant engineer would undertake the design of 
suitable apparatus, and would, in general, sooner or later be 
confronted by some traffic requirements which could not practi- 
cally be met or which could only be attained at such great cost 
or such excessive complications as would not be warranted. 
So the working out of this problem and similar problems requires 
codperation between the traffic engineer and the plant engineer 
in order that from the general idea at first proposed there may be 
finally evolved the best arrangement, taking into account all of 
the circumstances of the case—operating savings, maintenance, 
character of service, first cost of apparatus, etc. While a dis- 
cussion of the specific problem which Mr. Campbell has men- 
tioned would carry us somewhat beyond the scope of this paper, 
I might say in reference to the matter that while a good deal of 
work has been done on this question by a large number of people 
and extending over many years, so far as I know no large appli- 
cation of the principle of call distribution has ever been made 
anywhere. I do not feel that we are now warranted in saying 
that we can ignore this problem and say there is nothing in it. 
It is my opinion at the present time that it is a problem which 
has not as yet been worked out and that there are certainly no 
data available at the present time to permit us to give an affirma- 
tive answer to the question “‘ Is call distribution a satisfactory 
and economical feature of a telephone switchboard?”’ 

Mr. Valentine has, I think, placed us all under obligations 
to him in presenting to us his paper dealing with traffic engi- 
neering problems. While traffic engineering does not deal with 
volts and amperes, and in that sense is not electrical engineering, 
it is nevertheless a most important and interesting class of 
engineering work, the nature of which is but little appreciated 
at the present time except by those who come in direct contact 
with it in their work. 

A. P. Allen: What I wanted to make clear was that, regard- 
less of any system of distributing, no one can tell in advance 
what the load is going to be—that is, how many calls the public 
is going to give to us—at any particular period of the day; and 
even if we had a perfect distributing system for those calls, we 
would not know whether to put on one set of operators, or more, 
in order to give a certain grade of service. 

W. Lee Campbell: It is found in manufacturing practice as 
shown by the studies of Mr. Harrington Emerson, Mr. F. W. 
Taylor and others, that the efficiency of the average operator 
paid by the day, is only about 67 per cent of what is attained if 
an operator is paid in proportion to his or her efficiency. It is 
impossible to bring an operator up to the highest efficiency unless 
she is supplied with all the work she can do. The work must be, 
in some way, gauged and the operator must have before her 
definite standards to which she will be expected to rise. As 
Mr. Allen says, in the use of switchboard operators, the trouble 


WP en 


1911] DISCUSSION A I CHICAGO 1801 


is that the public does not furnish a regular amount of work but 
if some of the automatic or mechanical devices should be used 
between the public and the operators to distribute the calls to 
each at her best rate of speed and the efficiency of the operators 
could thus be brought from 67 per cent up to 100 per cent, a great 
saving would be secured. A certain percentage of operators 
could be held to take care of the irregularities. With the 
present plan, each operator is given a fixed number of lines to 
handle, and consequently all of them are subject to irregularities 
“ load with the result that each has an excuse for not doing her 
est. 

F. P. Valentine: While this discussion has brought out one or 
two typical problems which the traffic engineer has to face, it 
also indicates that there is not a general understanding of how 
far these studies have been carried. It is perhaps not generally 
known that for some years telephone traffic problems have been 
receiving constant study as the result of which many of the 
apparently intangible factors have been reduced to known 
quantities and their inter-relation established, so that due weight 
‘may be given to variations. The analytical work of the past 
few years has been merely outlined in brief form in this paper to 
point out that the work can be carried on intelligently having 
accurate knowledge of values and their relations. 

We cannot today consider all the problems solved, but by the 
methods pointed out and with the facts and laws already estab- 
lished as a foundation the way seems fairly clear to the ultimate 
solution of the various elusive problems which constantly con- 
front the traffic engineer. Traffic engineering in itself is a com- 
paratively young branch of engineering work, in which de- 
velopments have come very fast within the last few years, and in 
regard to which there is comparatively little knowledge or 
appreciation outside of the comparatively few who have been 
fortunate enough to participate in the comprehensive studies 
which have been carried on. It is safe to say that the develop- 
ments of the next few years will bring about a better realization 
of the fundamental importance of the study of these problems 
as well as a better appreciation of the progress already made. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS 


BY G. FACCIOLI 


In the summer of 1910 some tests were performed on the lines 
of the Great Western Power Company, which are operated at 
100,000 volts, to obtain information on oscillations and rises 
of potential, due to switching operations. In these experi- 
ments the oscillograph was extensively used and this paper deals 

with some of the most im- 
Sane portant and representative 
‘ records. 

Since it was necessary to 
conduct the investigation 
without interrupting the 
operation of the system, 
the study of switching phe- 

dle ale nomena is rather incom- 
Lie plete and limited to no-load 


ae 


_————>} 


TWO THREE- 
PHASE LINES 


073-MILES 


conditions. 
Mr. W. W. Lewis, who 
assisted in these experi- 


LA 8 
|< ae ments, gives a description 
ioe of the methods and appa- 


PACIFIC 


SAN FRANCISCO 
S.F. BAY ratus employed, in an ap- 
pendix to this paper. 

Fig. 1 is a map of the 
system of the Great Western Power Company. Two three- 
phase lines run on the same towers (Fig. 2) the conductors 
of each line being situated in a vertical plane. Each conductor 
consists of a copper cable No. 000, B. & S. gauge (seven 
strands, outside diameter } in. approximately). The vertical 

1803 


1804 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


distance between conductors is ten feet} and the horizontal dis- 
tance between lines is 14 ft. 

The following tests were performed: 

1. Switching in and out an open three-phase line at the 

generating station by high-tension switches. 
2. Switching in and out an open three-phase line and step-up 
three-phase transformer at the generating station by low-tension 
switches. 


Fic, 2.—Transmission line of Great Western Pr. Co. at Brighton 


3. Switching in and out a three-phase line, connected at the 
end to an unloaded three-phase step-down transformer, by high- 
tension switches, at the generating station. 

4. Switching in and out a three-phase step-down transformer 
at the end of an unloaded three-phase line by high-tension 
switches. Sooty 

5. Switching, by high-tension switches, one of the three- 
phase lines unloaded, on and off the end of the other three-phase 
line, carrying normal load. 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1805 


Before entering into the discussion of the oscillographic records, 
it is advisable to study the constants of the line which, as we said 
before, consist of three No. 000 B. & S. copper cables situated 
in a vertical plane. The distance between conductors is 10 ft. 
and the length of the line is 154 miles. 

Line Inductance. The total inductance of each conductor is 
0.323 henry. 

Line Capacity. The total capacity of each conductor to the 
neutral is figured as 2.2 microfarads. It is interesting to com- 
pare this figure, obtained by calculation, with the figure derived 
from actual test. 

From a series of experiments, which it is superfluous to enum- 
erate, we find that when the voltage at the generator end of the 
line is 51,700 volts from conductor to neutral, the voltage at the 
far end of the open line is 64,000 volts from conductor to neutral. 


: In this case, the charging current per phase is 48 amperes. 


Assuming the capacity of the line concentrated in two identical 
condensers, one at the beginning of the line, and the other at the 
end of the line, we have 


48 =2 m fc (51,700+64,000) 


where f is the frequency, 60 cycles. 
c is the capacity of each of the two condensers into which 
the line capacity was divided. 

We find c=1.1 microfarads. 

This gives for the total line capacity from each conductor to 
neutral the value of 2.2 microfarads, which is identical with the 
value obtained by calculation. 

Line Resistance. The ohmic resistance of each conductor is 
50 ohms. 

Generator Reactance. In all the experiments, the source of 
power is a 10,000 kv-a. three-phase generator. The windings of 
the generator are Y-connected, and the neutral is not grounded. 
The speed of the alternator is 400 rev. per min., its normal 
voltage is 11,000 volts. The machine has 18 poles and three 
slots per pole per phase. 

In later calculations, we will frequently have occasion to use 
the value of the synchronous reactance, and of the leakage 
reactance of the generator. 

The value of the synchronous reactance may be deduced by 


- test, as follows: 


1806 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLA TIONS [June 29 


Referring to Fig. 3, when the line is disconnected (high-tension 
switches open) the voltage of the generator is 4,430 volts between 
phase conductors. 

When the line is connected (high-tension switches closed) 
the voltage of the generator for the same exciting current is 
8,730 volts, and the current supplied by the generator is 400 
amperes. 

Neglecting the ohmic resistance and the exciting current of 
the step-up transformer, we have 


8730 —4430 
2m f Lp 400=— 


where L, is the synchronous inductance per leg and f is the 
frequency, 60 cycles. 


CUR, TRANS. 7 
RATIO 200:1 CUR. TRANS. 


RATIO 80°1 
L AannlSPARK aaPl_ 
POT. TRANS. ie wel 
RATIO 10031 REACTANCE 
ee 
LINE 
L.T. SWITCHES H.T, SWITCHES 
\ {2 
GENERATOR 10000 KV.-A. TRANS, LIGHTNING 
11,000 V., 525 A., 60 CYCLES RATIO 10,450 * 100,000 ARRESTERS 
Fic. 3 


L,=0.01645 henry 

If we refer the synchronous inductance to the high-tension 
side of the step-up transformer, whose ratio of transformation is 
9.56, we obtain a value of Ly=1.52 henry. 

The leakage inductance of the generator deduced by calcula- 
tion is 0.00276 henry, and referred to the high tension side of 
the step-up transformer is 0.253 henry. 

Transformer Reactance. The transformers used in all the 
tests—step-up or step-down transformers—are 10,000 kv-a. 
three-phase transformers, delta connected on both primary 
and secondary sides. 

The leakage inductance of the transformer referred to its 
high tension side (L;) is 0.088 henry, from each conductor to 
neutral. 


= ">. ~ 
; ‘. C . 
‘ \ 


- 1911) FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1807 


Electrostatic Capacity of the Apparatus. The capacity of the 
generator windings and of the transformer windings plays an 
important role in some of the oscillations, as we will see later. 
However, no attempt is made to determine the value of these 
capacities. 

The theory of the phenomena involved in this investigation is 
well understood, and will, therefore, be omitted with the excep- 
tion of a few instances. All the calculations and theoretical 
considerations in this paper had their origin or inspiration from 
Dr. Steinmetz’s treatise on ‘‘ Transient Electric Phenomena 
and Oscillations.” 

TEST No. 1 

Fig. 3 shows the arrangement of the apparatus. The po- 
tential was recorded across one phase of the low-tension side 
of the step-up transformer. 

_ The current was taken either across the secondary of the cur- 
rent transformer connected in the low-tension circuit, or across 


Lt Li 


( Cc 
GENERATOR 
Eee LINE 


Fic. 4 


the secondary of the current transformer connected in the high- 
tension circuit. All the switches in this and the following tests 
were of the oil type. . 

The low-tension switches were closed, and the generator and 
step-up transformer excited at a certain voltage. Then the 
154 miles of three-phase line were switched in or out by means 
of the high-tension switches and the waves of e.m.f. and current 
were recorded at the moment of closing or opening the high 
tension switches. 

The line under test was open at the far end. 

Fig. 4 represents a simplified diagram of the connections. 

L, is the reactance of the generator. 
L; is the leakage reactance of the step-up transformer. 
L, is the reactance of the line. 
cis one-half of the line capacity. 
- We neglect ohmic resistances and assume the susceptance of 


1808 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


the step-up transformer equal to infinity. We neglect also the 
electrostatic capacity of the apparatus. 

If, for a first approximation, we consider L; as negligible, the 
closing and opening of the high-tension switches connects and 
disconnects the condenser given by the line capacity on and from 
the inductance of the generating system. 

It is known that in a circuit consisting of a condenser in 
series with an inductance, the general expression of the e.m.f. 
across the condenser and of the current contains three terms. 

The e.m.f. across the condenser is 


e=ei+er+es 
And the current is 
t= 412413 
4, and e; are the values corresponding to stationary conditions 
of charging current and condenser potential at fundamental im- 
pressed frequency. The current leads the e.m.f. by 90 deg. and 
the effective value of the current is equal to the effective value of 
the e.m.f. divided by the line condensive reactance. 
1, and e, represent a damped oscillation at a frequency inde- 
pendent of the impressed frequency but depending on the con- 
stants of the circuit, as follows: 


Frequenc ee Ste ae) 
eee ake ene BF 


Where L is the inductance of the circuit, C the capacity, and 
r the resistance.. 

This term depends mainly upon the point of the impressed 
e.m.f. at which the oscillation starts. There is no point at 
which this term is absent, and it reaches its maximum value 
when the oscillation starts at the maximum of the impressed 
é.m.f. 

t, and e, depend on the constants of the circuit and upon the 
instantaneous values of current and of difference of potential 
in the circuit at the moment the oscillation starts. 


A. SWITCHING IN OPEN LINE BY HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES 


In the special case of switching in a line, if the operation is 
instantaneous and no secondary phenomena occur, the third 
term disappears since the e.m.f. and current in the line are zero 
at the moment the switches are closed. 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1809 


The complex oscillation produced by closing the high-tension 
switches, thereby connecting suddenly the line condenser to the 
inductance of the generating system, will then consist in our 
case of a fundamental wave at 60 cycles on which is superim- 
posed a damped oscillation whose frequency is—neglecting ohmic 


1 
24 VLC 


Referring to Figs. 3 and 4, L=L,+JZ, (line inductance 
neglected). 

C=total line capacity. 

For L, we must take the value of the true self-inductance of 
the armature of the generator, and not the value of the syn- 
chronous inductance, as the latter includes the effect of armature 
reaction which must act on the field circuit where any change in 
flux is retarded by a change in field current. 

If, however, the oscillation lasts a comparatively long time, 
then the armature reaction may enter in the phenomenon. 

L=0.253+0.088 =0.341 henry. 

C=2.2 microfarads. 

Frequency of oscillation = 139 cycles. 

If L; is not neglected and the circuit is treated as represented 
in Fig. 4, the frequency of oscillation is 167 cycles. Finally, 
by taking the total synchronous inductance of the generator in 
the circuit represented in Fig. 4, the frequency of oscillation 
is 83 cycles. 

In these calculations we have neglected the ohmic resistances, 
which are actually very low, so that they not only allow the oc- 
currence of a free oscillation (7? less than 4L/C) but do not 
practically affect the value of the frequency of oscillation. 

This frequency is then comparatively low, and is between 
83 and 167 cycles. 

In Fig. 5, a 60-cycle wave is superimposed on a 120-cycle 
damped oscillation, and the resultant wave is almost identical 
to those obtained in the oscillograms, showing that the fre- 
quency of free oscillation found by test is of the same order of 
magnitude as calculated and approximately equal to 120 cycles. 

However, the oscillograms show that closing the high-tension 
switches (Fig. 3) produces a more complicated phenomenon 
than theoretically assumed, as the switches do not close the cir- 
cuit at once and permanently. Several secondary phenomena 
occur, as follows; 


resistance— f= 


1810 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


First: The three switches may not close the circuit at the same 
instant. 

If one switch only closes its circuit, then one wire only of the 
three phase line is energized, and the potential of the system 
to ground is unbalanced (the system has no point permanently 
grounded). A charging current from this wire returns to the 
generator through the line capacity in series with the capacity 
to ground of the generating apparatus (transformer included), 
giving rise to a high frequency oscillation. 

If two switches close and the third remains open, single-phase 
unbalanced load is thrown on the generator, giving rise to odd 
harmonics of the generated e.m.f. (third, fifth, etc.,) as shown 
clearly in some of the records. 


i ¥ RESULTANT WAVE 


| 
| 


Fires 5 


Since the first closing of a high-tension switch is generally 
due to an arc before the metallic contact is established, it is 
natural to expect that the three switches of a three-phase system 
will not begin to close the circuit at the same instant. 

Second: Arcs strike between contacts and die out before 
the metallic circuit is permanently established. It follows that 
instead of one starting oscillation, we obtain a series of oscilla- 
tions, due to the successive closing and opening of the circuit. 

We should then expect to find in the records a number of suc- 
cessive oscillations, which consist of a fundamental 60-cycle 
wave superimposed on a damped oscillation of 120 cycles, when 
all the three phases of the line are being connected to the gen- 
erating system. Other frequencies will appear when the three 
phases are not connected simultaneously, and at the -instant 


—_ ilies a Ne Ni 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS... * 1811 


when the line and the generating system become disconnected, 
the line on one side and the generating system on the other 
side will oscillate at their own natural frequency. Since the 
oscillograms of the electromotive force are taken on the low- 
tension side of the generating system, our records do not show 
the free oscillations of the line, and, likewise, do not show some 
of the oscillations which occur at high-frequency between the 
high-tension side of the transformer and the line and which do 
not go through the iron of the apparatus. 

Record No.1. Referring to Fig. 3, this record is taken at the 
moment of switching 154 miles of unloaded three-phase line 
onto the high tension winding of the step-up transformer by 
closing the high-tension switches. 

Before the switches are closed the wave of e.m.f. gives the gen- 
erator e.m.f. (4,500 volts, 60 cycles), which shows the harmonic 
due to the teeth of the machine, while the current—taken in the 


high-tension circuit—is obviously zero. 


’ After a high frequency impulse in the e.m.f. and current, due 
probably to an arc in one of the switches, the circuit is closed 
and the oscillation has the appearance of the resultant wave of 
Fig. 5 (120 cycles superimposed on 60 cycles). 

The current has two long zeros before the metallic contact is 
permanently established, due to arcs in the switch, and finally 
the last oscillation occurs, which is damped in less than three 
fundamental cycles. P 

The new conditions of equilibrium are now reached, and the 
record shows an e.m.f. of 9,300 volts and a charging current of 
48 amperes. 

It must be remembered that the e.m-f. is taken across two 
conductors of the low-tension circuit, while the current is taken 
in one conductor of the high-tension circuit. Therefore, if the 
current leads the corresponding e.m.f. by 90 deg., the record 
should show the high-tension current leading the e.m.f. by 60 deg. 
or lagging 120 deg. behind the e.m.f. In many of the records 
either the current or the e.m.f. should be reversed to obtain the 
proper phase relation. 

After the complex oscillation has occurred, the e.m.f. is smooth 
and does not contain the harmonic due to the teeth of the alter- 
nator, because of the very high impedance offered by the gen- 
erator reactance to the flow of this harmonic (17th harmonic), 
which Jags, the inductive reactance of the generator being several 
times the condensive reactance of the line at that frequency. 


AWILN3LOd 


AN3YYND “L*H 


WW ra 


L ant 


\ 


yy 


\ 


\ 


AVILN3LOd, 
\ 


LAA, 


wT eVOV 


Recorp No. 1 


1911] ; FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1813 


It is interesting to note that the first oscillation differs from 
the last in the wave of em.f. The first oscillation of e.m.f. 
shows a higher degree of distortion and contains odd harmonics 
(8rd and 5th) in addition to the natural frequency at which 
energy is exchanged between inductance and capacity. As 
pointed out above, this is due to the fact that all the three switches 
were closed at the last oscillation, while, very probably, all the 
three switches were not closed when the first oscillation started. 
Furthermore, while the first oscillation began with zero volts 
across the condenser, the successive oscillations started under 
different conditions. In fact, when the current is zero and the 
circuit is opened by the dying out of an arc in the switch, the 
e.m.f. across the condenser is near its maximum value and the 
energy thus stored in the line is dissipated at the natural fre- 
quency of the line, but this oscillation may not have died out 
entirely before the circuit is reéstablished. This introduces a 

‘third term in the expression of the e.m.f. and current, as men- 
tioned above. 

; The record shows also high frequency 
impulses in the e.m.f., due mainly to 
a change of energy from leading to 
lagging or vice versa. For instance, 
high frequency appears in the e.m.f. 
whenever the current goes to zero and the 
arc in the switch dies out. This occurs 
especially when the current maintains a low value for a com- 
paratively long time due to the interference between the 60- 
cycle and the 120-cycle waves. 

Referring to Fig. 6, let us assume that the line is discon- 
nected when the charging current, which is leading, is passing 
through zero. 

At this instant the impressed emf. E is maximum. On E 
is superimposed the e.m.f. e, which is generated by the flow of 
the charging current i through the reactance of the generating 
system, so that E+ is active across the condenser. At the next 
instant the high tension current remains zero, because the arc 
in the high tension switch has died out, but the generator must 
excite the transformer, which is still connected. Hence, lagging 
energy is supplied, and a current j flows. The current j produces 
an e.m.f. e’ across the reactance of the generating system. 

It follows that a sudden change of difference of potential 
has occurred with the corresponding change of energy stored in 


Fic. 6 


1814 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


the capacity of the generating system. The new equilibrium 
is reached through an oscillation at the natural frequency of the 
apparatus. 

. This high-frequency appears in the e.m.f. of the low-tension 
circuit and obviously not in the high-tension current, but we 
must expect to find it in the low-tension current, as we will see 
later. 

The switching-in is then complicated by arcs and by the 
irregular closing of the three switches. 

The record shows only the phenomena occurring in one par- 
ticular conductor and phase, and does not show—as stated be- 
fore—the free oscillations of the line. This line—154 miles 
long—oscillates at a frequency of 300 cycles when the length of 
the line corresponds to a quarter wave length. 

The records also do not show, or show incompletely, what 
happens at the very first establishing of the circuit, as only the 
oscillations passing through the iron of the step-up transformer 
and of the measuring transformer are recorded. At the very 
first establishing of the circuit, the energy stored in the high-— 
tension winding of the step-up transformer is thrown into the 
line, and a direct record of the high-tension e.m.f. would show 
this phenomenon and the process. by which the potential is 
established on the line. 

Finally, the records do not show what happens at the open end 
of the line, where the wave of e.m.f. undergoes a total deflection. 

Record 1 gives as maximum over-tension 60 per cent above 
final maximum voltage. The current reaches a maximum of 
160 per cent above final maximum value. The total complex 
oscillation lasts for a length of 10 fundamental cycles, or one- 
sixth of a second. 

Record No.2. This record is taken under the same conditions 
as the preceding record, but it gives the current in the low- 
tension circuit instead of the current in the high-tension circuit. 

We start again with an e.m.f. of 4,500 volts and the exciting 
current of the transformer, which is so small that it does not 
show in the record. Then an oscillation similar to the one of 
Record 1 occurs, and finally we have 9,300 volts and 450 amperes. 

All the remarks concerning the preceding record apply to this 
record, and the low-tension current shows, as expected, high — 
frequency impulses when the’arcs in the high-tension switches 
die out. 

The maximum over-tension is 55 per cent above the final 


aarp 


ui it 


44 NG ny 


Anni 


Recorp No. 3 


Recorp No. 2 


1816 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29-. 


maximum value, while the current reaches a maximum of 175 per 
cent above the final maximum value. 

The complex oscillation lasts nine fundamental cycles, or 
three-twentieths of a second. 


B. SWITCHING OUT OPEN LINE By HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES 


Fig. 3 shows the connections used, and the records are taken 
at the moment of opening the high-tension switches, thereby 
disconnecting the line from the high-tension winding of the 
step-up transformer. 

If the switching is instantaneous, then the sudden falling of the 
current I to zero gives an increase of potential E, such that 
Cie we LG 


9 ae where C is the capacity and L the inductance of the 


line. In other words, the electromagnetic energy stored in 
the system is transformed into electrostatic energy, and will 
be gradually dissipated. 

Let us consider now the other limit case where the switch 
opens the circuit very gradually through a continuous arc, 
which increases slowly in length and resistance, so that the 
successive adjustments in value and phase of current and e.m.f. 
follow the progressive change in the conditions of the circuit. 
In this case, the disturbance is reduced to a minimum, but it is 
evident that the gradual modification of the circuit and of its 
constants occurs in the switch, where the most active consump- 
tion of the energy stored in the system takes place. It follows 
that, generally speaking, the opening of the circuit imposes 
severe conditions on the switch. 

Between these two limit cases, approaching one or the other, 
according to the constants of the circuit and the characteristics 
of the switch, lies the actual opening of the circuit in practice. 

The phenomenon is complicated, however, by the fact that the 
arc in the switch is apt to rupture and reéstablish itself several 
times before the circuit is permanently opened. 

From this point of view we see that the phenomena and os- 
cillations which accompany the opening of the circuit are very 
similar to those met with in closing the circuit. Two main 
differences exist, however. First, in opening the circuit the 
movable contact of the switch travels away from the other con- 
tact, while in closing the circuit, the movable contact travels 
toward the other contact. 

In the latter case, then, the first arcs which strike are long, 


1911) FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS | 1817 


and there may be long intervals between arcs, while there is 
little or no probability of rupturing small arcs near the end of the 
stroke. In the former case short arcs may die out at the zero 
points of the wave of current, but will be at once reéstablished 
owing to the short distance between contacts, while the striking 
of long arcs at the end of the stroke appears improbable when 
the movable contact is rapidly moving away from the fixed 
contact. 

Second, in opening the circuit, if the interval between suc- 
cessive arcs is short, then the oscillation produced when the 
circuit is reéstablished finds the potential across the condenser 
very nearly equal to the impressed e.m.f., while in closing the 
circuit, at the first instant the e.m.f. across the condenser is 
zero, and in the successive starting oscillations the difference 
between the impressed e.m.f. and the condenser e.m.f. may be 
considerable owing to the comparatively long time during which 
’ the circuit was left open. 

Record No.3. This record starts with an e.m.f. of 9,300 volts 
and 49 high-tension amperes. 

The high-tension line is disconnected from the generating 
system through an oscillation which lasts four fundamental 
cycles, or one-fifteenth of a second, and then the e.mf. falls 
to 4,500 volts and the high-tension current to zero amperes. 

Before the oscillation of current begins the peaks of the waves 
of e.m.f. for five half-cycles show an almost instantaneous break 
apparently due to arcs which occur near the maximum value of 
the e.m.f. on the rising side. 


Pik 5 
This shows that the switch started to open the circuit 2x60 


=1/24th of a second before the current in this particular con- 
ductor starts its oscillation. 

Here again we note the absence of long zeros between arcs and 
the absence of high frequency impulses, except at the moment 
of final opening when the energy supplied by the generator 
changes from leading to lagging. 

It is also remarkable that the wave ot e.m.f. is hardly affected 
and that only a slight over-tension is produced, while the current 
reaches very high values. This oscillation of the current is 
similar to that obtained in closing the circuit and has the usual 
frequency of 120 cycles superimposed on the fundamental. 

An inspection of the current wave shows, however, that the 
120 cycles oscillating current does not start opposite in phase to 


1818 ' FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


the fundamental current as seen in the previous records, but its 
starting zero is shifted 60 deg. from the zero of the fundamental, 
showing that this oscillation of current is started by an arc 
opening the circuit and re-closing it in one of the two switches 
other than that in series with the current transformer from which 
the record is taken. 

This may explain also why the e.m.f., which is the e.m.f. 
of one phase of the delta, is not distorted. 

We must remember, however, that the record gives the 

e.m.f. in the low-tension circuit and therefore does not show the 
phenomena which occur in the line and in the high-tension wind- 
ing of the transformer, where the sudden change of conditions 
may produce high frequency impulses affecting the capacity 
of the line and the air reactance only of the high-tension winding 
of the transformer. 
.. Record. No. 4 is similar to record No. 3. It starts with 9400 
volts and 450 low-tension amperes. After the line is discon- 
nected the volts fall to 4400 and the current becomes the ex- 
citing current of the step-up transformer. In Record No. 4 
the oscillation is limited again to the current and shows two suc- 
cessive arcs, the first, quickly reéstablished, in the switch in 
series with the current transformer, originating high frequency 
in the e.m.f.; the other probably in one of the other switches. 

Here again the over-tension is small (30 per cent above normal 
maximum value), while the current reaches a very high maxi- 
mum value. The total time of the oscillation is 33 fundamental 
cycles, or a little more than one-twentieth of a second. 


TEST No. 2 
A. SWITCHING IN OPEN LINE AND STEP-UP TRANSFORMER BY 
LOW-TENSION SWITCHES 


Fig. 3 gives the diagram of connections. 

_ The low-tension switches are left open and the generator ex- 
cited to a certain voltage. The high-tension winding of the trans- 
former is connected to the line (high-tension switches closed). 
The records are taken at the moment of closing the low-tension 
switches, thereby energizing step-up transformer and line. 

The switching by low-tension switches differs from the 
switching by high-tension switches mainly in the following points: 
First, the switches are of the oil type but of different design. 
Second, the energy must go through the transformer before 
reaching the line and therefore there will be no steep wave fronts 


TWILN2LOd, 
ANBUYYNO “LH 


WILN3LOd. 


VANANA AACN AAD AAAS 


G ————EE 


Recorp No. 5 


LNSYHND LT 
\ 


Recorp No. 4 


1820 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLA TIONS [June 29 


entering the line. Third, the magnetization of the transformer 
calls for an oscillation of magnetizing current depending on the 
point of the wave of em.f. at which the switching occurs. 
Generally speaking, if the switches are closed at the maximum 
of the wave of e.m.f. no rush of current will occur provided the 
residual magnetism is zero. If the switching occurs at the zero 
point of the e.m.f. then in the first half-cycle the induction in © 
the iron must grow to twice the normal maximum value and a 
rush of current follows, etc. 

These oscillations of magnetizing current will appear, of 
course, in the waves of low-tension current only. 

Fourth, owing to the small voltage and the small distance 
between contacts the arcs in the low-tension switch are less 
severe and less frequent. 

Substantially, however, the oscillations will present the same 
character as in the high-tension switching. 

Record No. 5 gives the low-tension volts and high-tension 
amperes when the low-tension switches are closed. (Fig. 3). 

For this record the potential transformer through which 
the wave of e.m.f. is taken is connected on the generator side of 
the low-tension switches (instead of on the line side as shown in 
Fig. 3). The record, therefore, starts with the no-load e.m.f. of 
the generator (4400 volts) and zero high-tension current. 

After the oscillation is completed, the e.m.f. is 9300 volts, and 
the high-tension current is 48 amperes. The conditions are 
therefore identical to those of Record 1. The maximum over- 
tension is 50 per cent above the final maximum value, and the 
current reaches a maximum value of 108 per cent higher than the 
final maximum value. 

The oscillation lasts three fundamental cycles, or one-twentieth 
of a second. 

The oscillation consists of two parts: First, a very shee high 
frequency impulse in the e.m.f. due very likely to only one 
switch closing the circuit, then the usual oscillation of e.m.f. and 
current resulting from the 120 cycles damped wave superim- 
posed on the fundamental. 

It must be noted that in this case there is practically one 
fundamental oscillation, that is to say, the switches did not pro- 
duce arcs which opened and closed the circuit several times before 
establishing permanent contact. As mentioned above, the os- 
cillation of current due to the magnetization of the transformer 
does not show in this record, which gives high-tension current. 


AN3YYND ‘ AWILNSL 


AWILNSLOd 


VAAN A 


“ << 


Recorp No. 7 


Bees 
ANSYYND “L*H 


ERE Aga 


Recorp No. 4 


1822 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


Another interesting point shown by the record is the rapidity 
with which the oscillation is damped. 

Record No. 6. This is taken under conditions identical to 
those of Record 5. Since the potential transformer through 
which the wave of e.m.f. is taken is connected in this case on the 
line side of the switches this record starts with zero e.m.f. 
However, the idle line experimented upon runs parallel to the 
other three-phase line, which was carrying normal load during 
the test, and, therefore, the small e.m.f. due to the mutual in- 
duction between the two lines appears before the switches are 
closed. 

The oscillation is very similar to that shown in the preceding 
record, and it is apparent that the switches did not close simul- 
taneously, as the wave of e.m.f. starts ahead of the wave of cur- 
rent. 

The maximum over-tension is 55 per cent above the final maxi- 
mum value of the e.m.f. and the maximum value reached by the 
current is 165 per cent higher than the final maximum value of 
the current. The oscillation lasts 43 cycles, or a little less 
than one-fourteenth of a second. 

Record No. 7 gives the low-tension e.m.f. and low-tension 
current under conditions similar to those of the two preceding 
records. 

The potential transformer through which the wave of e.m.f. 
is taken is on the generator side of the switches, and the record 
starts with the no-load e.m.f. of the generator (4450 volts) 
and zero low-tension current. 

After the oscillation is completed, the e.m.f. is 9400 volts and 
the current is 450 amperes. 

The maximum over-tension is 40 per cent above the final maxi- 
mum value of the e.m.f. and the maximum value reached by 
the current is 125 per cent higher than the final maximum value 
of the current. The total oscillation lasts 84 fundamental cycles, 
or seven-fiftieths of a second. 

This record shows clearly how the switches may not close the 
circuit at the same instant. In fact, before the current has 
started the e.m.f. is distorted for 44 cycles. This distortion of 
the e.m.f. shows the existence of a single-phase load, and the 
dissymmetry between the positive and negative waves of the 
e.m.f. reveal the presence of a considerable rush of magnetizing 
current. Then the third switch closes and the oscillation is 
similar to those obtained in the two previous records. 


TWILNSLOd 
AN3SYYND “L‘H 


N 


9 


RD No 


iS) 
o) 
Q 
fad 


WWILN3LOd WILN3L0d 


ANSYYND LT 


8 


Recorp No. 


1824 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


B. SwITCHING OUT OPEN LINE AND STEP-UP TRANSFORMER BY 
LOW-TENSION SWITCHES 


Fig. 3 gives the diagram of connections. The generator 
excites the line through the step-up transformer, and the oscilla- 
tion is recorded at the moment of opening the low-tension 
switches. ; 

Record No. 8 gives the low-tension e.m.f. and low-tension 
current. It starts with 9300 volts and 450 amperes. After 
the oscillation is completed, the voltage and current fall to zero, 
since the potential transformer through which the wave of e.m.f. 
is taken is connected on the line side of the switch. 

The maximum over-tension is 43 per cent above the normal 
maximum value of the e.m.f. and the maximum value reached 
by the current is 56 per cent higher than the normal maximum 
value. 

The oscillation lasts a comparatively long time and is not 
completed in the record. ; 

After the low-tension current has entirely died out and the low- 
tension switches have disconnected permanently the transformer 
and line from the generating system, the e.m.f. across the 
low-tension winding of the transformer still continues and reaches 
the zero value through a long, slow oscillation. 

When the low-tension switches are entirely open, the high- 
tension winding of the transformer is still connected to the 
line and the presence of the e.m.f. on the low-tension side of the 
transformer is explained by an exchange of energy between the 
capacity of the line and the open-circuited inductance of the 
transformer. 

Record No. 9 shows this very clearly. This record gives the 
low-tension e.m.f. and high-tension current under conditions 
similar to those of Record 8. 

The record starts with 8650 volts and 44 amperes. In this 
case both current and e.m.f. do not rise above their normal 
maximum value. The oscillation lasts for 15 cycles, or one- 
quarter of a second. 

After the low-tension switches are opened the line and the 
transformer slowly synchronize. The high-tension current 
(which obviously has no image in the open low-tension) consists 
of impulses having the characteristic shape of currents exciting 
iron circuits, and shows a strong decrement due to losses. The 
frequency of oscillation is very low, as the oscillating circuit is 
composed of the line capacity and of the total open-circuited 


—_— 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1825 


inductance of the transformer. The frequency also decreases 
gradually because the e.m.f. and flux density decrease and 
therefore the inductance of the transformer increases, lowering 
the frequency, 
TEST No. 3 
A. SWITCHING IN BY HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES UNLOADED LINE 
CONNECTED AT THE FAR END TO STEP-DOWN TRANSFORMERS 


Fig. 7 is the diagram of connections used in this test. The 
end of the line is connected to an unloaded 10,000 kv-a. step- 
down transformer, delta-connected on both primary and second- 
ary sides. 

The generator excites the step-up transformer and the oscilla- 
tion is recorded at the moment of closing the high-tension switches 
at the power house. 

This test is similar to test 1-A, with the difference that the 


BIG BEND CHOKE COIL & | \CHOKE CO.L & 


SPARK GAP | SPARK GAP 
POT. TRANS. 
10031 


i 
OAKLAND 
| 
See ae 
UR. TRANS. \ 
200:1 | 

1 | 

\ 


H.T. SWITCHES 


es we 
GENERATOR 19999 KV,-A. TRANSFORMER — {e-454-mir>| 10000 KV.-A. TRANSFORMER 
RATIO 10,450 : 100,000 : ' RATIO 88,250: 12,100 


Fre. 7 


three-phase line is not open at the far end, but closed by an 
unloaded three-phase step-down transformer. 

Fig. 8 gives the equivalent circuits corresponding to the con- 
nections of Fig. 7. If we compare Fig. 8 with Fig. 4, we find 


that in the case of Fig. 4 the oscillations occur between the line 


capacity (neglecting line inductance) and the inductance of the 
generating system, while in the case of Fig. 8 the oscillations 
occur between the same line capacity and the inductance of the 
generating system connected in parallel to the open-circuit 
inductance of the step-down transformer. Since this open- 
circuit inductance of the transformer is exceedingly high in 
comparison with the inductance of the generating system, we 
conclude that the frequency of oscillation and in general all the 
phenomena met with in Test 1-A will be reproduced in Test 3-A. 
The switches used in both tests are the same. 


1826 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


Record No. 10 gives the low-tension e.m.f. and high-tension 
current when the high-tension switches connect the unloaded line 
and step-down transformer to the generating system. 

The record starts with 4400 volts and zero current. After 
‘the oscillation is completed, the volts are 8700 and the high- 
tension current 43 amperes. 

This record shows all the features pointed out in Test 1-A, 
namely, irregular closing of the switches, long zero of current, 
e.m.f. distorted by single-phase load, and oscillations due to a 
damped 120 cycles wave superimposed on the fundamental. 

A new feature, howevet, which was not given by Record 1, 
is the distortion of the line current due to the magnetization 
of the step-down transformer. The line current assumes 
regular form after approximately 20 cycles following the com- 
pletion of the main oscillation. 

The maximum over-tension is 50 per cent above the final 
maximum value of the e.m.f. and the maximum value of the 


VN 
((_)) GENERATOR 


current is 200 per cent higher than the final maximum value of 
the current. 

The total oscillation (disregarding the distortion due to the 
magnetization of the step-down transformer) lasts about 8 cycles, 
or a little less than fourteen-hundredths of a second. 

In conclusion, the phenomena are substantially the same 
whether the line is open or closed by an unloaded transformer. 

Record No. 11 is taken across one of the low-tension windings 
of the step-down transformer and shows the establishing of the 
electromotive force on the low-tension side when the high- 
tension switches are closed at the power house 154 miles away. 
The record starts showing a small e.m.f., due to the mutual 
inductance on the line under experiment from the parallel 
loaded line, and the final voltage is 12,000 volts. This cor- 
responds to a voltage of 87,500 volts on the high-tension side of 
the, step-down transformer, while the voltage on the high- 


IVILNS.LO ~ 


ie, 


Recorp No. 10 


Ol Bee Neil a 


inna hea | 


1828 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


tension side of the step-up transformer at the power house is 
81,400 volts. Of course, the record does not show what occurs 
on the high tension side of the step-down transformer, where 
the incoming wave of electromotive force is partially reflected. 


B. SwItCHING Out py HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES UNLOADED LINE 
CONNECTED AT THE FAR END TO STEP-DOWN TRANSFORMER 


Fig. 7 gives the diagram of connections used in this test. 
The oscillation is recorded at the moment of opening the high- 
tension switches at the power house, thereby disconnecting the 
line and step-down transformer from the generating system. 

This test is similar to Test 1-B, with the difference that the 
three-phase line is not open at the far end, but connected to a 
step-down transformer. 

Record No. 12 gives the low-tension electromotive force and 
the high-tension current at the moment of opening the high- 
tension switches (see Fig. 7). 

The record starts with 8700 volts and 43 amperes. After 
the oscillation is completed, the current falls to zero and the 
e.m.f. becomes the no-load voltage of the generating system, 
4400 volts. 

All the considerations mentioned in connection with Tests 
1-A, 1-B and 3-A apply to this case, since the high-tension 
switches are the same in the four experiments. 

The wave of e.m.f. shows that an arc dies out and is im- 
mediately reéstablished in one of the switches, then—after less 
than half a cycle—a similar phenomenon is repeated, and — 
the oscillation proper begins. At this moment the arcs in the 
switches are of such nature as to modify the conditions of the 
circuit, and the current shows the characteristic resultant wave 
due to a 120 cycle damped oscillation superimposed on the 
fundamental wave. P 

Here, again, the oscillation is damped very quickly, a con- 
siderable part of the energy being dissipated in the long arcs of 
the switches. 

Record No. 13 is the complement of the preceding record, and 
gives the potential across one phase of the low-tension winding 
of the step-down transformer at the end of the line when the 
switches are opened at the power house under conditions similar 
to those of Record 12. 

Record 13 starts with 12,000 volts, corresponding to 87,500 
volts between line conductors at the receiving end of the line, 
the voltage at the power house being 81,400 volts. 


AWILN3LOd: 


Recorp No. 13 


4AN3uuNd A\ TWILNS oe) 


Recorp No. 12 


HMA 


1830 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


Record 13 shows that the dying out of the electromotive force 
across the secondary of the step-down transformer consists of 
two distinct periods. 

First, the high-tension switches at the power house are opening 
the circuit and modify the conditions of the circuit for the length 
of about one fundamental cycle. Second, the high-tension 
switches at the power house are permanently opened, and the 
typical. low-frequency oscillation takes place between the ca- 
pacity of the line and the open-circuited inductance of the step- 
down transformer, as in the case of Test 2-B. 

In Record No. 12 the maximum over-tension is 20 per cent 
above the maximum value with line connected, and the current 
reaches a value 116 per cent higher than the maximum value 
of the charging current. ~The oscillation lasts three cycles, or 
one-twentieth of a second. 

In Record No. 13 the maximum over-tension is 26 per cent 
above the maximum normal value. 


a TEST. (NGmee 
A. SWITCHING IN BY HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES THE STEP-DOWN 
TRANSFORMER (10,000 Kv-A.) AT THE RECEIVING END OF THE 
LINE 


Referring to Fig. 7, the line is energized by the generator 
through the step-up transformer, and the records are taken at the 
moment of closing the high-tension switches at the far end of the 
line, thereby energizing the step-down transformer. 

The high-tension oil type switches used in this test are different 
in design from the high-tension switches used in Tests 1 and 3. 

However, the remarks made before on the irregular closing of 
the switches hold in this case also. 

From a theoretical point of view, the most convenient way to 
picture the phenomenon consists, perhaps, in considering the 
winding of the transformer as a high-tension line, closed at the 
far end and under peculiar conditions of electrostatic capacity 
and inductance. Since the high-tension winding of this step- 
down transformer has a total length of approximately ten miles, 
this view of the phenomenon is plausible. 

The records are taken on the low-tension side of the step-down 
transformer, therefore they reveal the establishing of the dif- 
ference of potential across the low-tension windings, but fail 
to show the phenomena connected with the first instant of ‘closing 
the circuit, when the line is, so to speak, drained by the pis 
tension winding of the transformer. 


 INSYYNS “L'H 


AWILN3SLOd 


i 


UAAAVVVANAA 


WILN3LOd 


Recorp No. 15 


Recorp No, 14 


1832 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


Record No. 14 gives the low-tension e.m.f. across one phase 
of the low-tension delta of the step-down transformer (which is 
delta-connected on both primary and secondary sides.) 

The record starts, obviously, with zero electromotive force, 
and after the oscillation is completed the e.m.f. is 12,000 volts, 
corresponding to 87,500 volts across line conductors. 

Record 14 shows an oscillation consisting of three distinct 
periods: First, a difference of potential is established across the 
phase of the secondary winding under investigation, and this 
difference of potential falls to zero through an oscillation, due 
very probably to the striking of an arc in one of the switches only. 
Second, another switch closes the circuit, and a normal wave of 
e.m.f. of small value is established across the secondary winding. 
In this connection it must be noted that if two switches close the 
circuit, the full potential is applied at the terminals of the wind- 


a ai 


Bae. 
H. T. SWITCHES) =< ; [ 


OUND § PCT. TRANS. 
2 RATIO 120:1 


CURRENT TRANS? 
RATIO 20:1 


ee 
<— TOSTANISLAUS POWER PLANT (135 M1.) 


3-3750 KV.-A. TRANSFORMERS 
RATIO 104.000 : 12,000 


Fic. 9 


ing connected across the two switches, while each of the other 
two windings of the delta receive one-half of the full difference of 
potential, This explains the low value of the e.m.f. in the second 
period of the oscillation. Third, all the three switches have 
closed the circuit, and the oscillation proper begins, showing an 
asymmetrical wave of e.m.f. due to the rush of current exciting 
the step-down transformer. 

Record No. 15 shows these phenomena more clearly and 
gives the high-tension current as well as the low-tension e.m.f. 
at the moment of switching in the step-down transformers at the 
end of the line. 

Record 15 was taken on the system of the Sierra & San Fran- 
cisco Power Company, when three 3,750 kvy-a. transformers, 
unloaded, were switched in at the end of 135 miles of three- 
phase line. 


Fig. 9 gives the connections used in this case, the step-down 


=)" 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1833 


transformers being Y-connected, with grounded neutral, on the 
high-tension side, and delta-connected on the low-tension side. 

The e.m.f. was taken across one phase of the low-tension delta 
and the current is the current flowing to ground through one 
of the high-tension windings. 

Record 15 shows again the three periods in the oscillation of 
the e.m.f. and the rush of exciting current. . The final voltage 
is 12,000 volts, corresponding to 104,000 volts across phase con- 
ductors. 

The oscillation of e.m.f. in Record 14 lasts 10 cycles, or one- 
sixth of a second, and apparently no over-tension occurs. 

A record of the generator e.m.f. and current taken at the power 
house at the moment of switching in the step-down transformer 
at the end of the line, under conditions described in connection 
with Record 14, shows no distortion whatever of the e.m.f. of 
the generator, but a distortion of the wave of current, due to the 
magnetization of the transformer. . 


B. SWITCHING OUT BY HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES THE STEP-DOWN 
TRANSFORMER (10,000 Kv-A.) AT THE RECEIVING END OF THE 
LINE 


Fig. 7 gives the connections used in this test. 

The records are taken at the moment of opening the high- 
tension switches at the end of the line, thereby disconnecting the 
10,000 kv-a. step-down transformer from the line. 

All the apparatus and connections are the same as those used 
in Test No. 4-A. 

Record No. 16 gives the electromotive force across one phase 
of the secondary delta at the moment of opening the high-tension 
switches, which disconnect the step-down transformer from the 
line. 

The record starts with an e.m.f. of 12,000 volts, corresponding 
to 87,500 volts across line conductors, and after the oscillation 
is completed the voltage is obviously zero. The main oscilla- 
tion lasts 4 cycles, or one-fifteenth of a second, and the maximum 
over-tension is 20 per cent above the normal maximum value. 

The most important frequency in this oscillation is the natural 
frequency of the transformer, which appears more and more 
prominent the more elastic and unstable is the connection be- 
tween the transformer and the line, t.e., when the switches begin 
to open the circuit their arcs are short and steady and the 
fundamental frequency applied to the transformer is but little 


WILN3LOd 
4AIN3YYND “L‘H \ 


ANAM 


ReEcorpD No. 17 


i 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS _ 18385 


disturbed by the oscillation of the transformer. As the arcs 
become longer and the supply of energy to the transformer be- 
comes more difficult, the natural frequency of the apparatus 
asserts itself more and more until, at the very end, the trans- 
former is free to oscillate at its natural frequency. This natural 
frequency of the transformer is approximately 1700 cycles. 

After the main oscillation is completed another short oscilla- 
tion occurs, due probably to an arc in one of the switches. This 
last oscillation recalls in its character the beginning of the oscilla- 
tion of Record 14, when the transformer was switched onto the 
line. 

Record No. 17 is taken under identical conditions to Record 
No. 15, with the difference that the three step-down trans- 
formers (see Fig. 9) are switched off the end of the line of the 
Sierra & San Francisco Power Co. The apparatus, connections 
and conditions of Record 17 are identical with those of Record 15. 

Record 17 confirms entirely the results obtained by Record 16. 

A wave of generator e.m.f. and current taken at the power 
house at the moment of switching out the step-down trans- 
former under the conditions of Record 16, does not show any 
distortion in the waves of current and e.m.f. of the generator 


RES. NO 
A. SwitcHING By HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES ONE OF THE THREE- 
PHASE LINES, UNLOADED AND CONNECTED AT THE Far END TO 
A STEP-DOWN TRANSFORMER, ONTO THE END OF THE 
OTHER THREE-PHASE LINE CARRYING NorMAL LOAD 


Fig. 10 gives the diagram of connections used in this test. 

Line No. 2, excited by three 10,000-kv-a. three-phase alter- 
nators and three 10,000-kv-a. three-phase step-up transformers, 
carries a load of approximately 20,000 kilowatts, the majority of 
which is delivered at the end of the line—Oakland substation— 
154 miles away from the power house. 

Line No. 1 is unloaded and connected at the power house to an 
idle 10,000 kv-a. step-down transformer. 

Records are taken when the beginning of Line No. 1 is thrown 
at the Oakland substation by high-tension switches onto the 
high-tension bus bars, energized by Line No. 2. The high-tension 
switches are of the same type as those used in Test No. 4. 

As stated before, the two lines are identical and run on the 
same towers for the whole length—154 miles. Therefore, when 
the high-tension switches are closed at the Oakland substation 


7 


1836 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


the circuit consists of a loop 308 miles long, whose beginning 
and end are both at the power house. 

Record No. 18 gives the electromotive force on the low-tension 
side of the generator end of the loop, and the electromotive 
force on the low-tension side of the step-down transformer 
at the receiving end of the loop. One of the electromotive forces 
is reversed in phase to avoid confusion. 

It being necessary to maintain the load of Line No. 2 in 
operation and in consequence to avoid great variation in voltage, 
the voltage at the generator end of the loop was regulated by 
hand at the moment the switching occurred at the Oakland 
substation. The records, therefore, do not give the true oscilla- 
tion in voltage and over-tension, which would have occurred if 
the fields of the generators had been kept constant. 


POT, 
TRANS. 


2 ee OAKLAND 


GENERATORS STEP-UP 
TRANSFORMERS 


BIG BEND 


$Por. TRANS. 
_ CHOKE COILS & 


LoAD——> 
SPARK GAPS = * 


| 
! 
| 
| 
4 
| 
a 
| 
\ 
| 
| 
—— —pLapphe STEP-DOWN 
FOT, ° / TRANSFORMERS 
TRANS. H 
= INE 1 U0LE) ee 


| 

| 

| { HT. 

| SWITCHE 
1 —__o. 

| 

| 


STEP-DOWN 
TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 10 


When one line is connected to the other, the most prominent 
frequencies which appear are the full-wave oscillations of the 
total loop and of each line. Since the total loop is 308 miles 
long, its full-wave oscillation has a frequency of 600 cycles, 
while each line—154 miles long—has a full-wave oscillation of 
1200 cycles, neglecting ohmic resistance. 

Record No. 18 starts with 11,100 volts at the generator end of 
Line No. 2 and zero volts at the receiving end of Line No. 1. 
After the oscillation is completed, the regulated voltage at the 
generator end of Line No. 2 is 11,225 volts, while the voltage 
at the receiving end of Line No. 1 is 9,850 volts. 

These last voltages correspond to 107,500 volts between line 
conductors at the generator end of the loop and 94,300 volts 
between conductors at the receiving end of the loop. 


| LN3LOd 


\ 


a 
— 
fe} 
Z 
a 
4 
fe) 
2) 
eI 
m% 


@,3NI7 ONINNIDSS LY WILN3SLOd 
byANIT GNA LV WILN3LOd 


\ 


Recorp No. 18 


1838 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


All the remarks made before on the performance of high-tension 
switches apply, obviously, to this case and are not repeated. 

The oscillation lasts 3 cycles, or one-twentieth of a second. 
The main frequency superimposed on the fundamental is ap- 
proximately 1200 cycles. 

Record No. 19 covers the same experiment as Record No. 18, 
but is taken at the switching point---the Oakland substation— 
on the low-tension side of the transformers carrying the load. 

The record starts with a voltage of 11,300 volts and after the 
oscillation is completed, the voltage is 11,900 volts. This last 
voltage corresponds to 86,800 volts between line conductors at 
Oakland, while the voltage at the power house, at the generator 
end of the loop, is 105,200 volts. 

The oscillation lasts nine cycles, or less than one-sixth of a 
second. A frequency of about 1200 cycles is superimposed on 
the fundamental. 

No conclusion can be drawn as to the over-tension because the 
voltage was regulated at the power house, as explained above. 


B. SWITCHING BY HIGH-TENSION SWITCHES ONE OF THE THREE- 
PHASE LINES, UNLOADED AND CONNECTED AT THE FAR END 
TO A STEP-DOWN TRANSFORMER OFF THE END OF THE OTHER 
THREE-PHASE LINE CARRYING NORMAL LOAD 


Fig. 10 gives again the diagram of connections. 


Record No. 20 is taken under conditions similar to those of 


Record 18, but it gives the low-tension voltages at the gen- 
erator end and at the receiving end of the loop when the high- 
tension switches are opened at the Oakland substation and the 
idle Line No. 1 is disconnected from the loaded Line No. 2. 

The record starts with 11,225 volts (107,500 volts between line 
conductors) at the generator end of the loop, and 9,850. volts- 
(94,300 volts between line conductors) at the receiving end of 
the loop. After the oscillation is completed, the volts at the 
generator end of the loop are 11,100 (106,000 volts between 
line conductors) and the voltage at the receiving end of the 
loop is zero. 

The oscillation of voltage at the beginning of the loop lasts 
six cycles, or one-tenth of a second. At the receiving end the 
oscillation is composed of two parts: The first part covers the 
period during which the high-tension switches are opening the 
circuit. The second part occurs after the switches are entirely 
opened and shows the characteristic exchange of energy be- 


WILN3LO0d 


b oma 
N 
fo) 
Z 
a 
} 
fe) 
8) 
a 
4 


— 
‘a iy 


<< 


by, ANI GN3 LV IWILN31L0d 


a 
Recorp No. 20 


1840 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


tween the disconnected line and the step-down transformer at 
low frequency. 

The two parts of the oscillation over-lap, and a frequency 
of 600 cycles (half-wave length oscillation of 154 miles of line) 
is superimposed on the low frequency surge between line and 
transformer. 

The first part of the oscillation shows a frequency of about 
1200 cycles, increasing in magnitude and superimposed on the 
fundamental. 

Record No. 21 covers the same experiment as Record No. 20, 
but is taken at the switching point—at the Oakland substation 
—and gives the voltage on the low-tension side of the trans- 
formers carrying the load. 

The record starts with a potential of 11,900 (86,800 volts 
between line conductors) and ends with 11,300 volts (82,500 
volts between line conductors). 

Before the switches are opened, the voltage at the power 
house, at the generator end of the loop, is 102,500 volts. 

The oscillation lasts eight cycles, or a little less than one- 
seventh of a second, and shows the usual frequency of about 
1200 cycles superimposed on the fundamental. 

In the last two records, at the moment of opening the high- 
tension switches the field of the energizing generators was 
strengthened in order to compensate for the drop in the line due to 
the disappearance of: the charging current required by the idle 
Line No. 1. Under these conditions Record No. 20 shows a 
maximum over-tension of 22 per cent above the final maximum 
voltage of the loaded Line No. 2, and a maximum over-tension 
of 21 per cent above the final maximum voltage of the idle Line 
No. 1. In Record No. 21 the maximum over-tension is 27 per 
cent above the final maximum voltage. 


The records, as repeatedly mentioned above, show only 
the potentials on the low-tension side of the step-up or step-down 
transformer, and in order to form an idea of the phenomena oc- 
curring on the high-tension line these tests were supplemented 
by measuring—at the instant of performing the different switch- 
ing operations—the maximum sparking distance across a choke- 
coil inserted in series with a line conductor. Figs. 3, 7 and 10 
show the exact location of the choke-coils shunted by spark gap. 

Each choke-coil consists of 34 turns of half-inch copper rod. 
The inside diameter is 5} in., the outside diameter 63 in., the 
total height 32 in. 


1911] FACCIOLI:. LINE OSCILLATIONS 1841 


The inductance of each coil is 0.0326 millihenry, so that - 
100 amperes at 60 cycles would give across the choke-coil a drop 
of 1.26 volts. 

Each of the different switching operations was repeated several 
times, and the following table gives the maximum sparking 
distances obtained across the coil. 


Test No. Diagram Record No. Sparking distances 
1-A 3 1 and 2 } in. at switching point. 
1-B 3) 3 and 4 2 git “ G 
2-A 8} 5, 6 and 7 Less than } in. 
2-B 3 8 and 9 Less than ¢ in. 
3-A 7 10 1 in. at generating station—switching point. 
11 Less than } in. at receiving end. 
3-B 7 12 } in. at generating station—switching point. 
13 Less than 4 in. at receiving end. 
4-A uf = Less than } in. at generating station. 
14 1} in. at receiving end—switching point. 
4-B i —_ Less than } in. at generating station. 
16 3} in. at receiving end—switching point. 
5-A 10 18 Less than } in. at generating station. 
19 + in, at switching point. 
5-B 10 20 Less than } in. at generating station. 
21 34 in, at switching point. 


These sparking distances represent the product of the intensity 
of the current times the steepness of its wave front. In Test 
1-A, for instance, the maximum instantaneous value reached by 
the current is 130 amperes. A sine-wave current whose maxi- 
mum value is 130 amperes would give across the choke-coil at 
60 cycles a drop whose maximum value is 1.64 volts. In our 
test, the maximum difference of potential across the choke-coil 
rose to 5,500 volts, from which value we can form an idea of the 
steepness of the wave front. In the case of Test 4-A the dif- 
ference of potential reached the value of 24,000 volts. 

These results, supplemented by a general inspection of the 


| records, allow us to draw the following conclusions: 


In the class of phenomena which we have investigated, ab- 
normally high potentials to ground or between line conductors, 
or across windings of apparatus, are not to be feared. The 
maximum over-tension which the records show is 60 per cent 
above normal operating value. This corroborates the theory 
of these phenomena, whereby the maximum possible over- 
tension is equal to the normal tension when the damping effects 


are neglected. 


1842 ‘FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


On the other hand; a glance at the records impresses one 
with the fact that, if high potential is absent, high frequency 
is a common occurrence. The spark gap tests tabulated above 
confirm this impression and point out the danger resulting to 
the end turns of apparatus from these switching operations. 

It seems, therefore, that our common method of protecting 
transmission systems by lightning arresters connected in series 
with a spark gap does not answer the purpose effectively in 
all cases. 

Of course, atmospheric disturbances, arcing grounds, switch- 


Fic. 11.—Oscillograph 


ing heavy loads, etc., constitute a class of disturbances which 
may be taken care of by our present protecting system, since 
they may give origin to high differences of potential across 
conductors or to ground; but the switching phenomena with 
which this paper deals call mainly for protection against high 
frequency impulses, whose existence has been repeatedly shown 
by theoretical considerations, but perhaps has not been properly 
realized in practical operation. 

The fact remains, however, that these tests were performed 
for a long period of time—several months—on systems operated 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1843 


at the highest voltages in use to-day. The switching operations 
performed, for instance, on the system of the Great Western 
Power Company during this investigation were more numerous 
and more severe than the system will experience in a long time of 
normal operation, and yet no damage whatever resulted to the 
line or to the apparatus, showing that the confidence of the engi- 
neers in high-voltage installations is justified. 

The only danger, perhaps, consists in the possibility that some 
of the frequencies, at which inductances and capacities exchange 
energy, will coincide with the frequency of the generating system 
or its harmonics. A simple calculation of the constants of the 
circuits is, however, sufficient to obtain the value of these fre- 
quencies and to ascertain the absence of resonance. 

The high frequency impulses, which originate at the point 
where the switching is performed, extend .over a short length of 
the circuit only. The steepness of such impulses is quickly 
reduced and smoothed over and their effect is localized. 

The oil high-tension switches open the circuit, as generally 
admitted, at the zero point of the wave of current, and since the 
establishing of the circuit is generally due to an arc, they close 
the circuit at the maximum point of the wave of e.m.f. or in its 
neighborhood. No attempt was made in these experiments to 
close the switches at different points of the wave of e.m.f., but it 
was preferred to obtain information as to the point of the wave 
at which the switches would naturally close the circuit. 

Low-tension switching is preferable—when possible—to high- 
tension switching. In this connection, it is interesting to note 
that high-tension switching may be undesirable when trans- 
formers are near the switching point, in which case low-tension 
switching may be generally arranged for. 

‘In energizing a line two methods of procedure may be followed. 
(a) the open line is connected to the generating system, and the 
step-down transformer is thrown onto the end of the live line; 
(b) the step-down transformer is connected to the dead line and 
then line and transformer are connected to the generating system. 

Our records show that the second method is the best, as it 
produces one oscillation only and this oscillation is of the same 
character as the less severe of the two oscillations which take 
place in the first procedure. . : 

This paper discusses, naturally, only a small number of the 
numerous oscillograms taken. For each switching operation 
several records were obtained, and the ones published are 


representative. 


1844 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


APPENDIX 
BY W. W. LEWIS 


The method of recording the waves shown in the foregoing 
paper is described in this appendix. 

Apparatus Used. The oscillograph used was of the three- 
element electromagnetic type illustrated in exterior view in 
Fig. 11 and previously described in papers before the Institute. 

This is regularly equipped with the film holder, shown in 
Fig. 12a and 12), which con- 
sists of three parts; a cylin- 
drical drum to which the film 
is fastened, by means of 
spring-clips, a light-tight hol- 
low semi-cylindrical holder in 
which the drum revolves, and 
a cover which fits over the end 
of the holder after the drum 
is in place. The holder is Fy. 124.—Standard film holder 
provided with a rectangular 
aperture and shutter, and a suitable arrangement for holding 
in place on the oscillograph. 

The standard film for which this holder is adapted is 37 in. 
wide by 12? in. long. 

An auxiliary arrangement was devised for films longer than 


Fic. 128.—Standard film holder 


the standard. This is illustrated in Figs. 13a and 13d. The fol- 
lowing modification in the regular holder was necessary. The 
clips for holding the regulation film to the drum were removed 
and a slot 'y in. wide by 2 in. long cut in the drum parallel to 
its axis. An aperture was cut in the lower part of the holder 


= 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1845 
3 in. wide by 37 in. long. A small wooden box with open top 
and inside dimensions 14 in. by 3% in. was made. This fitted 
over dowel pins and was fastened to the holder by small hooks. 
The box was made for a No. 2 Bull’s Eye Kodak spool, as this 
was a convenient size and permitted of ready means of holding 
in place. These spools have a 
hole bored throughout their 
length, and a brass rod witha 
knurled head served to hold them 
in place and form an axis on 
which they could revolve. A 
piece of spring brass pressed a 
small brass cylinder, through a 
hole in the side of the box, 
against the end of the spool and 
served to act as a brake. This 
was later found to be unneces- 
sary. 

Method of Operation. The method of operation with the regu- 
lation film will first be described, assuming that all the pre- 
liminary steps have been taken and there remains only the ex- 
posure of the film. The procedure in making the exposure is 


_Fic. 134.—Film holder with at- 
tachment fer long films 


Fic. 138.—Film holder with attachment for long films 


ordinarily as follows: First, start motor which revolves the 
film; second, open aperture in the film holder; third, operate 
electromagnetic shutter. 

The oscillograph shutter may be operated in two different 
ways, first by a worm contact, which opens the shutter and 


1846 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


commences the exposure at the beginning of the film, stopping 
the exposure at the end of one revolution; after the lever is 


pulled the film holder makes about one revolution before the . 


shutter opens. Second, by the instantaneous or disk contact, 
which opens the shutter instantaneously when the releasing 
lever is pulled and keeps it open during one revolution of the 
film. 


| 
L.T. CURRENT (POTENTIAL 
aii | cit , 


iim A A AL Mi Talat hf An wy 


ial ah on hava mi uh rit ae 


TTT nn 


Rati, START OF aut 


Fic. 14 


For ordinary normal waves of 60 cycles frequency the film is 
revolved at the rate of 600 rev. per min. In recording the oscilla- 
tions, however, this speed was reduced to 200 rev. per min. 
That is, the 12%-in. film passed the light aperture in three- 
tenths of a second. At this rate of speed 18 cycles of a 60-cycle 
wave could be recorded. This, in most cases of switching, would 
be ample to record the complete oscillation, providing the ex- 


se Ae ae 
nN 


posure of the film could be so timed that the oscillation com- 
menced sufficiently near the beginning of the film. 

The first method of operating the shutter, that is, by the 
worm contact, requires that the shutter lever be operated a 
trifle more than three-tenths of a second before the oscillation 
commences; the second method requires that the shutter lever 
be operated only in time to make sure that it is open before the 


— 


1911] FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS 1847 


oscillation takes place, probably one one-hundredth of a second 
before the oscillation begins, and it has the disadvantage that the 
exposure may begin at any point on the film. 

The second méthod was found to be the most suitable and 
some excellent results were obtained. For example see Fig. 14, 
which shows the complete record. Here the exposure com- 
menced about one-fourth the film length from the end, ran off 
the end,’commenced again at the beginning of the film and ran 
along to the starting point. The oscillation took place about 
one-third of the length from the beginning of the film or about 
one-sixth of a second after the shutter opened. Fig. 15 shows a 
record that is not satisfactory. The exposure began about the 
middle of the film. The oscillation commenced nearly at the 
end of the film and had not been completed when the starting 
point was again reached. Other records were obtained in which 


‘ ' T. CURRENT OLE N 


Ca CURRENT 


A | NI pn! maf | afl a, LEM AA EAA AK a It 
ey thn al Ol Bi ll ZA LA PY may ' wat 


—> ‘ tana? 


Fic. 16 


the exposure commenced at the beginning of the film and the 
oscillation was wholly completed within the length of the film, 
Fig. 16 shows one of these. 

It will be readily appreciated that this required very accurate 
timing. Automatic timing devices were tried, but were found 
to be unduly complicated, in view of the nature of the power 
plant wiring and switching; and especially so when the switching 
was done in one station and the oscillograph located in another. 

To overcome the shortcomings of the regular film and insure 
more certain results, the arrangement for long films was devised. 
This arrangement immediately extended the usefulness and ac- 
curacy of the apparatus. The films used were 3} in. wide by 
48 in. long, so that instead of three-tenths of a second in which 
to make the exposure, about 1.1 seconds were now available, and 
approximately 66 cycles could be recorded; the exposure always 


commencing at the beginning of the film, 


1848 FACCIOLI: LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


The procedure in loading these films is as follows: They are 
loaded in daylight as with an ordinary roll film camera, the 
film being placed in the box and the end of the black paper cover- 
ing drawn through the aperture in the holder and inserted in 
the slot in the drum (see Fig. 17). About one-half turn is made 
around the drum with the black paper and the box drawn up and 
fastened_to the holder. 

The routine in exposing the standard or sack films was to 
first start the motor that revelved the film, next open the aper- 
ture in the film holders and lastly to operate the electromagnetic 
shutter at the proper instant. With the long films the routine 
was in the reverse order, that is, to first open the light shutter 
and keep it open, next open the aperture in the film holder, the 
black paper protecting the film from exposure, and finally at the 


Fic. 17.—Showing method of loading a long film 


proper instant to start the motor and wind the film from the 
spool onto the drum. 

The motor was operated at high speed and the reduced speed 
required by the film secured by means of counter-shafting, which 


is clearly-shown in Fig. 18. The belts, which consisted of 


heavy twine, were made very tight. By this means acceleration 
was. secured in probably one-fiftieth of a second, or practically 
instantaneously. The film was preceded by 20 in. of black paper 


of which about one-third had already been wrapped around the . 


drumy,leaving two-thirds, or one turn, to be wound around the 
drum before the film could be exposed. (This allowed about 
three-tenths of a-second to elapse between the starting .of the 
motor and the exposure of the film, giving a wide factor of safety 
for acceleration. 


‘ 
eo 


=e 


1911] FACCIOLI: EINE OSCILLATIONS 1849 


As familiarity was gained with this device, the efficiency of 
operation was increased from probably 50 per cent with the short 
films to approximately 95 per cent with the long ones. At one 
particular station where fifteen exposures were made, all were 
successful—an efficiency of 100 per cent. 

The significance of this can be appreciated when it is stated 
that all the signals were manual and vocal. When the switching 
was done in the station where the oscillograph was located, the 


signal passed from the oscillograph operator to the switchboard 


attendant either direct or through an intermediate person. 


Fic. 18.—Oscillograph and testing equipment at Big Bend 


When the switching took place at one station with the oscillo- 
graph located at another, a telephone and two or three additional 
men were needed in the signalling chain. As described in the 
‘paper, Records 18 and 20 were taken at Big Bend Power Plant, 
while the switching was done at Oakland, 154 miles distant 


(see map, Fig. 1). The oscillograph set-up and the station 


layouts necessitated a signaling chain consisting of five men; the 
oscillograph operator, an intermediary and a telephone at- 
tendant at Big Bend; a telephone attendant and a switch- 
board attendant at Oakland. In addition to allowing time for 


1850 FACCIOLI: LINE_OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


the transmission of the signals, it was necessary to make an 
allowance for the lag in the switch mechanism, which was some- 
times appreciable. 

Several exposures were made in which a line was switched on 
and off the generating ee and both operations recorded on 
the same film. 

To assist in judging the proper time to be allowed for the 
transmission of the signals, etc., one trial switching operation 
was usually performed, the movement of the beam of light being 
noted on a ground glass inserted in place of the film. 

None of the records given in the foregoing paper show more 
than 10 in. of the 48 in. of the film exposed, with the exception 
of Record 15, which shows 20 in. 

In most of the exposures the zero line was not recorded, as it 
was not necessary and only complicated the records. To record 
the zero line the procedure with the short films is to make a second 
exposure with the vibrator switches open. With the long films 
a second exposure is not possible, but the zero line is recorded 
at the time of the original exposure by using the beam from the 
third or idle vibrator. 

When two vibrators were in use it. was found most satisfactory 
to cause their zero positions to coincide, in some cases reversing 
one of the waves, to better distinguish them when the two waves 
were nearly in phase. A few records were taken in which the 
zero positions of two waves were widely separated, thus separating 
the waves and preventing confusion. This, however, necessi- 
tated waves of small amplitude, and owing to the uncertainty 
as to the probable amplitude during an oscillation the method of 
using coinciding zeros in the center of the film was found most 
suitable. 

The unloading is doneina darkroom. To unload the standard 
film, the cover is removed, the drum taken out and the film 
unfastened—the reverse of the loading operation. With the 
long films it is only necessary to loosen the hooks and remove the 
wooden box. The film is then pulled out through the aperture 
in the holder. The cover and the driving pin need never be 
removed. 

During all the switching operations one terminal of the 
vibrator was connected to one of the poles of the electromagnet 
between which it vibrated, in order to eliminate the effects due 
to electrostatic differences of potential, which were sometimes 
present. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1851 


Discussion on ‘‘ ELEcTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS,”’ CHICAGO, 
JUNE 29, 1911. 


C. P. Steinmetz: Mr. Faccioli’s paper gives an oscillographic 
investigation of the transients, that is the oscillations, traveling 
waves, etc., produced by switching operations in transmission 
systems at the utmost limits of voltage and distance reached 
today: a 100,000-volt system, comprising a three-phase circuit 
of over one hundred and fifty miles, and in some of these oscillo- 
graphs, records are presented in which two of these lines have 
been connected in series, so giving a circuit of over 300 miles 
operating at 100,000 volts. The taking of these oscillograms 
naturally involved considerable difficulties, quite a number of 
problems, which are discussed by Mr. Lewis. Specially favorable 
conditions for the investigation of the phenomena existed in this 
circuit, as oscillograms could be taken at the generator end, at 
the receiving end and in the middle of the circuit, and thereby it 
was possible to investigate the propagation and the attenuation 
of line disturbances, created at one point of the line, and the 
effect produced by them at other points, at the middle and ends 
of the line and at the transition points between line and other 
apparatus. Tests were made on opening and closing the circuit 
at the generating end of the high potential lines, by high potential 
switching and by low potential switching, with the line open at 

the other end, and with the line connected to step-down trans- 
formers. Tests are also given of the phenomena occurring when 
150 miles of line is switched to another 150 mile line, or 
- gwitched off, at 100,000 volts. ' 

An interesting and important conclusion from these tests is 
that the oscillations and disturbances of such a system are not 
those of a line or circuit of uniformly distributed capacity and 
inductance, are not the phenomena usually described in the text- 
books, but that in the oscillation the transformers and the 
generating system participate, and the oscillation thus is a 
compound oscillation of the system, comprising different sec- 
tions of different characteristics and_constants: transmission 
line, step-up transformer, generator. Two conditions exist, one, 
where the circuit consists of the transmission line, the leakage 
reactance of the step-up transformer and the generating system, 
with transition points between these circuits. The other con- 
dition results by disconnecting the generating system from the 
line, and gives a circuit comprising the transmission ‘line and the 
mutual inductive reactance of the transformer, which is very 
many times greater than the leakage reactance, and is an iron- 
clad reactance, while the leakage reactance is essentially an air 
reactance. The latter case results in a frequency of oscillation 
of the compound circuit which is very low, below machine fre- 
quency, reaching as low as from 20 to 30 cycles. As seen in Figs. 
8, 9, 13, 20, etc., voltage and current waves are distorted greatly 
by the periodic variation of the ironclad inductance, and suc- 
cessive half waves increase in length, due to the increase of in- 


1852 ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


ductance with the decrease of voltage and thus of magnetic 
density. When the generating system is implicated and surges 
with the line, the transformer inductance is much lower, as it is 
the leakage inductance, and the frequency of oscillation of the 
compound circuit is higher, is between the second and third 
harmonics, approximating 120 cycles. A number of interesting 
phenomena result by a superposition of this frequency of oscilla- 
tion on the fundamental generator frequency, since the oscilla- 
tion frequency is approximately twice the generator frequency. 
This means in the resulting current alternate half waves are 
subtracted from each other and added, so that there are suc- 
cessive periods where the current is nearly extinguished by super- 
position of two opposing currents of the two different frequencies, 
and periods where it is exaggerated. Such a current passing 
through a high potential switch gives the effect that the arc is 
extinguished at the low current values and rekindles again at the 
high current values. This gives not a single transient oscilla- 
tion, but a series of successive transients, as shown in theos- 
cillographic Records 1, 2, 10, etc. Record 2 especially gives a 
very long extinction of current. We must consider that in 
switching at these high voltages the contact is not made and 
broken as metallic contact, but before the switch terminals 
meet, the spark jumps ahead and closes the circuit by an 
arc. When the switch contacts separate in opening the circuit, 
the arc follows for quite a number of cycles. 

It is obvious that the arcs of the different phases do not 
necessarily extinguish at the same moment, nor start at 
the same moment, and that, therefore, even if the switch 
mechanism of all phases is absolutely simultaneous in its 
action, the actual closing and opening of the circuit of 
the different phases is not simultaneous, but some of these 
open or close ahead of the others. This gives a momentary 
unbalancing of the circuits, and leads to some interesting phe- 
nomena as shown in Records 7, 14 and 15, etc. Specially 
noteworthy is the frequent appearance of high frequency waves, 
as shown in most of the oscillograms, Records 1, 2, 3, 10, 12, 
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, etc., which indicates that high frequency 
is an ever present phenomenon in high voltage transmission lines. 
The observations made with spark gaps across small inductances 
give further evidence of extremely high frequencies. Especially 
interesting is the appearance of a high frequency oscillation in a 
transformer when disconnecting it from the line, as in Records 16, 
17, etc., as this shows the danger to which the transformer is 
exposed. Record 20 is interesting by the superposition of a high 
frequency oscillation of rapid decay, on the low frequency oscilla- 
tion of the compound circuit consisting of 150 miles of line with 
step-down transformer, produced by disconnecting this circuit 
from another 150 miles of line. Here the origin of the high fre- 
quency seems to be the readjustment of the stored energy be- 
tween the sections of the compound circuit, which precedes its 
oscillation as a whole. alae 


=A. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1853 


Especially important is the absence of high frequency in the 
oscillograms taken at a considerable distance from the ‘starting 
point of the disturbance, as the switch. This illustrates that 
high frequency does not travel very far, but is local, and that 
the more, the higher the frequency: the extremely high fre- 
quencies observed by spark gap across a small reactance, had 
vanished already at a short distance from their origin. 

The starting transient of a transformer is shown in Record 15, 
which illustrates the excessive starting current, lasting for many 
cycles, and its unsymmetrical shape, resulting from even har- 
monics. 

It is obvious that I cannot discuss in detail the oscillograms, 
but they have to be carefully studied from the records. How- 
ever, the conclusions from these investigations are essentially 
that switching in a high potential circuit of considerable capacity 
is a dangerous operation, even with the oil circuit breaker, and 
therefore it should be avoided as far as possible. It is dangerous, 
however, only if the switching occurs at or near a transition 
point between circuit sections of different constants, near a 
transformer, but no danger results where switching is done in 
the middle, or inside of a homogeneous circuit, as from one trans- 
mission line on to another transmission line with no transition 
point near it. Therefore, where a change in the circuit constants 
by a transition point is near, as a transformer, you should arrange 
the switching on the low tension side, as this is safe, but where 
there is no transformer nearby, you have to switch in the high 
tension side, but there all the circuits which are involved are line 
circuits of the same or similar constants, and there switching is 
relatively harmless. Furthermore, these records show that 
whatever takes place, any change of the circuit conditions results 
in the appearance of high frequency, and high frequency is in 
those high voltage systems an ever present phenomenon, as 
much as the waves of the ocean are ever present. High fre- 
quency impulses, as oscillations of current, and corresponding 
oscillations of voltage, ‘are of moderate amplitude, usually not 
high enough to raise the voltage of the system sufficiently to 
discharge over the lightning protective apparatus, and lightning 
arresters therefore usually can not take care of these high fre- 
quency oscillations. Their danger consists in the possibility 
of locally piling up the voltage, in inductive parts of the circuit, 
as in the end turns of the transformers, generators, etc., etc. 
The danger of these high frequency surges thus results not from 
an increase of the voltage of the system, but from the local ex- 
cessive potential differences which they may create in apparatus. 

Max H. Collbohm: The main points brought out in Mr. 
Faccioli’s paper are, in the speakers’ opinion, the following two: 

1. The fact that the higher harmonics in the generator wave at 
no load practically disappear with a certain increase in current. 

2. The appearance of high frequency oscillations during 
switching operations in long distance transmission systems, 


1854 ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS {June 29 


I have made the same observations in a 66,000 volt 25-cycle 
63 mile transmission system where the generator wave con- 
tained at no load the 17th harmonic of about five per cent 
amplitude. The influence of this 17th harmonic could, how- 
ever, not be detected by any appreciable increase in the charg- 
ing current over that due to the fundamental frequency. 

This seems to indicate that in a high voltage transmission 
system the requirements for a smooth generator voltage wave 
without harmonics, which heretofore have been strongly advo- 
cated, lose a great deal of their importance. ‘ 

Regarding the second point, viz., the high frequency osculla- 
tions of moderate amplitude and the consequent building up of 
high voltages when meeting inductive reactance, it must be 
said that our present American types of arresters, including the 
electrolytic arrester, do not afford any protection whatever under 
such conditions. 

As pointed out in my discussion on Dr. Steinmetz’s paper on 
‘Central Station Development,’ there has however recently 
been developed in Europe an arrester to meet just that particular 
condition. It consists of one or more banks of dry condenser 
elements shunted by a choke coil of very high reactance, the 
condensers acting on high frequency while the choke coil takes 
care of static accumulations. This type of arrester has been 
installed in various prominent European transmission plants 
with great success. 

In the same discussion there has also been mentioned a scheme 
devised by the speaker for protecting against high frequency 
disturbances, namely, the use of solid iron wire of high permea- 
bility for station wiring, extending from the high tension trans- 
former taps to the point where the arrester taps on to the trans- 
mission line, the choke coils being also wound with soft 
Swedish iron. 

The protection afforded by this scheme is obtained by the 
very high resistance of the iron wire under high frequency, due 
to the skin effect. 

The same discussion also mentions a scheme to protect: the 
high tension series transformer from damage due to the high 
frequency, which consists in the use of a small electrolytic cell 
shunted across the high tension terminals of the series trans- 
former. The before mentioned schemes have been tried out with 
entire success in a prominent hydroelectric plant which has 
passed through a great number of very severe lightning storms 
which caused the arresters to act very frequently without the 
least damage to the station apparatus. 

D. B. Rushmore: The real motive of Mr. Faccioli’s paper is 
that high tension transmission systems have been causing dis- 
turbances, and as the voltages have been increased there have 
been certain breakdowns in insulations and in apparatus, which 
were not understood, and a great many theoretical explanations 
have been offered for them, but so far as I know this is,about the 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1855 


first actual investigation of this particular class of phenomena 
on an actual transmission line of high voltage to find out what 
really existed there. Our transformers may break down, and it 
is very difficult to tell why they do break down. As both manu- 
facturers and operators are desirous of avoiding failures, it is 
necessary to actually investigate the phenomena taking place 
on transmission lines, so as to have facts at hand, instead of more 
or less empirical hypotheses. We have certain elements of mass, 
velocity, inertia, elasticity in mechanical or electrical systems, 
and it helps very much to have us understand what is taking 
place in electrical systems, if we form some conception of the 
mechanical analyses. Interrupting a high tension circuit often 
makes me think of a fact in our daily experience, in earlier times, 
in getting the running light losses on synchronous motors, by 
throwing the belt, which used to be an exceedingly interesting 
thing with large motors—we used to throw it across the shop, 
anywhere in the neighborhood to get it out of the way, and you 
have just about the same element when the transmission of 


energy is interrupted very suddenly; we have about the same 


class of phenomena, with very different appearance. After 
having investigated and discovered what the real facts are in 
high tension switching, we can understand the matter more 
clearly; and I want to offer here a word of sincere appreciation 
for this investigation and for the elucidation which this matter 
had from Dr. Steinmetz both before and at the meeting, in clear- 
ing up a great many vague ideas which we had of what was 
taking place on transmission systems. 

As a matter of fact, on high tension transmission systems the 
insulation is getting to be so strong, that if every thing is in 
proper shape, the number of disturbances is going to be very much 
smaller, because while these oscillations may exist the voltages 
induced by them are below the factor of safety of the insulating 
material on the line and on the apparatus. But, as Dr. Steinmetz 
very clearly brought out, the line is not the only thing to be con- 


sidered, because when we have an oscillation of electricity, as it is 


playing back and forth into the capacity of the line, or through 
some leak of the line into the capacity of the ground, the place 
where the harm is done is where the voltage piles up, and that is 
always across the reactances. See 

Now, in the future design and operation of transmission sys- 
tems we are going to find out through that wonderful instru- 
ment the oscillograph—and it is rather interesting to note in 
these scientific investigations the important part the oscillo- 
graph has played—more and more nearly exactly what is taking 
place, and we shall have an increased ability to interpret the 
results, something that is not always done without a consid- 
erable expenditure of time and money. But as a general result, 
somewhat repeating what has been said, the result of this very 
important and interesting investigation is a reassurance con- 
cerning our ability to deliver uninterrupted power to our future 
high tension transmission systems. eas 


1856 ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS [June 29 


C. P. Steinmetz: I would like to make a few remarks re- 
garding the spark gap test that showed a voltage of some 20,000. 
From the characteristics of the line, you get the relation between 


I 
voltage and current of the transient: VA Cc’ and from the start- 


ing voltage of the transient, we get the transient current. This, 
with the inductance of the reactive coil, gives the frequency _re- 
quired to produce the observed spark voltage of this traveling 
wave. This calculation gives an approximate frequency of 
2,000,000 cycles. We thus find that there are frequencies of 
oscillation moving around the system, varying from 20 cycles, 
which is the oscillation of the transformer, up to the magnitude 
of 2,000,000 cycles. 

Percy H. Thomas: As Mr. Rushmore has said, this work 
of Mr. Faccioli’s is one of the first efforts that has been made 
on a full sized plant to determine just what happens by actual 
measurement in generators and step-up transformers at the time 
of switching. It would be well to consider in connection with 
this paper a paper presented at the Asheville Convention of the 
Institute in 1905, which was a somewhat similar study of the 
static effect produced by switching. These results, you will 
remember, were obtained in 1902 on some plants in the middle 
western part of this country. The tests were limited strictly to 
the experimental study of static phenomena, which, as Dr. 
Steinmetz said, is not the subject of the present paper—these 
two papers thus become complementary. 

For fear it should be considered a misprint, I will call your 
attention to a point in the table (p. 1841) under 4-a opposite 14 in 
the last column, you will note that 1} in. spark-gap was jumped at 
the receiving end across a small choke coil in series with the line, 
representing a momentary voltage of 24,000 volts. This is a 
purely static phenomenon of course, this measurement of voltage 
across the choke coils having been an incidental test in connection 
with the main experiments. The point about that extra high 
voltage, this being: higher than in any other test, is brought out 
in the other paper of which I speak, namely, that the most serious 
results of a static nature from switching come when you connect 
apiece of apparatus of a different potential toa line which has 
stored in electrostatic capacity a sufficient quantity of energy ~ 
so that it can instantly charge the idle apparatus with which 
you are connecting it. This particular case was a transmission 
line, on the end of which was a transformer, the transmission 
line having a large capacity of energy stored, ready for imme- 
diate delivery, if you will accept that expression, to charge up 
the transformer: initially or nearly. The result was that a 
choke coil connected to the lead of the transformer received a 
very excessive strain. 


= 


A “paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


THE ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR.—II 


BY JOHN B. WHITEHEAD 


In a former paper! with the title of the present one the author 
described a series of investigations of the conditions under 
which the air breaks down in the neighborhood of clean, round 
wires subjected to high voltage. A principal feature of that 
paper was the description of a method for observing with a 
close degree of accuracy the critical or corona voltage for various 
sizes of wire when centred in cylinders forming the opposite 
side of the source of voltage. There has been a great diversity 
in the values of critical voltage as given by other observers, who 
for the most part have used the appearance of the visible corona 
and the readings of instruments in the primary circuits of 
transformers as indications of the voltage at which the air breaks 
down. The method referred to was developed as the result 
of a conviction that the laws governing the loss between high- 
tension lines could not be satisfactorily determined without a 
study and knowledge of the fundamental phenomena. So far 
therefore these investigations have been concerned only with 
the conditions under which the air actually breaks down, causing 
a large increase in conductivity and power loss. The results 
of the former paper show among other things that when car- 
rected. for wave form, temperature and pressure the electric 
intensity at the surface of a clean, round conductor, correspond- 
ing to the voltage at which corona starts and loss sets in, is a 
constant for each size of wire. This value of surface intensity 
varies with the temperature and pressure and is that correspond- 
ing to the maximum value of the voltage wave. ° It is different 
for different sizes of wire but is independent of the material 


I a Sa I lr te << ee 
1. J. B. Whitehead, TRANSACTIONS A.1.E.E., 1910, X XIX, II, p. 1159. 
1857 ; 


1858 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


of the wire, of the moisture content, and of the amount of free 
ionization in the air. In the present paper some further facts 
bearing on the fundamental relation between diameter and criti- 
cal surface intensity are given, and a series of investigations of 
the influence of stranding a conductor, of variations of at- 
mospheric pressure, and of frequency on the critical electric 
intensity are also described. 

Critical Surface Intensity. As used in these papers the term 
‘ critical surface intensity ’’ refers to the voltage gradient at the 
surface of a conductor at which the visible corona appears and 
ionization of the neighboring air with accompanying conduc- 
tivity begins. These two phe- 
nomena are exactly contem- 
poraneous as has been shown 
in the foregoing paper and 
by numerous later observa- 
tions. No investigations have 
been undertaken showing the 
variation of the loss above 
the critical voltage. For the 
details of the method by 
which the critical intensity is 
observed to a close degree of 
accuracy the original paper 
must be consulted. The prin- 
ciple is simple, however, and 
may be described briefly. The 
wire is stretched along the 
axis of i. metal cylinder and 
the voltage is applied between Fic, 1 
them. Air may be _ passed ; 
through the cylinder by means of two lateral tubes near 
the ends, the walls of the cylinder at these points being 
drilled with a number of small holes. Close to one set 
of these holes a wire mesh electrode, connected through an 
insulating bushing to a sensitive electroscope, is placed. As 
soon as the air around the wire breaks down under increasing 
voltage a rapid and sharply marked leak of the charged elec- 
troscope begins. Observations may be repeated at will, and 
after any interval; when corrected for temperature and pressure 
a most satisfactory constancy of results is obtained. For con- 
venience of reference a sketch of the apparatus is shown in 


MOIST AIR 


ORY AIR 


1911) WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1859 


Fig. 1. The constancy of the relation between critical surface 
intensity and diameter of wire was shown by various combina- 
tions of material and sizes of wire and cylinder. The results on 
this portion of the work are plotted in Fig. 2 in which the letters 
A and S indicate points observed with aluminum and steel 
wires respectively; the remaining points are for observations 
with copper wire. A formula connecting the value of the critical 
surface intensity with the diameter of the wire has been added 


(va 
wl 
Led 
Ww 
2 
= 
z 
i 
Oo 
oc 
wi 
a 
no 
i od 
=f 
[o) 
> 
fe) 
2 
x {L 
u } | 
Case } 
E 30 | | Y le | 
5 
z 
til) Tx | 
5 a ad es Eee (ee Ls a a al ef] 
ea | 
Ww 20} SSS Sila S|) a fe be (i =I 
< | o—-RYAN 
cc el eet ied Dee ee = _@=meRSHON. |__| 
om ——+— WATSON 
10 —}_} | ++ + | 
| alu oe 
i Datla 3) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
DIAMETER MILLIMETERS 


Fic. 2 


to Fig. 2. This formula which refers to the conditions of 
760 mm. pressure and 21 deg. cent. temperature is as follows: 


13.4 
f=32-—-——— (1) 

os Vd 
in which E is the critical surface intensity in kilovolts per centi- 
meter and d is the diameter of the round conductor in centi- 
meters. For the discovery of this simple relation I am indebted 


1860 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR (June 29 


to Dr. Alexander Russell. Over the range of diameters covered 
by the observations this law is obeyed with remarkable closeness. 
In Table I values calculated from formula (1) are compared with 
those observed and plotted in the curve of Fig. 2. A column 
showing the percentage error referred to the calculated values is 
also given. It is seen that this error is less than 1 per cent 
throughout the whole curve with the exception of one point which 
represents a reading on aluminum wire. This point actually 
falls outside the curve of Fig. 2 a fact which is due to the im- 
possibility of obtaining a smooth polished surface on an aluminum 
wire. A roughened surface invariably causes a lowering of the 


TABLE I 


OBSERVED AND CALCULATED RELATION BETWEEN DIAMETER OF WIRE 
AND CRITICAL SURFACE INTENSITY 


Surface intensity 
Diameter Difference 
em. Calculated Observed per cent 

0.089 76,950 77,100 +0.19 
0.122 70,400 70,875 +0.67 
0.156 65,950 65,880 —0.1 

0. 205 61,600 61,680 +0.13 
0.254 58,600 58,750 +0. 25 
0.276 57,500 58,000 +0.87 
0.235 55,600 55,000 1.08 
0.340 54,980 55,100 +0.21 
0.399 53,230 53,050 —0.33 
0.347 54,780 54,500 —0.51 
0.475 51,460 51,400 —0.11 


critical intensity. The closeness with which this law is obeyed 
makes it reasonably certain that it obtains over a wider range of 
diameter. If this be so the value of critical surface intensity for 
a wire of 0.25 in. (0.635 cm.) diameter is 48.8 kilovolts per cm., 
and for 1 cm. diameter, 45.4 kilovolts per cm. Hence the value 
of critical intensity is still varying considerably for wires in the 
neighborhood of No. 4/0 B. & S. Such a uniform and regular 
law should prevent all future use of such artificial suggestions 
as that the air in the neighborhood of a wire has a greater electric 
strength than at a distance, and that the thickness of this so- 
called layer becomes constant above a certain diameter. 

The relation which has been described above will only obtain 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1861 


for fixed conditions of pressure and temperature. The laws 
covering the variation of the critical intensity with temperature 
and pressure are apparently within easy reach. It is also to be 
noted however that in actual transmission lines a loss begins at 
values considerably below those corresponding to formula (1). 
There are other disturbing factors which are not so readily 
located but which apparently all take their rise in conditions 
which affect the value of the surface potential gradient of the 
conductor. Thus dirt, or any other irregularities, and as shown 
later in this paper, the stranding of a conductor will lower the 
critical surface intensity. Moisture content of the air has no 
influence. The state of the air as regards the amount of free 
- ionization present has been suggested as an important factor. 
Ionization means conductivity and there is a certain amount 
present at all times in the atmosphere. This amount however is 
extremely small. It has been estimated that the number of 
ions present is about 1000 per cubic centimeter of air. The 
charge on each one of these ions is about 4.6107" c. g.s. 
electrostatic units, or 1.5X10- electromagnetic units. Under 
the influence of ionizations of this amount the most sensitive 
electroscopes require an extremely long time, say of the order 
of several days, to lose their charge. The variation from time 
to time and place to place, in the amount of this free ionization 
is very small, say from 1 to 4 or 6 times. The amount of ioniza- 
tion caused by the corona is incomparably greater in amount. 
The air becomes extremely conducting and the electroscope 
loses its charge within a second or two. It follows therefore 
that if the presence. of a greater or less quantity of ionization 
in the air has any influence on the point at which corona sets in, 
a foregoing presence of corona should materially affect the voltage 
at which corona begins again. For example, let us suppose that 
the voltage on a clean round wire is raised gradually and carried 
above the corona voltage and then gradually lowered. If the 
presence of a large amount of ionization lowers the critical voltage 
then as the voltage on the wire is lowered the corona should 
continue down to a value lower than that at which it started. 
This is not the case however; the corona ceases at exactly the 
same voltage at which it begins. Further it hasbeen shown 
by the author that for a voltage well above that at which corona 
appears the corona is periodic and begins and ends on the voltage 
wave at approximately the same value. It is readily possible 
to obtain extraneous sources of jonization and in order to secure 


1862 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


direct evidence as to the influence of the amount of ionization 
in the atmosphere the following simple experiment was per- 
formed: A clean copper wire 0.156 cm. in diameter was stretched 
at the axis of a cylinder 17.5 cm. in diameter, the cylinder being 
constructed from coarse wire screen with a mesh about one 
centimeter square. A large X-ray tube enclosed in a light-tight 
box was set up immediately adjoining this apparatus. When 
in operation the X-rays ionized the entire region in the 
neighborhood. A rough laboratory electroscope placed on the 
far side of the cylinder lost its charge quite rapidly. The voltage 
at which the visible corona appears on the wire is absolutely 
independent of the state of the X-ray tube. The visible corona 
under these circumstances can be read to an accuracy of } per 
cent or even closer, and the above experiment was carried out 
by several observers. The only claim based on experiment 
that such an influence of ionization exists is that of Ryan? de- 
scribed in his recent A. I. E. E. paper. In this experiment the 
central one of three parallel wires in one plane was connected 
to a static induction machine. The alternating voltage corona 
appeared on the outer wires at a lower voltage when the central 
wire was discharging than when it was not excited. Ryan’s 
conclusion is that the central discharging wire furnishes a supply 
of ions which enable the outer wires to discharge at a lower value 
of voltage. It is obvious as pointed out by the writer in dis- 
cussing the paper that the presence of the central wire raises 
(or lowers) the value of the absolute potential of the outer wires 
above that indicated by the voltage between them. This 
higher potential causes the normal critical surface gradient 
corresponding to the size of the outer wire to be reached at a 
lower voltage. 

All the facts and phenomena so far observed indicate that the 
state of the air as regards ionization has no influence on the 
value of critical surface intensity. So far as the writer is aware 
there is no experimental evidence in support of the contrary 
contention. It is quite possible that the presence of con- 
siderable amounts of ionization may cause a small loss before 
the principal and far greater loss due to the presence of corona 
sets in. Such a loss would be due to the actual conductivity due 
to the presence of the ions. This conductivity as already 
pointed out is extremely small. In the present state of uncer- 
tainty as to the conditions controlling the critical voltage and 


2. H. J. Ryan, Transactions A. J. E. E., LOU ex xy Lapeele 


— ~~ | 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1863 


the variation of the loss it appears unwise to confuse the problem 
by the introduction of the ionization theory. This theory 
has been pushed to extreme lengths and used in the vaguest 
manner to explain discrepancies and unrecognized phenomena. 
Its basic principles are undoubtedly correct and it has been a 
most valuable instrument in the hands of physicists. Corona 
formation is undoubtedly due to secondary ionization, or ioniza- 
tion by collision, but it is of doubtful wisdom to discuss the ulti- 
mate nature of these phenomena when the simple laws they follow ~ 
have not yet been definitely fixed. To the engineer these laws 
are more important than their explanation in terms of deeper- 
lying and often invisible phenomena. The language of the 
ionization theory is therefore in this paper confined to a dis- 
cussion at the end. 


EFFECT OF STRANDING THE CONDUCTOR 


It is quite obvious that if the surface intensity is the determin- 
ing factor in the voltage at which the corona appears on a given 
conductor, a stranded conductor should have a critical voltage 
lower than that of a solid conductor of a diameter equal to that of 
a circle tangent to the strand. The influence of stranding has 
been studied by Mershon* and his results are contrary to the 
above conclusion. In fact, he states that under certain cir- 
cumstances the stranding of a conductor may actually have the 
effect of raising the critical voltage above that of a solid wire of 
diameter equal to the overall diameter of the cable. Jona‘ 
has given an expression due to Levi-Civita from which the 
value of the maximum surface electric intensity for cables 
of various numbers of strands may be computed. This ex- 
pression involves a hypergeometrical series whose evaluation 
requires some labor. Jona gives a solution for the particular 
case of six strands in the outer layer. This solution states that 
the maximum surface intensity occurring in a cable having six 
strands uniformly spaced in the outer layer is 1.23 times that 
corresponding to a solid wire having the same cross section. The 
expression of Levi-Civita makes no allowance for the spiral of a 
cable. The spiral undoubtedly has the effect of lowering the 
intensity on the outer portions of the strand. Further it is 
much more important to refer the behavior of a stranded con- 
ductor to its outside diameter since in many cases the interior 


3. Mershon, Transactions A. I. E. E., 1908, XXVI, Il, p. 886. 
4. Jona, Trans. Int. Elect. Congress, St. Louis 1904, Vol. II, p. 550. 


1864 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR (June 29 


of such conductors is made up of a material different from that of 
the strand. 

An investigation was therefore made of the critical voltage of 
a number of cables of stranding ranging from three to nine con- 
ductors uniformly filling the outer layer. The interior space of 
these conductors was filled with a single wire, or several wires of 
suitable size, but in each conductor the wires of the outer layer 
were all of the same size, 0.162 cm. diameter. The cables were 
subjected to no special treatment for cleaning or making their 
surfaces smooth other than to run over them with a piece of 
crocus cloth in order to remove any points or other imperfec- 
tions on the round surface of the strands. For the sizes three, 
four and five strands the experiments were performed by means 
of the electroscope method of Fig. 1. Beyond these sizes the 
critical voltage was too high for the insulation of that apparatus 
and resort was had to the visible corona as indication of critical 
voltage. In the smaller sizes mentioned the visible corona and 
electroscope leak were contemporaneous. For the five and six 
strand conductors the outer cylinder was of woven wire made 
carefully circular by wooden forms and of diameter 17.13 cm. 
For the largest sizes the outer cylinder was. of 12 in. tin pipe 
about five feet long. Owing to the want of rigidity of this pipe 
its diameter as affecting the value of critical surface intensity 
could not be determined accurately. Comparisons of the values 
in the different cylinders were readily obtained however with 
solid wires and the critical voltage was extremely sharply marked 
by means of the visible corona and also by the sound of the dis- 
charge. The corona was observed through a narrow slit cut in 
the side of the pipe, the latter being maintained at ground po- 
tential. By either of these methods it was possible to repeat the 
readings of the critical voltage to an accuracy well within one 
per cent. A summary of the observations is given in Table II. 
This table gives the diameter over all and for comparison the 
behavior of a single wire having the same over-all diameter. 
The values of critical kilovolts are the product of the observed 
primary voltage and the ratio of transformation. Up to 30 
kilovolts the transformer described in the earlier paper was used, 
for higher values a 10-kw. 100,000-volt. transformer and a 
separate generator had to be employed. A comparison be- 
tween the two as regards wave form was obtained by oscillo- 
grams and by observations on the same conductor excited from 
each source. In the last column of Table II the diameters of the 


— 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1865 


round conductor which would discharge at the same voltage as 
the stranded conductor are given. At the foot of the table there 
are given the results of observations on conductors of three and 


TABLE II 
INFLUENCE OF STRANDING ON CRITICAL VOLTAGE 
Number of Diameter Diameter Diameter 
strands each Diameter outer of equivalent 
in outer strand over all cylinder Critical round 
layer cm. cm. cm, volts conductor 
3 0.162 0.349 9.52 18,300 
3 0.162 0.349 9.52 18,350 0.247 
1 0.349 0.349 9.52 21,540 
4 0.162 0.404 9.52 20,750 . 0.32 
il 0.404 0.404 9.52 24,250 
5 0.162 0.45 9.52 22,425 0.373 
1 0.45 0.45 9.52 24,375 
5 0.162 0.45 ilygnale} 26,250 0.37 
it 0.45 0.45 iW ites} 29,050 
6 0.162 0.49 17.13 28,100 0.42 
1 0.49 0.49 Ilya al) 30,550 | 
| 
a 0.162 0.541 29.2 32,880 0.465 
5 0.541 0.541 29.2 38,600 
8 0.162 0.589 29.2 35,000 0.516 
il 0.589 0.589 29.2 40,500 
9 0.162 0.64 29 .2 36,900 0.567 
1 0.64 6.64 29.2 42,500 
3 0.157 0.336 9.52 16,675 0.205 | 
4 0.157 0.378 9.52 18,500 0.25 | 
} 


four strands in which there was no spiral and having approxi- 
mately the same size of strand as that on the others. These 
were made up from carefully cleaned and polished wires with the 
aid of a fine blow flame for soldering. : 


1866 WHITEHEAD: ELE€TRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


The results are presented in somewhat different form in 
Table III. The columns A, B and C give the diameter of the 
cable over all, the diameter of a solid conductor of equal section, 
and the diameter of a solid round conductor having a critical 
voltage equal to that of the stranded conductor. The ratios of 
C to B and C to A and the pitch of the spiral, both actual and 
in terms of the corresponding diameter, are given in the re- 
maining columns. The results of Table III are plotted in the 
curves of Fig. 3. The upper curve showing the variation of the 
ratio C to B with the number of strands shows that the critical 


TABLE III 


COMPARISON OF STRANDED AND SOLID Ste oa WITH REFERENCE 
TO CRITICAL VOLTA 


| | 


Diameter 
Number Diameter of con- 
fo) of con-  |ductor with 
strands Diameter | ductor of equal Cc Cc Pitch 
in outer over all equal critical Ratio = | Ratio— of 
layer cm, section volts B A spiral 
————— ———— 
(A) (B) (C) em. | Diam- 
eters 
eer —|— 
3 0.349 0.272 0.247 0.907 0.708 3.81 | 10.9 
4 0.404 0.332 0.32 0.965 0.792 3.49 8.6 
5 0.45 0.381 0.37 0.971 0.822 4.44 9.9 
6 0.49 0.430 0.42 0.975 0.857 6.02 | 12.3 
x 0.541 0.48 0.465 0.969 0.868 6.66 | 12.3 
8 0.589 0.53 0.516 0.975 0.877 6.35 | 10.8 
9 0.64 0.581 0.567 0.977 0.886 6.98 | 10.9 
3 0.336 0.27 0.207 0.767 0.616 ae | 
4 0.378 0.312 0.25 0.802 0.665 None 


voltage of a stranded conductor has an approximately constant 
relation to that of a solid wire having the same cross section 
when the number of strands on the outer layer is above five. 
The relation is that the diameter of a solid wire with the same 
critical voltage is about 97 per cent that of the wire having the 
same cross section as the cable. For fewer strands than five 
there is a sharp decrease in this percentage value showing that 
cables with fewer strands form corona at very much lower 
voltages. 


The curve showing the relation between the ratio C to A and 


ae ee 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1867 


the number of strands is a very much more convenient indication, 
however, of the behavior of the stranded conductor. This refers 
the behavior of the cable to its own outside diameter, and the 
curve shows, for different numbers of strands, the fraction of 
this outside diameter which as a solid conductor would discharge 
at the same voltage as the cable. It is seen that with a seven- 
strand cable, i.e., with six strands on the outer layer, the critical 
voltage is that corresponding to a solid wire of diameter 0.85 
that of the outside diameter of the cable. With nine strands on 
the outer layer the relation is still less than 0.90. 

In a stranded conductor the strands are always spiralled. 


ma ' 


| DIO 


plo} 


| pee 

\A = ACTUAL OVERALL DIAMETER 
|B= DIAMETER OF SOLID WIRE, OF EQUAL SECTION 
|C = DIAM. OF SOLID WIRE WITH EQUAL 


| 
CRITICAL VOETASE | 


80} 


| 
| 


| | 
4 5 6 7 8 9 
NUMBER OF STRANDS, OUTER LAYER 


Fic. 3.—Critical voltage of stranded conductors referred to 
diameters over all and of equal section 


The pitch of the spirals of the cables described above is given 
in Table III. The spiral arrangement of the strands tends to 
lessen the value of the electric intensity on the outer surfaces 
since the equipotential surfaces are rendered more nearly 
cylindrical about the axis of the cable. At the bottom of 
Table III are given the results of observations on three- and four- 
strand cables in which there is no spiral. The results indicate 
the further lowering of the critical voltage when spiralling is 
absent. The ratio C to A falls from 0.71 to 0.61 for the three- 
strand cable, and the difference for the four-strand is somewhat 
greater. The pitch of the spirals investigated does not appear 


1868 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


to follow any regular rule. This irregularity however does not 
appear to have any corresponding effect on the points of curves 
of Fig. 3. From this it may be concluded that for a pitch of 
spiral less than 12 diameters there is no gain on the ground of 
lessened surface intensity due to a more uniform distribution 
of the electric field. 

The presence of the spiral prevents an exact comparison be- 
tween the values of surface intensity as calculated from Levi- 
Civita’s expression and those observed here. The critical sur- 
face intensity for a 0.162-cm. wire is 66,500 volts per centimeter; 


the critical intensity for a 0.4285-cm. wire which is equal in 


cross section to a cable made up of seven wires 0.162 cm. in 
diameter, is 52,240. According to Jona and Levi-Civita the 
maximum intensity on this seven-strand cable is 1.23 52,240 
= 66,050 which corresponds to a primary voltage of 113.9, but 
this cable actually discharges at 112.7, at which voltage the 
maximum intensity using the same relation is 65,300; but it is 
impossible to say whether this lowering is due to the presence 
of the neighboring strands or to the fact that the 0.162-cm. 
wire may discharge at a different intensity when made up into 
a cable than when it stands alone. We can, however, say that 
this 0.162-cm. wire does form the corona when made up into a 
cable at a lower intensity than that at which it will form around 
the wire alone. ; 

A comparison between the actual intensity as calculated by 
Levi-Civita and that at which corona starts can only be had by 
the use of cables without spirals. As already indicated the solu- 
tion of Levi-Civita’s expression has only been given for the six 
strand conductor which is impossible to make up without a spiral. 
At this writing the author has been unable to obtain the solutions 
of Levi-Civita’s expression as applied to cables having three and 
four strands. When these are obtained, however; they will 
permit from the foregoing results a comparison between the 
maximum corona intensity for a single round wire and that 
obtaining at the surface of the same wire when made up into 
a three or four-strand cable without spiral. 


INFLUENCE OF FREQUENCY AND WAVE Form 


By use of a cathode ray oscillograph in the high-voltage circuit 
Ryan in 1904 showed that the appearance of corona was ac- 
companied by a hump or peak on the charging current wave in 
the neighborhood of the maximum of the voltage wave. The 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1869 


writer by stroboscopic methods has shown that the corona is 
periodic, appearing every half cycle, and that its first appearance 
with increasing voltage coincides accurately with the maximum 


of the voltage wave. Also the duration of the corona may be 


reduced with lessening voltage to a very small fraction of the 
period of the alternating voltage. Thus a corona which was 
found to exist for only 1/20 of a period at the crest of the voltage 
wave of a 60-cycle circuit was plainly visible in a darkened room. 
It is evident therefore that the interval of time involved in 
corona formation and cessation is extremely short. For these 
reasons it has been supposed that the appearance of corona 
depends only on the maximum value of voltage occurring in the 
cycle and is therefore independent of the frequency. Experi- 
ence with existing lines indicates that if there is an influence of 
frequency it is small for the range between 25 and 60 cycles. 
The closeness with which the critical voltage may be read by the 
methods used in this work gave promise of discovery of any 
small differences due to a variation of frequency. Several 
series of observations were therefore made with different sizes of 
solid round conductor. The method of observation was that 
of the visible corona and the sound accompanying its start. 
The range from 15 to 90 cycles was obtained from two generators 
and the voltage from a 10-kw., 25-cycle, 100,000-volt trans- 
former. The transformer had also a low voltage secondary coil. 
The method of procedure was to raise the voltage gradually for 
each value of the frequency and with room darkened to observe 
the wire through a narrow slit in the wall of the outer cylinder. 
As soon as the corona appeared the voltage was read from a 
voltmeter connected to the terminals of the low-voltage secondary 
coil of the transformer. It was found that the sound accom- 
panying the corona was quite as reliable as the visible corona as 
an indication of the critical voltage. The results of three sets 
of observations taken on different days are given in Table IV. 
An inspection of the readings will show that the voltage could be 
determined to a close degree of accuracy. Indeed the limiting 
condition of accuracy when the wires are carefully straightened 
and polished is found to lie in the constancy of the voltage of the 
circuit rather than in the sharpness with which the corona begins. 
These excellent conditions for observations are somewhat 
impaired at the lowest frequencies where the flicker of the corona 
is perceptible and where the low pitch of the sound of discharge 
renders it difficult to distinguish it from other sounds. The 


1870 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


generators were excited from storage batteries and no load other 
than the transformer was on the generator, so that the circuit 
conditions were very constant. 

The results of Table IV are plotted directly in Fig. 4 which 
shows, therefore, the variation of the voltage on the low tension 
secondary winding when the frequency is varied from 17 to 92 
cycles per second for wires 0.343, 0.635 and 0.716 cm. in diameter 


TABLE IV ee 
INFLUENCE OF FREQUENCY ON CRITICAL VOLTAGE a 
comarca tee pot 0.343 cm. diam. pressure | 
temp. 14.4°-16° C. 0.716 cm. diam 752 mm. temp. 14° C. 
es a) 
ee ay tas ea hans & ¥ 
ae = Se 
‘19.6 49 | 54 48.7/ 17.5 50.7, 63 50.7] 20 33.3, 59 «33.8 
[21.6 48.7; 55 | 48.sis.7| 51.2 69 49.8| 22.5| 33.3 55 | 34.1 
21.7) 48 | 68.5) 48.7| 20.5 |.51.2| 74 | 49 | 23.5 | 33.5] 55. | 34.1 
25.5 | 48.7|-60. | 48.5] 20.5'| 51.2| 80 | 48.3| 32 | 33 | 50.5| 33.6 | 
27.2 | 48.5| 63.7| 47.2] 22 | 51.5 | 87 | 47.2| 37 | 32.7 | 50.8 | 33.4 | 
29.7, 48 | 69 | 46.2]25.5) 51.6] 92 46.6] 40.5) 32.5) 45 | 32.5 
31 | 48.5| 73.7| 45.7| 27.5 | 51.4| 77 | 49.2| 43.5 | 32.5 | 45 | 32.5 | 
32.5 | 47.1| 78.7| 44.9] 29.5 | 52.5| 67 | 50.1] 48.5/| 33.2 42 | 32.4 | 
34 | 47.1; 85. | 44 | 37 | 50.7| 61.5 | 81.6] 53 | 34.1 | ‘38.54 92.4 
37.5| 46.7| 57.5| 49 | 43.5| 50.4| 56 | 52.4) 53 | 34.1 | 88.5 32.4 | 
38.5 46.7| 45° | 46.7} 48.5] 51.1] 51 | 52 | 58 | 34.1| 35 | 32.6 
41 .| 46.7| 49.5] 48.1) 53 | 52.4] 46 | 50.3] 58 | 34.1/ 35 | 32.6 
44 | 46.5, 45 | 46.7] 57 | 52.4| 42.5 | 50:1| 63 | 32.9, 32.5| 32.7 
45 | 46.7) 49.5] 48.1] 62.5 | 50.8 | 39 | 50.3 | 63 | 32.9 | 
49.5 | 48.2! 59 «| 52.4 59 | 33.6 
| 


when placed in the center of a cylinder 120 cm. long and about 
29 cm. in diameter. The dotted breaks in the three curves 
represent the passage from one generator to the other. The 
observations were taken as continuous sets, interruption being 
necessary for only a few seconds to change generators. There 
were consequently no appreciable variations in temperature or 
pressure. Ascending and descending frequency is indicated 
by crosses and circles respectively. The irregular shape of the 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1871 


curves of Fig. 4 repeated itself accurately in other series of ex- 
periments over the same range of frequency. Since the gen- 
erators were rated at 5 kw., and since the transformer was oper- 
ating over a wide range of frequency at approximately the same 
value of voltage, and its magnetizing current was therefore 
variable, a variation of wave form due to the armature reaction 
of the generator appeared probable. The transformer had a 
capacity of 10 kw. and was designed for 25 cycles. In these ex- 
periments the maximum voltage on the primary winding was 
only one half of the rated value. The magnetizing current of the 
transformer at full voltage is 15 per cent of full load current. 


CRITICAL VOLTS, EFFECTIVE 


20 


40 60 
CYCLES PER SECOND 
Fic. 4.—Influence of frequency on critical voltage 


It will be seen from these figures that the lagging component 
of the generator current was not unduly large. Both generators 
were designed for operating the transformer and they have 
smooth body armatures with flat surface coils. Nevertheless it 
was realized that at the low frequencies the magnetic density in 
the field circuit of the generators varied widely from that ob- 
taining at the high values of frequency, and a set of oscillograms 
was carefully taken at seven different frequencies covering the 
range shown on the curve. These oscillograms were all taken 
from the low voltage secondary coil of the transformer and its 
potential was maintained constant at 50 volts. This voltage 
is about the value of the mean obtaining over the curve for the 


1872 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


0.716-cm. wire. The ratios of maximum to effective values of 
these waves were then taken from micrometer measurements of 
ordinates spaced 7.5 deg. apart over two half waves. The 
figures of these measurements may be omitted here, but in order 
to give an idea of the conditions of accuracy obtaining the 
’ following figures are given for two half waves measured from 
the oscillogram corresponding to 44 cycles. These two half waves 
were taken on different portions of the oscillogram. On the first 
half 20 ordinates 2 mm. apart were ruled on a dividing engine; 
the height of these successive ordinates could be measured to 0.1 
of a mm. on the same machine. The maximum ordinate was 
31.27 mm. high and the square root of the mean square of all 
the ordinates was 21.26, giving a ratio of maximum to effective 


TABLE V_ 
INFLUENCE OF FREQUENCY ON WAVE FORM 


Frequency Ratio of maximum to effective value — 
| Ist half wave 2nd half wave Mean 
| 
35 1.462 1.449 1.445 
| 
| 44 1.474 1.456 1.465 
55 1.404 1.398 1.402 
60 1.40 1.40 
65 1.426 1.41 1.418 
81 : 1.45 | 
91.5 1.466 1.469 1.468 


of 1.474. Similar measurements on another half wave gave 
1.456 as the ratio of maximum to effective value. A similar 
treatment of other waves at different frequencies gave the 
results shown in Table V. It is seen that the ratio of maximum 
to effective is a minimum somewhere between 50 and 60 cycles, 
1.e., the region corresponding to the peculiar hump on the curves 
of Fig. 4. 

In the curves of Fig. 5 the points indicated are obtained by 
multiplying the values in Fig. 4 by the corresponding ratio of 
maximum to effective for the voltage wave. These curves 
show a lowering of the critical voltage with increasing fre- 
quency. They leave something to be desired in the accurate 
location of the points upon the curves. It should be noted, 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1873 


however, that owing to the magnification of the scale the error 
of the points falling off the curve and of those lying on the low 
frequency portion of the curves of Fig. 4 is only about 1 per cent. 
The measurement of the ratio of maximum to effective value 
from an oscillogram is subject to considerable error. The 
maximum at 55 cycles on the curves of Fig. 4 is brought below 
the values for lower frequencies in Fig. 5 when the correcting 
factor is introduced; and particularly the lowering at 91 cycles 
is far too great to be questioned on the score of a possible error 
of this nature. The curves therefore show with a fair accuracy 
the nature of the variation of the critical voltage with the fre- 
quency. This variation within the range of commercial fre- 


70 


CRITICAL VOLTS, MAXIMUM 


20 ‘ 40 60 80 100 


CYCLES PER SECOND 
Fic. 5-—Influence of frequency on critical voltage 


quencies is only about 2 per cent. The lowering of the critical 
voltage at 90 cycles is about 6 per cent. The frequency was 
measured with a Hartmann & Braun vibration frequency indi- 
cator which had been calibrated carefully by means of a tacho- 
meter. A possible influence of the frequency variation on the 
readings of the Weston electrodynamometer type voltmeter 


was investigated by careful comparison between this instrument 


and a Kelvin multicellular electrostatic voltmeter at the various 
frequencies, and then a check by comparing these two instru- 
ments with a standard direct-current Weston voltmeter. No 
variation was found among the readings of any of the instru- 
ments in these several conditions. 


\ 


1874 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


The variation of the critical voltage with the frequency 
has not been noticed before. Mershon records results for 40, 
73 and 93 cycles which indicate a rise of the critical voltage with 
the frequency. It should be noted, however, that Mershon’s 
definition of critical voltage is taken arbitrarily from his loss 
curves and therefore has no direct or necessary relation to the 
~ critical voltage as defined in these papers. Ryan worked at 
130 cycles but the description of the apparatus and conditions 
under which his experiments were made are not sufficient to 
permit a comparison between his values and those described 
here. In addition Ryan used the visible corona and did not 
make an accurate investigation of the variation of the wave form 
of alternating voltage. Asa result his values, a few of which are 
indicated in Fig. 2, do not show a regularity which would permit 
differences of 5 or 6 per cent from the values of this paper to be 
detected. Ina discussion given later in this paper some further 
comment on the variation of the critical intensity with the fre- 
quency is given. 

INFLUENCE OF PRESSURE 

The influence of pressure on the various forms of spark dis- 
charge has been closely studied. Paschen’s law® states that the 
sparking potential for a given spark length is directly propor- 
tional to the pressure; his investigations cover the range of 
pressure between 10 and 75 cm. of mercury. Carr® has shown 
that this linear relation extends down.to pressures of a few 
millimeters if the spark lengths are not greater than one centi- 
meter, but does not obtain for lower pressures. Townsend’ 
has shown that the potential gradient at which secondary ioniza- 
tion sets in when electricity is passing through a gas is directly 
proportional to the pressure. Watson* investigated the spark . 
length between spheres up to 15 atmospheres and found that the 
sparking potential increases with the pressure in an approxi- 
mately linear relation. From the general similarity between 
the corona and the brush form of the spark discharge a linear 
relation therefore between pressure and critical surface intensity, 
or the potential gradient at which corona begins, is to be ex- 
pected. Apparently the only study of the influence of pressure 
on the formation of the alternating corona is a single set of 


5. Paschen, Wied. Ann., 1889, XXXVII. p. 79. 
6. Carr, Proc. Roy. Soc., 1908, LXXI, p. 374. 
7. Townsend, Phil. Mag., 1901, VI, I, p. 198. 
8. Watson, Electrician, 1909, pp. 62, 851. 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1875 


observations by Ryan® on a wire 0.32 cm: in diameter placed at 
the centre of a cylinder 22.2 cm. in diameter. He observed the 
alternating voltage at which the visible corona appeared for the 
range of pressure between 45 and 90 cm. of mercury. The 
alternating frequency was 130. The resulting linear relation is 
given as between the kilovolts K actually applied and inches of 
mercury B. K=2.93+0.902 B. 

A series of observations on several sizes of wire with varying 
values of pressure was therefore undertaken. Five sizes of wire 
were investigated: with diameters 0.122, 0.156, 0.276, 0.340 
and 0.475 cm. The wires were carefully straightened and 
cleaned and centered accurately on the axis of the apparatus 
which has been briefly described above. The outer cylinder 
has a diameter of 9.52 cm. In the pressure experiments the 
ends were closed with ebonite caps fastened by insulating rods 
to the metal cylinder; this arrangement was necessary to with- 
stand the pressures above that of the atmosphere. The side 
tubes were also closed with ebonite caps and the leading-in wire 
to the discharge electrode passed through a column of sulphur 
supported in hard rubber. The electroscope was thus outside 
the apparatus proper. No troubles with either insulation or 
air leak were encountered with this arrangement within the 
range of pressure 30 to 108 cm. All joints were sealed with 
a mixture of beeswax and resin. The discharge electrode was 
placed inside the upper side tube and within one or two milli- 
meters of the grating formed by the holes drilled in the outer 
cylinder. In the earlier work it was found that a flow of air 
from the cylinder over the electrode contributed little to the 
sharpness with which the starting of the corona was indicated, 


' the initial discharge of the electroscope occurring at the same 


value for both moving and stationary air. The results of a 
typical series of observations are given in Table VI. The values 
are those for a wire 0.156 cm. in diameter. It will be noted that 
at each pressure several readings of voltage were taken. This 
was done by raising the voltage gradually until the initial dis- 
charge of the electroscope set in, then lowering, then repeating 
the process. The table also indicates that observations were 
taken over the same range of pressure for ascending and de- 
scending values. The column showing the critical primary 
volts indicates a very satisfactory constancy in the values. The 
results on the other sizes of wire show a corresponding degree of 


per eke tae eS ee 
9. Ryan, TRANSACTIONS Ain Boch. £904, XSi, p. 101. 


1876 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


accuracy and the readings are omitted. The degree of con- 
stancy, however, is indicated by the curves of Fig. 6 on which are 
plotted the results for the five sizes of wire which were studied. 
It is seen that the observations as plotted show beyond any 
question that the relation between critical voltage and air 
pressure is a linear one for each size of wire. The values of 


TABLE VI 


INFLUENCE OF PRESSURE ON CRITICAL VOLTAGE, CLEAN COPPER WIRE 
156 CM. DIAMETER IN 9.52 CM. OUTER CYLINDER. ATMOSPHERE 
PRESSURE 759.5 MM. TEMPERATURE IN TUBE 24 DEG. C. 


Manometer Pressure 
Crit. prim. volts mm. 

Ratio 1:125 Right Left Difference mercury 

102.2, 102.2, 102.2 487.5 587.5 | —100 659.5 
97.5, 97.5, 97 .2 459 605.5 146 613 
91.3, 91.3, 91.2 427 628.5 201.5 558 
87.2 87.5, 87.8 407.5 642 234.5 525 
83, 83.2, 83.4 386.5 656 269.5 490 

79.9, 80 , 80 367.5 669.5 302 457.5 
80.5, 80.7, 80.6 371 666.5 295.5 464 
740, Fei, 74 340 688.5 | 348.5 41 
68.1, 68.1, 68.1 313.5 707 393.5 366 

94.2, 94.2, 94.2 439 617 178 581.5 
106.5, 106, 106.2 499 576.5 77.5 682 

114.5, 114.9, 114.8 545.5 545.5 0 759.5 

Ratio 1:250 

57.5, 57.4, 57.5 545.5 545.5 | 0 759.5 

59.8, 59.9, 59.8 | 570.5 530.5 +40 799.5 
61.8, 61.6, 61.7 592 516.5 75.5 835 

64, 64 =, 63.8 618.5 499.5 119 878.5 

66% , 641 486 155 914.5 

67.7, OW avs CFiaG 661 473.5 197.5 957 

69.8, ZO). 69.9 687.5 | 457 230.5 989.5 

71.6, 71.6, retry’ 710 | Ad 266 1025.5 


critical voltage are those taken at the primary terminals of the 
transformer. This voltage is directly proportional to the 
corresponding value of potential gradient at the surface of the 
wire. It was shown in the earlier paper that with the trans- 
former used in these experiments the primary voltage was amply 
sufficient indication by means of the ratio of turns of the actual 


- 
F 
; 
+ 
¢ 
a 
P- 
5 
a 
2 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1877 


voltage applied between the wire and the cylinder. It is of great 
interest to note that the slope of the line showing the relation 
between critical voltage and pressure varies with the size of wire, 
and that this slope is greater the greater the diameter of the 
wire. It should be noted, however, that the values of critical 
voltage as given in Fig. 6 have no particular significance in that 
they apply to a particular combination of wire and opposite 
conductor. A corresponding type of variation is to be expected, 


110 


lcm. DIAM. 


100 


70 


60 


CRITICAL PRIMARY VOLTS 


40 


400 500 600 700 800 900 
PRESSURE: MM. MERCURY 


Fic. 6.—Influence of pressure on critical voltage 


however, for any particular arrangement of wire and opposite 
conductor. Referring to the readings of T able VI, the ratios of 
transformation were 1 to 125 and 1 to 250, the frequency 60 
cycles, and the ratio of the maximum to the effective value of 
alternating wave of electromotive force of the generator at 
100 volts was 1.46. The temperature was 24 deg. cent. The 
equations of the lines of Fig. 6 are readily deduced, but since, 
as already stated, they apply toa particular combination of -wire 
and outer cylinder they need not be given here in any further 


1878 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


elaboration than to state that the equation for the 0.340-cm. 
wire 1S 


V=17+0.087 p (2) 


where V is the actual observed critical primary voltage and p is 
measured in millimeters of mercury. Similar expressions apply 
for the other sizes of wire. It is necessary for the purposes of 
universal application to express the relation between the behavior 
of a wire and the pressure in terms of the critical surface intensity, 
or potential gradient at the surface corresponding to the ap- 
pearance of corona. The values of this critical surface intensity 
have therefore been cote from the expression 


eV eR (3) 
dr R 


in which £ is the maximum value of the potential difference 
between wire of radius ry and outer cylinder of radius R. Ex- 
pressed in terms of electric intensity at which corona begins in 
kilovolts per cm. and pressure in cm. of mercury the equations 
for the five wires of diameters’ as given above are as follows: 
In these equations correction has been made for the slight altera- 
tion in wave-form, and by reduction to a common basis of values 
at 760 mm. pressure. 

Diameter of wire 


d (kv.) 


0.122 cm. cae =16.7 +0.691 p » (4) 
0.156 em. EEN) 14.95 4.0.66 p (5) 
0.276 cm. ee =11.6 +0.595 p (6) 
0.340 cm. qf eee) =10.94+40.56 p (7) 
0.475 cm. : ev.) =9.56 +0.534 p (8) 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1879 
These equations have been plotted in the lines of Fig. 7. The 
variation of the slope of the linear relation between pressure 
and critical surface intensity is still evident although it is not so 
pronounced. It is also to be noted that the variation of the 
critical intensity with pressure is greater the smaller the size 
of wire. The slope of the linear relation apparently approaches 
a minimum with increasing size of wire. 

If Ryan’s results quoted above for 0.317-cm. wire be ex- 
pressed in the same terms used in the formulas above, the re- 
sulting equation is 


d (KW-) _6.1540.744 p (9) 
dr / 
90 | 
| ne 
| aes 
80 54 - | 
| | | 
70/- | 
60 


) 

2475 OM. 
i 
| 


g 


CRITICAL SURFACE INTENSITY: KV. PER CM. 
— 
S 


zl 


coe 
400 500 600 700 800 900 


PRESSURE: MM. MERCURY 


Fic. 7.—Influence of pressure on critical surface intensity 


The slope of this line is greater than that of any of the wires as 
expressed in equations (4) to (8), although the larger size of 
wire should cause the slope to be less than those of the three 
smaller sizes. It is to be noticed further that the initial con- 
stant term of formula (9) is considerably less than any of those 
in formulas (4) to (8). Further, the value of critical surface 
intensity at 76 cm. pressure indicated by formula (9) is 62.6, 
while that calculated from formula (1), and therefore frequently 
observed by the writer, is 55.7. Ryan used invariably the visible 


1880 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


corona for indication of initial break down; some of his results 
on wires of different sizes are given as circles in Fig. 2 where 
they are seen to be very irregularly located. Aside from the 
uncertainty of the method of observation, the wave form and 
frequency may have introduced considerable error in the 
results as reported, although that due to frequency would have 
tended to a lower rather than a higher value than those ob- 
tained here at 60 cycles. 

The variation of the linear relation between pressure and 
critical surface intensity with the size wire adds a further diffi- 
culty in the attempt to express in simple terms the behavior of 
any circuit as regards the safe limiting voltage. The fact that 
the critical surface intensity at any one pressure varies with the 
diameter of the wire as shown in Fig. 2 can be taken care of 
quite readily since the relation is a simple one. It is of interest 
therefore to study by inspection the constants of formulas (4) 
.to (8), and see if a simple relation between them and the dia- 
meter can be found. These formulas are of the general type 


CY =K,+K,p (10) 
In Table VII the values of the diameter of the wire expressed in 
millimeters and the corresponding values of K, and Ke, together 
with the logarithms of these several quantities, are given. The 
relation of d and K, and d and Kz was studied by plotting the 
curves between d and Ki, d and log Ky, etc. The only obviously 
simple relation that appeared was that between log d and log K, 
which resulted in a straight line. The equation of this straight 
line is 

log K,=log 18.07 —0.41 log d (11) 


from which it may readily be deduced that the relation between 
K, and d in centimeters is as follows: 


K,=7.03 d-“" 7 (12) 


In Table VII a column is also given showing the values of K, 
as calculated from formula (12). 

A similar study was made of a possible relation between 
d and Ks, the slope of the line showing the relation between 
pressure and critical surface intensity. Curves were plotted as 
before: between the several pairs of quantities d, Ke, log d, Ko, 


“Spee eatin ah hee, 
i a ’ 


- 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1881 


etc. In this case also a straight line resulted when log d was 
plotted in combination with log Ke. The equation of the re- 
sulting line is as follows: 


log K.=9.8554 —0.188 log d (13) 


from which it may also be deduced that the relation between 
Kz and d with d now expressed in centimeters is as follows: 


Ky=0.464 d-0"188 (14) 


Values of K> calculated from formula (14) are given in Table VIT 
and show a fairly satisfactory relation to those observed. 

The relations expressed by formulas (12) and (14) do not offer 
promise of any simple factor to take account of pressure varia- 
tion. ‘The expression connecting the critical surface intensity 


TABLE VII 


INFLUENCE OF PRESSURE ON CRITICAL SURFACE INTENSITY AS 
AFFECTED BY SIZE OF WIRE 


Calculated values 
mm log d Ky log K, | Ko log K2 kK me 
1.218 | 0.085 16.7 1.223 0.691 9.839 _ 16.67 0.69 
1.56 0.193 14.95 a ay 0.66 9.82 15.05 0.658 
2.76 0.441 | 11.6 1.064 0.595 9.775 11.9 0.591 
3.408 | 0.532 10.94 1.039 0.56 9 748 5 i Dg 0.568 
475 10.677 | 9.56 | 0.980 | 0.534 9.728 9.55, 0.53 


in kilovolts per centimeter with the diameter of the wire in 
centimeters and the pressure in centimeters of mercury, at 
21 deg. cent. is 


Q 


(kv.) 


ae = 7.03 d-*41+0.464 pad" (15) 


This expression includes the relation given by formula (1). 
For example the critical surface intensity for a wire 0.276 cm. 
in diameter calculated from formula (1) is 57.2; from formula 
(15) with p taken as 76 the value is 56.8. It would be very 
desirable to extend the investigation of pressure over a wider 
range of sizes of wire. It is reasonably certain, however, in 
view of the consistency with which observations like those 


1882 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


above may be carried out that the linear relation between 
pressure and critical intensity varies with the size of wire. 
The exponents of d in the two formulas mentioned may suffer 
some modification with further experiment, but it seems quite 
conclusive from the above relations that the relation between 
pressure variation and diameter of wire while simple in form 
will nevertheless introduce an unfortunate complication in any 
final expression which aims to give the critical corona voltage 
for any particular separation and size of parallel conductors for 
the whole range of pressure variation encountered in practice. 


DISCUSSION 


So far as the question of the value of voltage at which corona 
will start on a given transmission line is concerned, it is probable 
that a sufficiently accurate solution will be reached sooner or 
later by means of experiments of the general character of those 
described above, supplemented by observations on existing 
lines. There is also a fair reason to suppose that a compara- 
tively simple law will be found. For the surface intensity for 
any arrangement and size of cylindrical conductors corresponding 
to a given voltage may be expressed in terms of these constants, 
for standard conditions of temperature and pressure. While 
as above shown the relation between pressure and critical 
voltage varies with the size wire, the law of this variation is 
simple and it may be possible to adopt a mean value of the slope 
of this linear relation which will apply with sufficient accuracy to 
the sizes of wire encountered in practice. Thus, from Fig. 7, 
it is seen that for wires in the neighborhood of 4 cm. in diameter 
the slopes of the lines are approaching each other rapidly. In 
view of the results from the investigation of the influence of 
pressure it seems probable that the variation with the tempera- 
ture will also be of different form for different sizes of wire. 
investigations in this direction are very desirable. It may be 
recalled that in the writer’s earlier paper, and in the experi- 
ments of Ryan, it is shown that a linear relation exists for a 
definite size of wire between temperature and critical voltage. 
The effect of stranding the conductor has been studied for only 
one size of strand as yet, but it appears a simple matter with 
some further investigation to express the effect of each of these 
influences in terms of the diameter of the conductor. 

The influence of frequency does not offer promise of expression 
as a simple relation. This influence is so small, however, within 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1883 


the limits of frequency met in practice that it may be neglected. 
The state of the atmosphere appears to be of small importance, 
for moisture does not influence the critical voltage nor does its 
state as regards ionization, as is indicated by several considera- 
tions given in an earlier paragraph.. Dirt and impurities which on 
settling on the wire cause irregularities of surface may lead to 
brush discharges, and if these are sufficient in number they may 
cause a noticeable loss below the normal critical voltage. It is 
this type of loss which causes the slow initial rise and gradual 
bending in the loss curve below the critical voltage. These 
facts will probably be taken care of by a factor of safety multi- 
plying the calculated corona voltage and taking into account all 
of the influences which are sufficiently great to play a part. 

It is of great interest to consider the results so far obtained in 
their relation to present theories of the nature of the electric 
conductivity and breakdown of a gas. Under this theory the 
neutral atoms and molecules of matter may under some cir- 
cumstances be separated into smaller charged’ particles. The 
motion of these particles under electric force constitutes an 
electric current. In a gas there are always a small number of 
these free ions present; this number may be greatly augmented 
by Rontgen rays, ultra-violet light, and other well-known ionizing 
agents. When so ionized currents of magnitudes within easy 
measuring range are obtained between ‘terminals subjected toa 
difference of potential. If this difference of potential is increased 
continuously a point is reached where the current is constant 
over a wide range of voltage, which shows that the ions are 
swept out as rapidly as they are formed. On further increase of | 
potential the current increases sharply showing the presence of 
some new source of ionization. The theory states that these 
new ions are formed by the impact of those already existing, and 
moving with higher velocity in the increased electric field, with 
the neutral molecules of the gas. This phenomenon has been 
called ionization by collision, or secondary ionization. 

The results of the experiments which have been described 
above are for the most part consistent with the ionization theory. 
The various circumstances surrounding the appearance of corona 
all indicate that it is an instance of secondary ionization. Form- 
ula (1) indicates that near a conductor of large radius, or near a 
plane conductor, the corona intensity approaches a value 
39 kilovolts per cm. Secondary jonization between plane elec- 
trodes in closed vessels at atmospheric pressure has been noticed 


1884 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


by several physicists to begin in the neighborhood of 30,000 
volts per cm. The mass of the elementary negative ion or 
electron is approximately 5.9X10-% grams and the charge it 
carries is 4.6X10-” c.g.s. electrostatic units. In an electric 
field the mechanical force acting on the electron is the product 
of the charge and the strength of field. Hence by the laws of 
simple mechanics it is possible to calculate the acceleration, the 
velocity and the kinetic energy attained by an electron in moving 
a given distance under a given electric intensity. If the mean 
free path of the electron, about 6X10-> cm. at atmospheric 
pressure, be the distance between collisions it is thus easy to 
calculate the kinetic energy of the electron due to the electric 
field when it collides with a molecule. This energy is readily 
seen to be equal to p V e, where p is the mean free path, V the 
electric intensity in electrostatic units, and e the charge of the 
electron. If, now, the voltage between plane parallel electrodes 
be raised until secondary ionization begins the value of the volt- 
age makes it possible to calculate the energy required to ionize 
a molecule of a gas. In fact the values of the energy required to 
ionize a molecule which are now generally accepted are largeiy 
based on the determinations of the value of electric intensity at 
which secondary ionization begins. It has been pointed out 
above that the values of this intensity as determined by Town- 
send and others are in close agreement with the value 32,000 
volts per cm. indicated by equation (1) as the lowest value at 
which corona appears. To one skeptical as to the correctness of 
the electron theory, therefore, (and there are many such) all 
that may be said so far is that the phenomena of sudden in- 
crease of current through a gas above a certain value of clectric 
intensity as observed by Townsend, and that of corona forma- 
tion, are probably due to the same causes. But there are several 
other independent methods of determining the energy required 
to ionize a molecule of a gas. The values are commonly ex- 
pressed in terms of the potential difference in volts through which 
the electron must pass in order to acquire energy sufficient to 
produce an ion by collision. The value pertaining to the method 
described above is from 10 to 12 volts. Rutherford from the 
relation between the heating effect of radium and the number 
of ions it produces gives the value of 24 volts. Stark and 
Langevin by independent methods conclude that the values 
are 45 and 60 volts respectively. While the extreme values 
differ by the factor 5 or 6, it must be remembered that the actual 


Gavaabaabanas 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1885 


amount of energy required to produce an ion is about 5107" 
ergs, so that all of these values indicate the same order of mag- 
nitude. Therefore when taken together they constitute a very 
strong reason for supposing the value 510-4 ergs is close to 
the correct one. If. this be true it is good evidence that the 
formation of the corona is actually due to the liberation of ions 
from the neutral molecules of the gas when the latter suffer 
collision from a free electron moving under the force of the elec- 
tric field. That the electron and not a gaseous ion or aggregate 
is the active agent is shown by the shorter free paths’ of these 
latter which by the relation already given results in a lower value 
of kinetic energy at the time of collision than the values given 
above. It is well known that since secondary ionization depends 
only on the velocity of the ions, and thus on the electric intensity, 
it should within wide limits be independent of the number of 
ions already existing in the gas. That the electric intensity cor- 


_ responding to the appearance of corona is independent of the’ 


state of ionization of the air has been shown conclusively in an 
earlier paragraph. 

The general influence of a decrease in pressure or an increase 
in temperature in lowering the critical voltage is quite consistent 
with the ionization theory, for under the kinetic theory of gases 
the free paths of the vibrating molecules and ions are length- 
ened in these two conditions. During the free path or interval 
between collisions the ions are accelerated by the electric force, 
and the longer the interval the greater the velocity acquired and 
the more kinetic energy and ionizing power. Hence a given 


amount of energy will be acquired at a lower voltage if the free 


path is lengthened. 

The lowering of the critical voltage by an increase in frequency 
is not to be explained so simply. However, if within the molecule 
or atom there are a number of electrons in motion or free to move, 
and there is some indirect evidence to this effect, it is evident 
that the forced vibrations set up in such a system of electrons 
by an external alternating field will with the increase in fre- 
quency of these vibrations cause the mutual attractions within 
‘the structure of the atom to become less and less strong and 
therefore more liable to be broken when in collision with an 
extraneous ion. Itis surprising, however, that this effect should 
be noticeable at frequencies so low as 60 to 90 cycles, for these 
frequencies are incomparably slower than those suggested by 
theory for the vibrations within the atom. The close ‘relation 


1886 WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 
between the first appearance of corona and the peak or maximum 
of the voltage wave is natural in the light of theory, for at at- 
mospheric pressure the mean free path of an electron is about 
6X10-* cms. long and under a field sufficiently strong to ionize 
the gas this path is traversed in about 2107 secs. 

Perhaps the most interesting problem in connection with the 
phenomenon of corona formation is the explanation of the 
greater values of electric intensity at which corona starts around 
smaller wires, i.e., the upward trend of the curve of Fig.2. Why 
should the properties of the air change with a slight alteration 
in the size of a conductor whose diameter is 50,000 times as 
great as the mean free path of the molecule? No tenable ex- 
planation of the curve of Fig. 2 has yet been offered. The at- 
traction to the surface of the conductor of oppositely charged 
ions which pile up as it were and reduce the actual gradient below 
that calculated, and at the same time increase the gas pressure, 
‘has been suggested in explanation. Both suppositions im- 
mediately include an influence on the value of corona voltage of 
the amount of ionization present in the gas, and this as already 
noticed is contrary to observation. Simple calculation also 
will show that the charge sufficient to materially reduce the 
gradient at the surface of a conductor at corona potential would 
require a number of ions far in excess of the numbers commonly 
present in the atmosphere. The writer, using a sensitive optical 
method, could find no indication of an increase of pressure at 
the surface of the conductor. It appears probable that the 
explanation of the higher values for smaller wires will be found 
in the lesser surface of these smaller conductors. Secondary 
ionization probably begins with the collisions of a few electrons 
which have free paths longer than the average. With de- 
creasing area of the conductor the number of neighboring elec- 
trons whose free paths exceed a certain length and at the same 
time are subject to the maximum electric intensity will be de- 
creased, and consequently the corona forming the electric in- 
tensity must. be higher. 


s 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 


1. The relation between critical surface intensity, i.e., the 
intensity at which corona starts, and the diameter of a clean 
round conductor may be expressed by the simple law E=32 
+13.4d~"°, E being the surface intensity in kilovolts per cm. 
and d the diameter of conductor in cm. 


1911] WHITEHEAD: ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 1887 


2. Stranding a conductor lowers the critical voltage. The 
lowering is greater the fewer the number of strands in the outer 
layer. Expressing the lowering in terms of the diameter of 
wire giving the same critical voltage, the fraction of the overall 
diameter of the stranded conductor for three strands is 0.7 and 
for nine-strand, 0.88. The values for intermediate numbers of 
strands are also given. 

3. With increasing frequency the corona starts on a given 
conductor at lower values of voltage; the lowering between 25 
and 60 cycles is about 2 per cent, at 90 cycles about 6 per cent. 

4. A linear relation exists between the atmospheric pressure 
and the corona-forming voltage for the range between 30 and 109 
cm. of mercury. The slope of this relation varies however with 
the size wire and the rate of change of critical voltage with the 
pressure is, greater the smaller the diameter of the wire. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Instilule of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC 
STRENGTH OF AIR 


BY F. W. PEEK, JR. 


I. SUMMARY 


For several years an extensive investigation of the dielectric 
strength of air, and more particularly, of the law of corona, has 
been carried on by the Consulting Department of the General 
Electric Company, under the general supervision of Dr. CAPT 
Steinmetz. The facilities were practically unlimited in regard 


Corona, standard line A, No. 3/0 cable, 
310 cm. spacing, 230,000 volts 


to power, apparatus, instruments and their standardization, and- 
available engineering skill. Thanks for their active assistance 
in this investigation are due to Dr. E. J. Berg, Messrs. C. M. 
Davis, J. L. R. Hayden, A. B. Hendricks, W. K. Page, L. T. 
Robinson, L. A. Schloss, W. I. Slichter, C. W. Stone and 


J. B. Taylor. 


The investigation gives the following results: 
: 1889 


1890 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


1. In alternating-current transmission lines at very high volt- 
ages a loss occurs by dissipation of power into the air. This is 
accompanied by luminosity of the air surrounding the line 
conductor—the so-called corona. 

Loss begins at some critical voltage, which depends on the size 
and spacing of line conductors, etc., and increases very rapidly 
above this voltage. Fig. 1 shows a typical curve of corona loss. 

The extended investigation on an experimental transmission 
line shows that the corona loss in fair weather can be ex- 
pressed by the equation 


p=af (ee)? (1) 


where p=loss, in kilowatts per kilometer length of single line 
conductor, 
e=effective value of the voltage between the line con- 
ductors and neutral in kilovolts,* 
f=frequency, 
and a is given by the equation 


tee (2) 


where r=the radius of conductor in cm. 

s=the distance between conductor and return conductor 
in cm. 

6=the density of the air, referred to the density at 
25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometer as unity. 

k=a constant. 

éy=the effective disruptive critical yoltage to neutral, and 
is given by the equation © — 


€o= Mp £0 6 r loge = kv. to neutral (3) 


where go is the disruptive gradient of air in kilovolts per cm. at 
°25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometer, and is constant for all sizes 
of wires, frequencies, etc. If the effective value of go is taken, 
€o is given in effective kilovolts. 


*Hence, in aula, -phase circuits, e is one-half the voltage between con- 


yest Sey, 
ductors. In three-phase circuits e is ey times the voltage between 
3 ; 


conductors. 


 eN 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1891 


From our investigations it follows that 
go =29.8 kv. per cm. (maximum) 


go=21.1 kv. per cm. (effective) 


mo is a constant depending on the surface condition of the 
conductors, and 

my=1 for perfectly smooth polished wires. 

my=0.98 to 0.93 for roughened or weathered wires, and 
decreases to 


rE PE Ss 


LINE A CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
” OCT. 6, 1910 
% TEST NO. 36 lien 
6 TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 CM, 
SPACING 310 » 
& +#3/o-7 STRAND CABLE. DIAM. 1.18 9» 


1 
; 15 a 
28 eel — ee at qe 
‘ 13 -- 
d 12 } 
; = eat | L 

10 : ] 

| j 


» 
a 


2) 


iS 


wn 
wo 


a 
co 
KILOWATTS LOSS 


9 


8 


vane 


AMPERES AND POWER FACTOR 


KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 1.—Corona loss characteristic curves; 


m)=0.87 to 0.83 for 7-strand cables (where the radius is 
taken as the outer radius of the cable). 

2. Luminosity of the air surrounding the line conductors does 
not begin at the disruptive critical voltage ey, but at a higher 
voltage és, the visual critical voltage. 

The visual critical voltage eo is much higher for small wires 
than the disruptive critical voltage, eo; it is also higher for large 
wire, but to a lesser extent. 

While theoretically no loss of power should occur below the 


visual voltage, es, some loss does occur, due to irregularities of the 


1892 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


wire surface, dirt, etc. Thus, for the line voltage, e, near the 
critical voltage, ¢, the corona loss is greater than given” by 
equation (1) for large wires, and smaller for small wires, as 
shown by curves, Figs. 2 and 3. 

The curves as drawn are calculated from equation (1); the 
points shown by circles are the measured experimental values. 

‘At the low values of corona loss two effects occur, which 
cause this deviation of the loss from the quadratic law, equation 
(1), and which affect the loss in opposite directions: 


RRESSRSRSe 


LINE A-1-2-3-4_ TOTAL COND. LENGTH 109,500 
CURVE PLOTTED FROM EQUATION p=«f (e-e,)* 
© EXPERIMENTAL POINTS 
JEST_NO. 36 
0 -7-STRAND CABLE ‘Sia; eae 
310- CM. SPACING 


cc 


KILOWATTS LOSS 
e 
S 


L|VOLTAGE 


ee RE She), = oes WE 2) 


| 
| 
VISU4L|CRITICA 
+ 


_ 


110 130 150 170 190 210 230 
KILOVOLTS BET. LINES 
Fic. 2.—Corona loss characteristic curves 


a. The loss of power does not begin at the voltage e9, at which 
the disruptive gradient is reached at the conductor surface, 
but only after the disruptive strength of air has been exceeded 
over a finite and appreciable distance from the conductor, that 
is, at a higher voltage ev. As the convergency of the lines of 
dielectric force is great at the surface of small conductors, a 
considerable increase of the voltage is required to extend the 
disruptive gradient to some distance from the conductor, and 
év is considerably higher than é@. Therefore the decrease of loss 


ee PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1893 
below that given by equation (1) is appreciable with small 
conductors within the range between é and eé», as seen in Fig. 3. 
With large conductors, however, the lesser convergency of the 
lines of dielectric force at the conductor surface requires a lesser 
voltage increase beyond é, to extend the disruptive gradient for 
some distance from the conductor, and é) and é» are therefore 
closer together, and this decrease of the loss below the theoretical 
value given by equation (1) is not appreciable. 

b. As the conductor surface can never be perfect, some loss 


10 | T 
LINE B. COPPER WIRE .382 CM. DIAMETER-183 CM. SPACING ] 
9 CURVE PLOTTED FROM EQUATION P= af (€—@0)” 
5 © EXPERIMENTAL POINTS 
TEST NO. 135 TOTAL COND, LENGTH 29050 CM. 
¥ a 
i \ 
|| a 
7 1 + 4 
i] 
6 
on 
F Sins al 
kK 
<t 4 =: 
= d 
g of 
x 
4 is 
ic 4 
| y 
3 . 
——_— = 
4 
P + 
75 Yi 
+ As + at an Ay 
4 
i (er 1 
: I a 
oe i 
to es 
x ol 


50 70 90 110 130 150 170 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 3.—Corona loss 


of power occurs at and below the disruptive critical voltage at 
isolated points of the conductor, where irregularities of the 
surface, scratches, spots of mud or dirt, etc., give a higher po- 
tential gradient than that corresponding to the curvature of the 
conductor surface. With small conductors, this loss is rarely 
appreciable, since the curvature of the conductor surface is of 
the same magnitude as that of its irregularities. It becomes 


appreciable however for larger conductors, as seen in Fig. 2. 


This excess of the loss beyond that given by the quadratic law, 


1894 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


equation (1), essentially depends on the conductor surface, and 
is larger, the rougher or dirtier the surface is. It is a maximum 
at the disruptive critical voltage e), and decreases above and 
below e. It is with fair accuracy represented by the probability 
curve: 


pi=q e—t (¢o—e)? (4) 


where g is a coefficient depending on the number of spots, and 
h is a coefficient depending on the size of spots. 

Snow, sleet and rain losses seem to be of the same nature, but 
frequently of far greater magnitude. 

The visual critical voltage, ev, is derived from the disruptive 
gradient, go, by the equation 


€v=Myr 204 (1 4°) loge = + ky. to neutral (5)* 


where mv=my)=1 to 0.93 for wires. 


A a ie local corona all along conductor;/ for seven- 
0.82 decided corona all along conductor, } strand cables 


If go (maximum) is used, ev is obtained in maximum kilovolts. 

From (1), (2) and (3) then follows the complete expression 
of the corona loss in fair weather, at voltages ess the visual 
critical voltage, ex, 


Y 2 
=F f Va Je~g mor 6 loge zs 10° kw. per km. of (6) 
. j single conductor 


where e=effective kilovolts to neutral. 


k=344, 
go=21.1 kv. per cm. (effective). 
: . 3.92 b 
6=air density factor = 273-41 


d6=1 at 25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometric pressure. 
b=barometric pressure, cm. 

t=temperature, deg. cent. 

r=radius of conductor, cm. 

s=distance between centers of conductors, cm. 
f=frequency, cycles per second. 


*NotE:—The visual critical point for wires is very sharp and definite, 
while for cables it is not so well defined. 


Se eniees nh Se te Sa aint melas bel erie iil 
oN AR 


LO 1 PEEK: LAW.OF CORONA 1895 


my=irregularity factor. 

my=1 for polished wires. 
= 0.98 —0.93 for roughened or weathered wires. 
= 0.87 —0.83 for seven-strand cable. 


The corona loss is 

a. Proportional to the frequency f.* 

b. Proportional to the square of the excess voltage above the 
disruptive critical voltage, éo. 

c. Proportional to the square root of the conductor radius r, 
and inversely proportional to the square root of the conductor 
distance. 

The disruptive critical voltage, eo, is that-voltage at which 
the disruptive voltage gradient of the air is reached at the 
conductor surface. Hence, it is: 


a. Proportional to the conductor radius, r, and the loge = 


b. Proportional to the air density. 

c. Depending somewhat on the condition of the conductor 
surface as represented by m. 

3. The effects of various atmospheric conditions and storms 
on the critical voltage and loss are as follows: 

Humidity or ‘‘ vapor products” have no effect on either the 
critical voltage or the loss. 

Smoke lowers the critical voltage and increases the loss. 

Heavy wind has no effect on the loss or critical voltage at 
ordinary commercial frequencies. : 

The weather conditions that really count practically and 
which must be seriously considered in the design of transmission 
lines are as follows: 

Fog lowers the critical voltage and increases the loss. 

Sleet on the wires, or falling sleet, lowers the critical voltage 
and increases the loss. High voltages do not entirely eliminate 
sleet formation. 

Rain storms lower the critical voltage and increase the loss. 

Snow storms lower the critical voltage and increase the loss. 
The effect of snow is greater than that of any other weather 
condition. 

Fig. 4 shows the loss during fair weather, and a corresponding 
loss during a snow storm. 


“*It is probable that at extremely low frequencies the loss decreases less 


~ than proportionally to the frequency, and approaches a small finite limiting 


value at continuous impressed voltage. 


1896 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


The excess loss during sleet, rain or snow storms, over the 
fair weather loss, seems with increasing voltage to approach a 
maximum and then to decrease again (the latter at values very 
far above the disruptive critical voltage), and the curves of 
excess loss seem to have the general shape of probability curves, 
as is to be expected theoretically. 

4. The following problem is given in order to show the method 
of applying the results to an actual transmission line. 


CORONA LOSS 
» DURING SNOW STORM 
LINE A- gonnucrons 172-3-4 


KILOWATTS LOSS 


90 no = 130 150-170 190 =. 210 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic, 4 
EXAMPLE 

Given a line—three-phase—60 cycles. 

Length =100 miles. 

Spacing = 10 feet. 

Conductor =No. 0 cable, diameter = 0.375 

in. 

Maximum temperature =100 deg. fahr. 

Elevation =1,000 ft. 
Required 


(a) Disruptive critical voltage. 

(b) Visual critical voltage. 

(c) Loss (fair weather). . 

(d) Loss (during snow storm) assuming ¢) =80 per cent 
of fair weather eo. 


a 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 2s 1897 


Solution 
Reducing to metric units 
Length = 161.km. 
Spacing =305 cm. 
Conductor radius =0.478 cm. 


Maximum temperature =38 deg. cent. 
Elevation being 317 m. 
Barometer corresponding = 73.4 cm. 

(a) Disruptive critical voltage. 

From formula (38) 


s 
Cp = Mp 200 r loge a 


my =0.87 value for seven-strand cables 


go=21.1 kilovolts per cm. (effective). 


3.9256 3.92X73.4 


°= 97341 273438 moe 
r=0.478 cm. 
S 
loge — =6 46 


Evaluating 


@9=52.7 kilovolts to neutral 


Therefore the disruptive critical voltage between conduc- 
tors =52.7X Vv 3=91.3. 
(b) Visual critical voltage. 
From formula (5) 
0.301 


ev = My Zo br (1+ =) loge = 


Evaluating 
ev=71.1 kv. for decided corona. 
ev=62.5 kv. for local corona. 
Therefore, visual critical voltage between wires 
=eyX v 3. 
= 125 ky. for decided corona. 
108 kv. for local corona. 
(c) Power loss (fair weather). 


1898 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


From formula (6). 


er Vt e— 20 Morb loge aa {10-8 kw. per km. of single 
y Sie t conductor. 


e=effective kilovolts to neutral. 


k=344. 
5 = 0.929. 
f=60. 
/ "0.0396. 
A 
%=21.1 
loge -=6.46. 


Evaluating and multiplying by three, since we have three 
conductors, we obtain 


p =2.64 (e—52.7)? 10-? kw. per km. 


Substituting values for line volts 


Fair weather Storm 

e between e to Ptotal | Ptotal 
line neutral p =p X161 p =p X161 

90 51.9 —- — 2.48 400 

100 57.7 0.66 106 6.33 1020 

110 63.4 3.02 485 11.90 1920 

120 69.2 7.2 1160 19.20 3090 

130 75.1 13.3 2140 28.70 4610 

140 80.9 21.0 3380 .- 39.50 6360 

150 86.6 30.4 4890 | 52.10 8390 


(d) For approximate loss during storm consider ep = 80 per cent 
of its value in fair weather. 


éo=0.8 X52.7 = 42.2 kv. 
Therefore: 
pb = 2.64 (e —42.2)? 10-2 kw. per km. 


See curves, Fig. 5 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1899 


: The formulas are given below in English units for the benefit 
of those who may desire them in this form. ‘ 
1. e@, the effective disruptive critical voltage to neutral is given 
by the equation: 


€9 = 2.302 mo gor 6 logio = (3a) 


2. er, the visual critical voltage in effective kv. to neutral is 
obtained from the equation: 


: ] 
pee INES s a de EAL st 2 
CORONA LOSS CURVES | 
40001 Line: ala ig ; 
3 PHASE —60 CYCLES 
3800] |LENGTH —100 MILES = ahha 
SPACING —10 F | 3 
3600} —\conDUCTOR -No, Yo CABLE aaa 
: 3400 MAX, TEMP .—100 DEG, FAHR, eal 29h z 
9 n ELEVATION — 1000 FEET | eee 
’ — 3200} al +}! 
| & 3000 bey aaa Yale 
5 = | tie 
a lee | pate 
Q, 2800 : 2 | 
< 2600 4 S}— gp = 
wy 2400 4 g = 
F = 200 2 S abe 
5 ela @ Py 
; Z 2000 }- =) e | 
S x = 
, H 1800 oH & 
3 ro) @ 
= —! 1600 if = 
: = 1400 t 
3 5 1200 +— - $4} 
. € al ee | 
A 1000 |- - - 
800} —+—— ft aS 
600; ——— 4 - —— 
400|— A t 
Z 200 tL ce 
i i | 
30° »4290~=«‘WSSsSiS:«‘iSCiCSSC‘iKSCCSO 
LINE KILOVOLTS 
2 Fie. 5. . 
E rae 
4 0.189 5 
5 ey =2.302 mv go OF (1+ ae logio ou (5) 
: iphies 
of 


3. p=the total power loss due to corona in fair weather, in 
kw. per mile of single conductor: 


, Hey 2 
INE | e=2.302 Zo mor 8 logs} 10° (6a) 


1900 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


In the above formulas: 
e=effective kilovolts to neutral. 


k’ =552. 

go=53.6 kv. per in. (effective). 
: : 17.91 b 

6=air density factor = 459-41 


6=1 at 77 deg. fahr. and 29.92 in. barometric pressure. 
b=barometric pressure in inches. 

t=temperature, deg. fahr. 

ry=radius of conductor, inches. 

s=distance between centers of conductors, inches. 
f=frequency, cycles per second. 


NORTH we. 
CONDUCTOR 


<9 
sere | ; 
GROUND WIRE 


DISC INSULATORS 


WEST 


SOUTH 


GROUND WIRE gee 
/ 
conpucTtorR / 
{ CONDUCTORS 


+465 DIAM. 7 STRAND 
+155 DIAM. H.D. CU. WIRE 


417/12 


ST Pat 


Fic. 6.—Corona loss—Original line arrangement used for preliminary 
tests. 


/mo=irregularity factor. 
mo=1 for polished wires. 
=0.98 to 0.93 for roughened or weathered wires. 
=0(0.87 to 0.83 for seven-strand cables. 
mv=my for wires. 
~ ee local corona all along cable; et seven-strand 
0.82 decided corona all along cable, cables. 
If go maximum is used, ev is obtained in maximum kilovolts. 


II. Lines, APPARATUS AND METHOD OF TEST 
The Lines. The conductors used. in the investigations were 
supported by metal towers arranged in two parallel lines of 


yey 


19tt| PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1901 


two spans each. The length of each span was approximately 
150 m. These tower lines will be designated by A and B 
respectively. The conductors were strung in a horizontal plane 
with seven disk suspension insulators at each point of support. 
For preliminary tests four No. 3/0 B. & S. (1.18 cm. diameter) 
seven-strand hard-drawn copper cables were put in place on 
each line. A seven-strand steel ground cable was also strung. 
(See Fig. 6). After a number of tests had been made the ground 
cables were removed from line A. The conductors on line A, 
however, were kept in place as a standard throughout all the 
investigations. The conductors and ground cables were re- 
moved from B, and the first span of this line was used to support 
various sizes of conductors at various spaces (see Fig. (ey 


NORTH 


VARIABLE 
CONDUCTOR 


t eT 
102 a 
| * 10'2” + 
| 03 ut cA 
r He 


LINE B 


WEST 


mL 


LINEA 


1s BO Oss 


DISC INSULATORS 
SOUTH 


LINE A STANDARD LINE 
v 

+465 DIAM. 7 STR.CABLE 

LINE B VARIABLE LINE 


43/0" 


Serra 1k eis 490/47 


Fic. 7.—Corona loss—Final line arrangement 


The lines were erected in a large field. The prevailing winds 
were from the west over open country, that is, free from smoke 
from the city and the factory on the east. Figs. 8 and 9 
show the towers, and Fig. 10 shows one link of the insulators 
used. 

Test Apparatus. A railroad track was run directly under the 
line, and the testing apparatus was housed in three box cars. 
This proved a very convenient arrangement, as the cars could be 
quickly run back to the factory when changes or repairs were 
necessary. * 

Power was received in substation car No. 1 at 550 volts, 40 
cycles, and changed to direct current by a converter. This in 


1902 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


turn was used to supply a direct-current motor, belted to a 
single-phase alternator. This last was an old Thomson- 
Houston machine with a smooth core pan-cake winding on the 
armature; it gave a very good wave, and was used in all tests. 
See oscillogram and analyzed wave, Fig. 11. It was rated at 
35 kw., but this rating was quite conservative. 

The high-voltage transformer and the testing apparatus were 
placed in car No. 2. The portion of the car roof over the trans- 


| > 


Pas ee SN ZN SN 
— 
ite 


YF PATRAS RR BSS OEE OP ~ 
et Pa ‘ 


‘oa 
oye | 
a 


if 
V 
BR 
va 
p 

4 
=H 
4 

; 

‘ 

N 

4 

4 

VY 

P 


Fic. 8.—Intermediate transmission towers 


former was made of heavy canvas. This could be rolled back, 
and the leads from the line dropped directly to the transformer 
terminals. By means of a framework and canvas cover the 
transformer could be protected from the weather, and investiga- 
tions carried on during rain and snow storms. The power supply, 
speed and voltage, were all controlled at the test table in car 
No. 2. In fact all of the adjustments could be made from this 
car (see Figs. 12 and 13). The transformer was rated at 100 kw., 
200,000 volts and 60 cycles. On the low side were four 500-volt 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1903 


coils. These coils could be connected in multiple or series for 
change of ratio. The high-tension winding was opened at the 
neutral and taps were brought out for the ammeter, and current 
coil of the wattmeter. Three taps were also brought out here 


Fic. 9.—Experimental transmission line, looking east 


from the main winding for voltage measurement. See Fig. 18. 
The following tap ratios were thus obtained—100/200,000; 
200/200,000 and 400/200,000. 

The transformer was specially designed for this work by Mr. 


Fic. 10.—25,000-volt link strain insulator 


A. B. Hendricks, Jr., from experience gained in previous tests.*: 

Car No. 3 served as a dark room for making photographs, 
and visual tests on short wires and cables. Fig. 13a shows the 
framework used for supporting conductors in the visual tests. 


—*See Transactions A. I. E. E., NO MlxkexXe Gon L ep ae LOT. 


1904 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA {June 29 

Methods of Test. Accurate power measurements of corona are 
very difficult to make, because of the nature of the load—low 
power factor and high voltage. It is not desirable to make the 
measurements on the low side because of the difficulty in separ- 
ating the transformer iron and load losses, and these may be 


ee 


- Fic. 11 (a).—Line A conductors 1, 2, 3, 4—191 kv. ; 


sometimes as large as the corona losses. In these tests the cur- 
rent coil of the wattmeter, and the ammeter, were put in the high 
tension winding of the transformer at the neutral point, and the 
neutral was grounded. See Fig. 13. The voltage coil of the 
wattmeter was connected to a few turns of the high tension 


R FOND Nats VOLTAGE WAVE 


NAL VOLTAGE WAVE 
1 ees SRS 


FUNDAMENTAL 


|ARMONIC 


Fic. 11 (b).—Corona loss wave form analysis oscillogram T 40 


winding at the neutral.* Voltage was also read in this manner. 
Another method of voltage measurement was also tried as a 
check, namely, by using the above turns as a separate winding. 
The results obtained by the two methods checked very well. 


*See paper by A. B. Hendricks. Jr., Transactions A. I. E. E., 1911. 
XXX, 1, palei 


pel Sek Seka Re 7” A” 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1905 


All the loss measurements were also duplicated on the low side 
as a check. Frequency was held at the test table by means of 
the motor field and a vibrating reed type of frequency meter. 

Voltage was controlled in two ways—by the potentiometer 
method and by rheostats in the alternator field. By the po- 


; Fic. 12.—Cars Nos. 1, 2 and 3 


tentiometer method is meant a series resistance on the low side 


of the transformer for voltage control and a multiple resistance 
across the transformer, taking about three to five times the exciting 
current, to prevent wave distortion. When the leading current 
was very high a reactance was arranged to shunt the generator 


Fic. 12 (a).—Interior of car No. 2 


and approximately unity power factor could be held. This 
prevented overloading the generator and reduced wave shape 
distortion. For a set of tests at a given frequency the ratio of 
the main transformer was kept the same. Where losses at 


-geveral frequencies were to be compared the main transformer 


ratio also was changed to keep the flux on the generator as nearly 


1906 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


constant as possible—for instance at 45 cycles a ratio of 
500/200,000 would be used, while at 90 cycles a ratio of 1,000 
to 200,000 would be used. Wattmeters with scales especially - 
adapted to the tests were constructed. These were of the 
dynamometer type; they were each provided with a 75-volt and 


Fic. 12 (b).—Transformer end of car No. 2 


150-volt tap. The voltmeter coil ratio on the transformer, and 
the wattmeter tap were always changed to give the best reading. 
Four wattmeters were used in these tests. The meters were all 
carefully calibrated in the laboratory at unity power factor and 
at 0.10 leading power factor; at’ both 25 and 60 cycles. See 
Fig. 14 for the meter scales. 


FREQUENCY M 


ROTARY 


: 
MAAN 


~<- ALT. FIELD 
| nee 


+MOTOR FIELD 


nnd 


CAR I CAR II 
| 


Fic. 13.—Arrangement and connections of apparatus used in corona tests 


Humidity, temperature, and barometric pressures, as well as 
general weather observations, were taken during each test. 


Ill. THE QuapRATIC LAw 
Table I is a typical data sheet for Line A. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA’ 1907 


| 
TREATED WOOD WHEELS 


\<—CONDU: 


TOP 


PLUGS FOR TIGHTENING 


O 


180 446 
10 WATT3 150 V. COIL. 5 WATTS 75 V. COIL ao 


194 962 
4B 30 WATTS 150 V. COIL. 15 WATTS 75 V. COIL 


% 217 558 * ,/ 
75 WATTS 150 V. PLUG. 37.5 WATTS 75 V. COIL 


40 


211 477 
3 WATTS 150 V, COIL. 1.5 WATTS 75 ¥. COIL 


Fic. 14.—Wattmeter scales 


1908 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE I 
EXPERIMENTAL LINE. 10-6-10 4 p.m. 
Line on 
Totsl setae oe pace alls | 
Volts Amperes Kilowatts Kilovolts Amperes Kilowatts . 
395 16.5 0.40 80.5 0.077 0.10 
435 17.9 0.60 90.5 0.087 0.13 
490 20.5 0.70 101.6 0.101 0.17 
535 22.6 0.86 111.1 0.112 0.22 
590 24.7 1.00 120.4 0.119 0.28 
635 27.1 1.10 130.2 0.135 0.35 
680 29.2 1.40 139.2 0.145 0.45 
| 735 31.6 1.80 150.0 0.158 0.68 
780 33.4 2.40 159.0 0.169 1.10 
| 812 35.3 3.30 165.8 0.178 1.80 
| 830 36.3 3.60 169.0 0.181 2.40 
862 37.5 5.12 176.6 0.190 3.60 
893 39.2 6.35 183.2 0.199 4.70 
914 40.5 7.50 187.0 0.207 6.00 
975 43.9 11.40 200.0 0.227 9.30 
1020 47.8 14.50 209.0 0.243 12.60 
1050 49.3 17.00 214.2 0.253 14.60 
1080 52.7 19.50 220.2 0.267 17.60 
1125 55.5 22.80 223.4 0.283 20.30 
| Line off 
| 400 1.14 0.40 80.0 0.005 0.055 
/ 500 sey 0.62 100.5 0.007 0.10 
600 1.63 0.82 121.5 0.008 0.15 
718 1.87 1.18 143.5 0.010 0.21 
| 812 2.05 1.45 161.0 0.011 0.28 
| 905 2.29 1.80 181.0 0.013 0.35 
1015 2.69 2.20 202.2 0.015 0.44 
1095 | 3.25 3.64 217.0 0.017 0.54 
Cloudy—rain in morning. Barometer A pb co Ma Ree Dy wet 10 deg. cent., dry 12 deg. 
orn Line and connections 
Total conductor longtbi ns at ear 109,500 cm. 
SPO@ch eee iio seine, 5 5c'o S's oe. cea alah cole eon chesene Ree La alee Rent ea tits on aac eoree ene 310 cm. 
Trtuslormes Tallon nan ee nee ates ce ieee eae 


Frequency 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF.CORONA 1909 


Fig. 1 shows the characteristic corona curves. The corrected 
values for Table I are recorded in Table II. 
TABLE II 


CORONA LOSS 
OBSERVED VALUES CORRECTED FROM TABLE 1 


Kilovolts Kilovolts 

between to Kilowatts 

lines Line neutral line loss Kilovolt- Power 
e amperes e 4 amperes factor 
80.5 0.072 40.2 —— .80 —— 
90.5 0.081 45.2 ss .33 —— 
101.6 0.094 50.8 == 9.55 o2 MSS 
ideal 0.104 55.5 ase 11.55 — | 

| 120.4 0.111 60.2 0.11 13.40 0.008 

130.2 0.126 65.1 0.15 16.40 0.009 
139.2 0.135 69.6 0.22 18.80 0.012 
150.0 0.147 75.0 0.40 22.10 Ono Sameer 
159.0 0.157 79.5 0.79 25.00 0.032 | 
165.8 0.166 82.9 1.42 27.60 0.051 | 
169.0 0.168 84.5 2.04 28.40 0.072 | 
176.6 0.177 88.3 Seon 31.20 On103 se) 
183.2 0.185 91.6 4.28 33.90 0.126 
187.0 0.193 93.5 5.55 36.10 0.154 
200.0 0.212 100.0 8.78 42.40 0.207 
209.0 0.227 104.5 12.02 47.50 0.253 

| 214.2 0.237 107.1 13.99 50.70 0.276 | 

[2220 = 2. 0.250 110.1 16.94 55.10 0.307 — | 


The shape of the curve between kilovolts and kilowatts sug- 
gests a parabola. After trial it was found that the losses above 
the knee of the curve follow a quadratic law. Below the knee 
it was found that the curve deviates from the quadratic law. 
This variation near the critical voltage is due to dirt spots, irregu- 
larities and other causes that will be discussed in section VII. 


‘We will confine ourselves in this section to the main part of 


the curve expressed by 
p=c (e—€0)? 
where 
p=the line loss. 
e=kilovolts to neutral. 
é is called the disruptive critical voltage, and is measured in 
kilovolts to neutral. 
The meaning of é) and will be considered later. 


1910 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA ; [June 29 


Let us now see the best mechanism of evaluation of constants 
for a given set of tests. We may write (1) 


Vp=c (e—ep) 


then, if the quadratic law holds, the curve between the square 
root of p, and e, will be a straight line. eo will be the point 
where the line cuts the e axis, and c will be the slope of the line 
(see Fig. 15). e9 and c might be evaluated graphically in this 


Th | eal 


me 
T LINE A CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
NO. 
4 ne TEST NO. 36 
L t 


l0.~—=«i19S«S 

° BETWEEN LINES 

+45 55 65 73. es 8a oO eos 
KIROVOLTS Fee 


Fic. 15.—Corona loss—method of reducing 


way, but it is difficult to know how to draw the line accurately 
and give each point the proper weight. To do this we will use 
the ZA method,* and proceed as follows: 

The values of e and the Vp for the set of readings to be in- 
vestigated are first tabulated and a curve plotted (Fig. 15). 
All points that differ greatly from the straight line are 
eliminated as probably in error or, as at the lower part of the 
curve, following a different law. Then taking the remaining 


*See ‘‘ Engineering Mathematics”, Steinmetz, page 232. 


1911} PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1911 


readings and forming two groups, each of an equal number of 
readings, we have: 


Group 1 Die. Bay p 


Group 2 Zee a 
Then is : aes 


A De=21e—e 7D Vp=2, Vp—Z2 Vp 


DLe=DietB,e DE VpP=TiVP+2.Vp 


Solas Cae ed 


LINE A CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 

#3/0-7 STRAND CABLE DIAM. 1.18 OM. 

TOTAL.CONDUCTOR LENGTH - 109 500 ‘+ 

SPACING 310 «6 

© EXPERIMENTAL POINTS 

— CURVE FROM EMPIRICAL EQUATION p=.0115 
(@-72.1)2 

€o = DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE 

@y = VISUAL CRITICAL VOLTAGE CORRECTED 

TO SAME TEMP. AND BAR. PRESSURE 

AS 20 

TEST NO. 36 


20 
19 


=p 
= 
w 


KILOWATTS 


110 130 150 170: 980 210 BETWEEN LINES 
55 65 15 85 95 105 TO NEUTRAL 


KILOVOLTS 
Fic. 16.—Corona loss 


wie LP 
ae Se 
DON b 
fh Seceyyec ales 2 
éo= _ 


where n is the number of points used. 
Thus eo and c are determined, 


1912 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE III 
CORONA LOSS 
METHOD OF REDUCING (10-6-10) 


Kilovolts between Kilovolts to Kilowatts loss Vz 
lines e’ neutral e p p 
120.4 60.2 0.11 0.332 
| 130.2 > 65.1 0.15 0.388 
139.2 69.6 0.22 0.470 
| 150.0 75.0 0.40 0.632 
159.0 79.5 0.79 0.889 
165.8 82.9 1.42 1.192 ¥ 
169.0 84.5 2.04 1.428 
176.6 88:3 3.21 1.792 
183.2 91.6 4.28 3.069 
| 187.0 93.5 5.55 2.356 
200.0 100.0 8.78 2.963 
209.0 104.5 12.02 3.467 
214.2 107.1 13.99 3.740 
220.2 110.1 16.94 4.116 
Total conductorslengtt.. wt cone Satan cabernet ais OE OE Pee a 109,500 cm. 
SPACIN WH. s.5 5's Reis a-acenaracna do. ucdhere Seabee ehe aanerel ote ra, Airveleltie ea olateonlal ee hcmiets eure ceateing 310 cm. 
No. 3/0) seven-strand. ‘cable diameter... ncaeduc ott so a cate ay Coico x-hite wiels 1.18 cm. 
| 7 ia 
(4 ood 
orig) eee Aze= 366 Az Vp= 3.935 
93.5 2.356 yz ¢ =606.8 =z Vp =18.711 
100.0 2.963 
Vz 
104.2 3.467 | em &% *? 9.107 
107.1 3.740 A ze 
110.1 4.116 
ce =0.0115 
Z2¢ =285.1 D2 Vp =7.388 
z= ze ae 
ce 
Q= 
n 


Y1e¢=321.7 s1 Vp =11.323 
€o =72.1 
eo’ =144.2 
Table III shows the method of reducing. The curve, Fig. 16, 
is drawn from the equation p=0.0115 (e—72.1)?.. The circles 


show the experimental values, and where the losses deviate from 
the quadratic law. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1913 


TABLE IV 
CALCULATED VALUES FOR FIG. 16 
p =c? (e- e)? 


p =0.0115 (e — 72.1)? 


Kilovolts between lines Kilovolts to neutral Kilowatts 
€ e pb =c (e — €)? 
‘ 144.2 71.2 0.0 
150.0 75.0 0.10 
: 159.0 79.5 0.63 
165.8 82.9 1.34 
169.0 84.5 LTS 
176.6 88.3 3.02 
183.2 91.6 4.17 
3 187.0 93.5 5.08 
i \ 200.0 100.0 9.03 
209.0 104.5 12.10 
214.2 107.1 14.10 
220.2 110.1 16.70 


ie Pare 
oe Pit 


LINE B- ONE SPAN 
5 el TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH — 29050 CM. 
SPACING 188 66 
| at 4.8 H.D. COPPER WIRE DIAM. 328 +6 | Nee 
@o = DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE 
4 | @€ v= VISUAL CRITICAL VOLTAGE CORRECTED 
TO SAME TEMP. AND BAR. PRESSURE 
sf AS €o if 
TEST NO. 135 
SU T 
I 


40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 BETWEEN LINES 
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 TO NEUTRAL 
KILOVOLTS . 


Fic: 17..-Corona loss—Method of reducing 


Table V gives a similar set of data for a small wire. The 


results are plotted in Figs. 17 and 18. 
All data taken under various conditions were first reduced in 


this way and tabulated as in Table VI (a), (0), (¢). 


1914 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


Kilovolts between lines Kilovolts to neutral | Kilowatt line loss Ve 
e e p Dd 
| ————- 
70.0 35.0 0.02 -0.14 
80.0 40.0 0.07 0.26 
91.2 45.6 0.26 0.51 
101.3 50.6 0.85 0.92 
110.0 55.0 1.42 1.19 
120.0 60.0 2.02 Lies 
130.0 65.0 2.71 1.65 
141.5 70.7 3.51 1.87 
70.0 35.0 0.06 0.24 
80.0 40.0 0.10 0.32 
90.5 45.2 O)S607 ut 0.51 
101.3 50.6 0.96 : 0.98 
109.9 54.9 1.43 1.20 
152.0 76.0 4.45 2.11 
160.4 80.2 5.17 2.27 
170.0 85.0 6.06 2.46 
180.6 90.3 7.04 2.65 
190.6 95.3 8.26 2.87 
200.0 100.0 9.52 3.08 
193.6 96.8 8.60 2.93 
176.0 88.0 6.65 2.58 
155.0 77.5 4.66 2.16 
136.0 68.0 3.01 1.73 
Total conductor len gtbiiecn tcmesin aie oe bes wtelerpAiprecals vcd R SUOels wieis,eteldhs Mieaeepre.s 29,050 cm. 
Rock Wt. He dopber ginpediineiee algae aie oa ete ee enema ae 
e vp e Vp BEe=841.1 
100.0 3.08 80.2 2.27 
96.8 2.93 77.5 2.15 ps Vp 324.15 
95.3 2.87 68.0 1.73 
90.3 2.65 60.0 1.42 
85.0 2.46 88.0 2.58 24.15 
ara | 8.90 _| 373.7 10.16 | (00406 
10 
A 2e=93.7 ae 
Az Vp= 3.80 
° 3.80 ef 
c= =0.0406  c?=0.00164 = =0,00164 (e — 24.6): 


TABLE V 


CORONA LOSS 
2 A METHOD OF REDUCING 


1911] 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


a 


LINE B ONE SPAN 
Q|-—— #8 COPPER WIRE H.D. DIAM. 392 CM. 
SPACING : 183 CM, 


TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 29 050 ‘*» 
© EXPERIMENTAL POINTS 

8|—— —CURVE FROM EMPIRICAL EQUATION 
p=.-00164 (e—24.6)? 
——} €9 = DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE 


@y= VISUAL ‘CRITICAL VOLTAGE CORRECTED 


7 TO SAME TEMP, AND BAR. PRESSURE 
AS €o 
TEST NO, 135 
eh 

26 
ll 
tL es 
ke 
ES 
= ae 
(e} 
a 4 
<4 Fic i tay 


ev 


|< om 


-— 


50 70 90 110 130 
25 35 45 55 65 


KILOVOLTS 


150 BETWEEN LINES 
75 TO NEUTRAL 


Fic. 18—Corona loss 


DATA 
LINE B 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 29 050 CM. 
SPACING 3.66 16 
5 PHOSPHOR BRONZE WIRE DIAM, .051 «« 
TEMPERATURE WET —6.5°C 
r DRY —6.5°C 
AROMETER 77.3. OM 


oo 


RIGHT SUN. NO WIND, 
© GOING UP 

X GOING DOWN 

€o =5.9 

C= .0262 

PAGE 92 D..B, II 3-7-11 
TEST NO. 130 


wes 


0 =20- 40 60 80100 120 140 169 180 200 220 BETWEEN LINES 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 TO NEUTRAL 


KILOVOLTS 


Fic. 19.—Corona loss 


1915 


1916 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


DATA 
LINE B 


TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 29050 CM, 
SPACING 
.066 GALV. STEEL WIRE,DIAM, .« 
TEMPERATURE WET 

DRY 


CAROMETER 

CLOUDY. NO WIND 

© GOING UP 

Co= 16.1 

C= .0232 

PAGE 178 D.B. 11723710 
TEST NO. 92 


120 140 160 180 200 220 BETWEEN LINES 
60 70 80 90 100 110 TO NEUTRAL 


KILOVOLTS 
Fic. 20.—Corona loss 


ss 


DATA 


LINE B 

TOTALCCNDUCTOR LENGTH 29050 CM. 

SPACING 244» 

#8 COPPER WIFE.DIAM. 328 

TEMFCRATURE WET —1.5°C 
” CRY KENT COT ape ls 

DAROMETER 76.6 CM, 

BRIGHT SUN. SLIGHT BREEZE [+—}—— 

© GOING UP 

X CCING DOWN 

Co= 27.5 

C = .0386 

FAGE 106 0,.8.J]1 3-8-11 

TEST NO. 136 


CETWEEN LINES 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 1407160 180 200 220 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 

KILOVOLTS TO NEUTRAL 


Fic. 21.—Corona loss 


a 8 
: DATA 
LINE A 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 CM. 
SPACING 310 
£] 4#9/0-7 STRAND CABLE.DIAM, 1,18 
TEMPERATURE WET 16°C 
” DRY 18.5 °C 
BAROMETER 75,3 CMs 
3] BRIGHT SUN. HIGH WIND 
Ss © GOING UP 


PAGE 38 D.B, 
TEST NO. 18 


9-21-10 


100 140 
60 60 70 


160 180 220 


80 90 . 100 = 110 
KILOVOLTS “TO NEUTRAL 
Fic, 22.—Corona loss 


[June 29 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1917 


3 DATA 
LINE A ! 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 CM. | —~ 
SPACING 310 

4] 4£3/0-7 STRAND CABLE.DIAM. ‘1.18 7 
TEMPERATURE WET 10°C 

” DRY 132¢ +—+— — 
BAROMETER 75.7 CM. 
g| BRIGHT SUN. HEAVY WIND 
@, | © G0ING uP 
LS | x coine pown 
Co= 70.5 
C= .102 


TEST NO. 37 


Cy 
PAGE 82 D.B. 1010710 [| 
Vv 


100 120 140 160 180 200 220 BETWEEN LINES 
50 60 10 80 90 100 110 TO NEUTRAL 
KILOVOLTS 


Fic. 23.—Corona loss 


e DATA 7 
LINE A 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 CM, 
SPACING 310 

4 | =43/)-7 STRAND CABLE.DIAM. ‘1.18 i 
TEMPERATURE WET 13°C 

” DRY. 13°C 

BAROMETER 76 CM. 

3] BRIGHT SUN. NO WIND 
© GOING UP 

iS €o= 80.5 + 

C= .0988 

g| PAGE 6 0.8. II 12 10-10 
TEST NO. 105 ev 

tL 


100° 120 140 160 180 200 


220 240 BETWEEN LINES 
50 60. 10 80 90 100 110 120 TO NEUTRAL 
KILOVOLTS 


Fic. 24.—Corona loss 


e DATA [ y ] 
LINE B de 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 29050 CM. 

SPACING 27599 le 
4] 3400 NEW S.D. COPPER WIRE, DIAM. . 926 »» ff 
TEMPERATURE WET =1.0°° 
” DRY -.5°C ice] ee Sa 
BAROMETER 75.4 CM. 
3] CLOUDY 4 
a, | © soine uP 
S X GOING DOWN Se 


Co= 72.0 
C= .0568 
PAGE 80 D.B. II 3-3-11 | 
TEST NO. 124 e, 


120 140 160, 180 200 220 240 DETWEEN LINES 
60 0 80 90 100 10 120 TO NEUTRAL 
KILOVOLTS 


Fic. 25.—Corona loss 


[June 29 


LAW OF CORONA 


rc 


PEEK 


1918 


—_— = —_ . ye - ’ a a es 


“Apnoy) 


*puim AAvey—uns 73g) 


“Apnoyg 


*yuetima Aq pelip 
soury ‘UMOp BUTOrL) 
“puim Aavayy ‘uns yysIgG 

“Soull 
uo 4soij—dn sutor) 
pura AAvey] “uns 4YsIg 

*punoi3 uo Moug 


pum 3ysyg ‘uns Azey 
*punoi3 uo Moug 
pula ON ‘uns 4ysIg 


TEST PISO GnS 

*purm AAvoyY—uNGg 
“Apno[g 

“APNOTD 

*purm Aavayy ‘uns yysIg 
“ApnolD 


*pulm—uns 4ysIg 


Jayzea 


4 OIG O8T EP 0°96 » 066 
9 166 O9T Ore 6° & » 916 
v £16 I8- 6ST 0° » ‘OFT 
F 9ST OFT | F' 16 g°96 or OLX 02'8T 
“WD CRC'D JoyeUTeIp 91qQ"d [9938 “ATVB ,0EZ'O 
OL |9° 202 O9T | F'16 696 » OP FE 
8 ats | TOL ba T6 g°Se or OT X So'8a 
“UID €CG'() JoJOWIeIp a] qvd Ja04s ‘A]eB ,C Ag" 0 
v ¥ SIG rf “PLT ore 6°96 » $9'ST 
8 9° LTS 1G" LAT Ole 8° FS 9 . ESE 
at FIG O9T ore’ 8°96 » I9°ST 
a FES I8T Ore 0°96 » STILT 
tI tater LLT ole L°SG » OOLT 
8 T&G PLT Ole 1°96 » €0°8T 
9 T1G OLT Ole G°9G » LTT 
F E16 99% ore 8°96 » €6°9T 
9T (ar POT ote ! €°SS » SF 9T 
9 OGG OST Ore 0°92 » O@°8T 
8 906 O9T OLE os ot-OLX OT'9T 
‘UID QI] JoqoureIp sjqeo seddoo pursjs-2 0/E “ON 
pesn is ¢ 0) 
squtod sqyuiry | Bur | zeq-uiogs]| Ieq ‘uo gy 

‘ON | roeds | 2 08% AP | *D 096 38 S/0?| 
; 14319 M 


| 


8°92 | VES Ty} » 998 09 |e SZ € if €8 
L’°SG | 9° 81/6 ° LE » 80°6 09 .|¢ SL € x OL 
8°SS } L 8I| ere » 80°81 09 |a°¢oL € T 0s 
L°86 | 9°06| L°¥E | or- OLX 96°9T 09 ee € T €LZ 
“uIo OGO'6Z 4IBUeT ogi ter ToL —d aury 
3°66 | ¥ 1d| 2°49 » OF'OE | O9 |¢'9L LS Leal eSee 
9°16 | Pag se or-OLX OF 9% 09 series T <4 Ee 00F 
i 0¢0‘6Z 4}Bus] JojoOnpuoo [eIo,—g surly 
£66 | GIZ| ESL | » 99°9T 09 |S 92 9 ——|'S50 OLE 
0°86 | €° 06) Tez » OOCT 09° 19°92 9 5. | Sioa ROPE 
8°16 | L0G) F FL » SPF FT 09 |6°é2 os) ES S160 
0°0€ | 4°16) 5°08 » SPL 09 16°92 Sit Pot S08 
| €°66 | 6 T@) S82 » €6FT 09:6 92 (9S. 6 |S 6 vO 
0°66 | O' TG) LLL » F691 O09, | SL SF 6 Fe SOE 
| 9°86 | 2°08/6'92 | » S88°ST 09 |L°hL Ear hocor 
8°46 | T°03\S° FL » O8SE 09 {a °SZ | £ T 8 
| €°96 | ¢0°6T)S° 02 n O8'ST 09: | 2792 Hie ene LE 
| 6°96 | S$ 6T'T SL » LG°L1 09. ./0°S2 a | OL 9€ 
r-98, | ane ororxoset } o9 jg-exigst | ‘or | st 
yyWuey [eIOL ‘VEG siojonpu0h-——y 2uvI—GuVaNvVLs 
*xeu | pA 0 “puoo sepoAo| ‘uto | AIq 7M | “ON 
og og Te30} jo ‘beig | seg 4saL 
"wo Jad f/72 ainjeledurs y 


SaTavo 


SLSG@L VNOUWOO dO NOILONGAA V< 


PIA ATAVL 


1919 


LAW OF CORONA 


PEEK 


1911] 


” ” 


-aza0Iq 43S Apnoyg 


” 


‘uns 1UsLIg 


Sa i} 


azveig yYBYIS 


” ” 


*puim ou—Apno[9 


¥yxyyy 
2y3e 


‘pulIm ou—uns 4yY3Ig 


134429 M 


8 Ce 161 | €8T ¥°0E a aR GalG | 
Or ee% |9°S8T | F'16 eSe orOTX $8'Ss | 
"Wd 0G0'6Z 43B8U2T 1OJONpuUOD [e4OT, 
8 eke OLT 16E Z'9G » F92 
Or 91% | 6ST CLE 0°92 » 2L9°6 
ral TES IST €8T ¢'9z ey OAKS 
oT €1z 8ZI |F 16 GaSe or OLX S86 
me £2) 0S0'6Z 438Ue] ojonpuos TeIOL 
OL |%°20% |¢*TsT SSF 6°SS » ¢0°9 
OT 98T FEL 998 LZ op Ae 
OT |8°€0% |S°OTT FES 0°62 7 Se One| 
OT 002 Oct €8T Cisne GPO 
oT 10 raat Gol 8°8z or OLX IT FI 
"UID YGO'6Z YISUST JOJONpUOD [eyjOT, 
9 GGG OZT-| ogg F'1E x OOS Pe) 
8 GZS Tel OTF T' 6% » 09°F 
9 GES SIT 62S 91g eS al 
8 81z TOT GST ete or-OTX L0°6 
"md 0GO'6S Y}8UeT IOJONpUOD [eo] 
9I O1Z ZOT 88F 8° 6% — 
cas 103 oot! 99¢ 8° 6% ae 
ST €0Z | 2° 60T FES 8° 6z —— 
rai €0Z | 0°16 e8T 8°62 — 
FL |8'EZT 19°06 ZT 8°66 — 
ee y4sues] Iojonpuos weil, 
pesn | | “mo 
sqzutod| SUT Bul teq ‘ula Og) teq ‘wo O/ 
‘ON | | ~oedg | “9 09338 | “OD 096 48 £/0? 
es *xeur 07 
131M | 


0°€s 
6 1€ 


PG 
L6G 
9° FG 
PVG 


1210 
oF 
9° 
1% 

9 FG 


| 
» O8'6T 09 1), %.S2 S70 G| ie 
ot-O1TX 08° ES 09 |}F SL pee sal Chore 
m9 9¢6 OJeIewWIRIq “dq ‘§ e11M Joddoo Q/Z ‘ON 
» 889 COS eA AaltS i  l 
» $898 OO NG GES Cie Gere 
2 0ev TE Re) ONAN Dee aap OSS 
or-OLX 88°21 OSU GNSL Sy Sale Boe 
“ud QTG'O JeyeuleIp "q “H etlm Joddoo F ‘ON 
» GOS 09%: 9°92) GaSe | ere 
» 6&9 09 1.9" 920k Whe Sia 
» 99°83 094/99 921 SK AaS ios 
| n_ 696 09 19°92 |¢°T + ae yet 
orOLX63°SE | 09 |9 92 )¢°1 +1 Bi 
M9 8Ze'0 JogowreIq “qd “H 211m Joddoo g ‘ON 
» S89P 09 |0°S$2 \0'€ OT 
» 83P 09 j|O0°SL |0'% pats) 
» 89 09 |O'S$2 |0@ Ge OFke 
or OLX FF'8 09 |O0 SZ |0@ cs0) 
“UID SOTO JoJoUIeIP—ellm [904s poztuvATes e090 0 
ot a O9) NS" 2 NG oe 
Saks 5 09) SiS 22 S59. aa 
Raacena 09 |e LL SoCal eae 
Se OOS 822 She eee 
cao 09 je 22 Sascolge tee 


Ba 
03 


& 99 
e sg 


0° 0F 
GLE 
© 9 
LE 


0°96 
¥ 9G 
G16 
9° FS 
GGG 


0°8T 
EO 
FOL 
GST 


ee 
3° 
c 
e 


1919.19.19. 


0a 


*puoo 
ye}O} jo 
‘wo Jed {/79 


. sopoAo 
"bel 


‘UID [CQ'O JoyoUIeIP—eorIM ozu0Iq 


“mo 


eq 


SGudIM J ANIT 


SLISGL VNOUOD dO NOILONGUA Vs 


IA ATAVL 


Able 2 uc0'0 


ainjzeiadula yy 


| 


Aig | ?M | “ON 


£61 


GEL 
O€T 
Tél 
Sel 
661 


4s2,L 


LAW OF CORONA 


PEEK 


1920 


” ” 


3 
s 
~ ot H O 


‘Apno[g pue dueq 


“Apnoyy) > 

5 a hae 

: eg OI 

a res 
“syeAtoqyut ye uns—Jle yf) 9 


11é 6L1 
lz O8T 
ele €8T 
GIG OLT 
L61 OLT 
881 SST 
O61 8ST 
006 €9T | 
0G | T9T 
c6r POT 


‘UID QT'T JeyeueIp 


J ——| | —_| —_— 
req "utd gy 


| pesn 
I9yyea M isyutod spuVy 
“ON 
T4310 M 


Ole 
ole 
Ole 
Ole 
Ole 


“Wd QI'[ JoyeweIp ajqeo Jaddoo 


ore 
Ore 
Ore 
ore 
Ole 


G°SG 
9°S6 
6° F% 
9° FG 
€°Se 


0°96 
8°96 
1°96 
6°93 


| L°S3 


» GOPFL 
» O8'FL 
» 89°FL 
» O8El 
or OLX 9ST 


puviys-ueres 0/¢ ‘ON 


» I68t 
» 9G LT 
» €8'8T 
» SLT 
or OLX 9S LT 


ajqeo 1addoo puvijs-) 0/€ “ON 


aioe) 
But 


-oeds | *D 0G 7” 


*xeur OF 


req “wo gf 
"2 083 3 £/0? 


6°92 | $°61/s'Sz | » ¥Iel OOT |2°¢2 ¢ € 99 
€°42 | 8°61) ec €2 » S88'éT 06 (|6°oL | ef € s9 
G’'9% | Z'61IG TL » SLI 08 levee i € (a) 
@'9% | 061/02 » GPT 09 |o°¢o2 | ¢ € 69 
6°92 | $°6T| GL or OLX OF TT Lb \S°SL ¢ | € | 89 
‘ULD OCL'FG YABusy 12307 E-Z SIOJONpuos p eULT 
| ¥'oS | FSI) 6°89 » I6LT 06 |e 92 GS 0G €€ 
| 6°¢% | EZ°81|¢°69 » OGLI 08 (2 ¢2 GG 0G 9T 
@°9% | 0° 61)S°0L » LL SI OL |2°SL GG 0G LT 
| 1°93 | 6° 81|0°0L » SPLIT 09 | SL (ag 0@ a 
| $°6% | L°81| €°69 | or OT X OG LT og |e SL (x4 02 =| FT 
“wo 08"601 y4Bue] [230] ee CRS ee ® | 
“xeul Ba 02 *puoo sapoAo | “Wo : Aiq eM ‘ON 
0g 03 ye307_ jo ‘beg | reg 4soL 
‘uo Jed f/;7 ainzeiedula 
| 


SLSAL VNOUOO ‘SHIONaNOAad LINaaaddIG—NOILOnaad Vs 


7IA ATAVL 


- 

a 
q 
a 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA ; 1921 


To further investigate the law it is now necessary to determine 
the various factors affecting e) and c?. These will be taken up 
under separate headings. The loss near the critical point will 
then be discussed.  _ 

In Fig. 19 the Vp and e are plotted. This is an especially 
interesting curve on account of its range. The measurements 
are taken up to approximately 20 times the disruptive critical 
voltage, and show how well the quadratic law holds. Figs. 20 to 
25 are plotted in the same way to illustrate the quadratic law. 


IV. FREQUENCY 
To determine the way that frequency enters into the power 
equation 
p=c (e—e6) 


a series of loss curves were taken at various frequencies between 
47 and 115 cycles. Points taken from the volt-watt curves are 
tabulated below in Table VII and VIII and plotted in Figs. 
26 and 27. 


TABLE VII 
LINE A. CONDUCTORS 2-3. TOTAL LENGTH 54,750 cm. 
210 200 : 190 180 kilovolts between lines 
Kilowatts |loss 
ewe 
47 4.9 3.2 2.0 1.30 
60 6.1 ach 2.6 1.6 
70 6.1 4.3 | 2.8 1.70 
80 6.9 5.0 3.4 1.9 
3.6 2.1 
90 7.5 5.6 3.8 2.6 
100 8.0 5.6 See 2.4 
115 9.3 he is 5LO 3.4 
| 
SS ae ee ee 
TABLE VIII 
LINE A. CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4. TOTAL LENGTH 109,500 cm. 
pee oe ia 
210 200 190 180 kilovolts between lines | 
Kilowatts |Loss | 

50 9.24 6.30 Chil = 2.20 
60 10.50 iea0ys 4.65 | 2.65 

70 12.1 8.60 5.50 |S-3..20 | 
80 14.0 10.20 6.80 | 3.95 


1922 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA {June 29 


For a given voltage the points lie on a straight line through 
the zero point. That is, the loss seems to vary directly with the 


| oy | 


LINE A- CONDUCTORS 2-3 if. 
10 |_| | PLOTTED FROM CURVES 


TAKEN NOV. 4,1910 


KILOWATTS LOSS 
o 


20 40 60 80 100 120 
FREQUENCY CYCLES 


Fic. 26.—Corona loss—Different frequencies 


KILOWATTS LOSS 


20 40 60 80 100 120 
FREQUENCY CYOLES 


Fic. 27.—Corona loss—Different frequencies 


frequency. The data are further investigated and reduced by the 


>A method. The results are tabulated below in Tables IX 
and X. : 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1923 


TABLE IX 
LINE. A. CONDUCTORS 2-3 


| bp €0 c2 pep 
| 

47 72 0.00292 6.00 X10-5 

60 70.2 | 0.00408 6.80 

80 71.5 0.00600 7.50 

90 73.2 0.00684 7.60 | 
| 100 72.2 0.0072 7.20 

Average, 7.10 


TOTAL LENGTH 54,750 cm. 


TABLE X 
LINE A. CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4. TOTAL LENGTH 109,500 cm. 


f €0 a ajfec 
50 | 69.3 0.0094 18.80 X10- | 
60 70.0 0.0115 19.10 
70 70.5 0.0140 20.60 | 
80 69.5 0.0151 18.80 . 
90 | 68.2. 0.0177 19.60 

| Average, 19.40 


Ce aE 


The values of c2/f should be constant if the loss varies directly 
as the frequency. The tables show c2/f constant within the 
limits of experimental error. 

Care was taken to keep the wave shape as nearly constant as 
possible in these tests. Variations in e9 and c? are accounted 
for by wave shape changes. For instance a slight progressive 
change in the wave shape would change the slope c of the line 
between Vp and e. This would cause a variation in both e 
and ¢. 

The reduced values of c are plotted with frequency in curves 
28 and 29. The points lie on a straight line passing through 
the zero point. The tabulated values show that é is independent 


of the frequency. The power equation may now be written: 


e 


p=af (e—éo)? 


that is, at a given sine wave voltage the loss per cycle is constant 
for a given conductor at a given spacing. 


1924 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


The fact that the curves pass through the zero point does not 
necessarily mean that there is no loss at zero frequency or con- 
tinuous impressed voltage. What takes place is probably this: 
when excessive continuous voltages are applied to a conduc- 


t LINE A- CONDUCTORS 2-3 
RELATION BETWEEN C2 AND FREQUENCY fe. 
008 7 7 
.007 Me ——— 
006 + + + — 
a +005 fea 7 —— 
3 [ 
004 | T 
003 5 aa | 
002 + bee 
001 Pat | 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
FREQUENCY 


Fic. 28.—Corona loss 


tor, the air is broken down and a transfer of energy which appears 
as corona takes place. Now if the conditions were constant, 
such as still air, constant temperature, and no electrostatic 
repulsion, there would be no further loss than the first energy 


x ite = cack Gaal 
_—_} 

| LINE A- CONDUCTORS {aad 

RELATION BETWEEN C2 AND FREQUENCY 


40 60 80 
FREQUENCY 


Fic. 29.—Corona loss 


rush. However, as this overstrained air is probably driven 
away and replaced by fresh air, which is in turn broken down, 
there is actually a power loss with continuous voltage. Hence 
the above frequency relations do not contradict the observed 
fact of corona loss with direct current. If observations could 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1925 


be made at very low frequencies, or continuous impressed voltage, 
the curve would probably be obtained as shown in Fig. 30. 


V. RELATION BETWEEN ¢?/f=a AND s/r 
The power equation may now be written: 


p=af (e—eo)? 


where a=c2/f is a factor that has not to this point been in- 
vestigated. 

In Table XI are values of c/f for various sizes of wire and 
cable and various spacings. Upon investigation it is found that 
a varies greatly with the radius of the conductor and the spacing. 
Plotting s/r and a a curve is obtained that suggests a hyperbola. 


slenlh 


RELATION BETWEEN C2 AND FREQUENCY 
SHOWING HOW CURVE WOULD 
PROBABLY TURN AT LOW FREQUENC 


FREQUENCY 


Fic. 30.—Corona loss 


Where y=the radius of the conductor in cm., s=distance be- 
tween conductor centers. The curve between loge a and loge s/r 
is a straight line. Therefore the following relation between @ 
and s/r is established: 


| a=c/f=k (s/r)4 


The constants k and d are calculated by the = A method in 
Table XII, and 


a=c2/f =3.70 (r/s) 53 X10 (2) 


These calculations are merely preliminary. 


1926 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


The fair weather value of a for standard line A 1-2-3-4 may 
now be examined in Table XIII. 

It is seen that these values are not exactly constant, but ap- 
parently vary with the temperature and barometric pressure. 
1/6 in Table XIII is explained in section XI. It is sufficient 
here to call it the air density correction factor; it is unity at 


TABLE XI 
(EXPERIMENTAL VALUES FROM TABLE VI) 


Relation between c?/f=a and s/r | 
| Tet a rs | id bal Style, of Material | 
| =a X10 
95 0.168 6550 4.68 | Wire | Gal. iron | 
92 0.168 4880 4.28 | | . 
86 0.168 3700 5.44 | “ | «“ | 
138 0.328 2980 5.52 = Copper 

rgd 0.168 2730 6.84 “ Gal. iron 
137 0.328 2230 6.52 ; Copper 
91 0.168 1820 8.44 “ Gal. iron | 
128 0.518 1530 6.87 : Copper 
136 0.328 1490 8.56 . “ 
82 0.585 1480 8.56 Cable Gal. iron 

Aes 0.328 1120 9.52 Wire Copper 

| 94a 0.168 | 1090 10.56 “ Gal. iron 
77 0.585 1060 9.08 Cable . 
79 0.585 770 9.52 “ « 
134 0.328 740 12.88 Wire Copper 

| 126 0.518 700 11.44 “ “ 

re 18 1.181 525 15.80 Cable « 
80 0.585 520 13.08 “ Gal. iron 
125 0.518 1 350 17.88 Wire Copper 
73 0.585 | 310 16.96 Cable Gal. iron 
100 | 0.953 | 193 26.40 : ‘ 


25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometer. a and 6 in curve Fig. 
31. suggest that a varies as 1/6. Multiplying by 1/6 then 
reduces a to the standard temperature of 25 deg. cent. and 
76 cm. barometric pressure. The constants for equation 
(2) were determined from values of a corresponding to various 
temperatures and barometric pressures. In order to properly 
evaluate the constants it-is now necessary to reduce all a values 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1927 


TABLE XII 


s 
RELATION OF —toa. 2 A REDUCTION 


ee | 
| (= x10 ) : 
Test | Diam. Bf per cm. iene tog,(— X 10” ) ene | 
No. cm. Yr =a x 1010 r f cond. | Material | 
[ 2A 
92 0.168 | 4880 4.28 8.492 1.454 | Wire Gal. iron 
86 0.168 | 3700 5.44 8.215 1.694 A e 
138 0.328 | 2980 5.52 8.000 1.708 - Copper 
| 137 0.328 | 2230 6.52 CatO9 1.875 £ s 
136 0.328 | 1490 8.56 7.306 2.147 Ms 4 
82 0.585 | 1480 8.56 7.299 2.147 Cable Gal. iron 
135 0.328 1120 9.52 7.020 2.253 Wire Copper 
94a | 0.168 1090 10.56 6.993 2.357 = Gal. iron 
| 134 0.328 740 12.88 6.607 2.556 e Copper 
126 0.518 700 11.44 6.551 2.437 g z 
18 | 1.181 525 15.80 6.263 2.760 Cable s 
80 0.585 520 13.08 6.254 2.575 g Gal. iron | 
125 | 0.518 350 17.88 5.858 2.884 Wire Copper 
73 | 0.585 310 16.96 5.736 2.831 Cable Gal. iron 
“Blog, —=54.04 Blog, ‘(2/f X10) =13.284 
r 
= log. = =44,26 z log, (c2/f X10") = 18.400 


s§ 
AZ log, —= 9.78 AZ log, (c2/f X10") =-5.116 
1 


S Vor —=98.30 Fz log, (c2/f X10!) =31.67 


r 


A 2 log, (c2/f X10%) 
d= 


=-0.523 


s 
A = log, — 
r 


s 
= 2 log- (c2/f X10) —d = = log. — 


c= 


35.91 
n i 


s 
i -0.523 loge — =log, (c2/f X10") — 5.91 
2 r 


r\ 0.523 
(c2/f) =3.70 (=) 10-8 
aw \ S 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


[June 29 


to a standard value of temperature and barometric pressure. 
In Table XIV all values of a are corrected to 25 deg. cent. and 
76 cm. barometer, and the constants recalculated by the = A 
method in Table XV. 


TABLE XIII 


1 
RELATION OF a TO — FOR MAIN EXPERIMENTAL LINES 
é 


Test 
No. 
| 18 
| 36 
| 37 
84 
101 
103 
| 104 
| 105 
| 109 
| 119 
Test | Diam. 
“No, cm s/r 
95 | 0.168] 6550 
92 | 0.168] 4880 
86 | 0.168} 3700 
138 | 0.328] 2980 
137 | 0.328| 2230 
77 | 0.585} 1060 
126 | 0.518] 700 
18 | 1.181] 525 
80 | 0.585! 520 
125 | 0.518| 350 
73.) 0.585] 310 
100 | 0.953] 193 


(STANDARD LINE A) 


Line A 1-2-3-4 


(c2/f) X10 
per cm. 
15.80 
17.56 
15.80 
15.80 
15.88 
16.24 
14.92 
14.84 
14.48 
16.56 
TABLE XIV 
a Ss 
—= and — 
) r 
c 
— x10 | 100 
ease | hrs reams 
4.68 5.00 | 0.936 
4.28 4.60 | 0.932 
5.44 5.80 | 0.930 
5.52 6.04 | 0.913 
6.52 7.16 | 0.913 
9.08 9.76 | 0.932 
11.44 12.72 | 0.898 
15.80 16.08 | 0.982 
13.08 14.00 | 0.932 
17.88 19.88 | 0.808 
16.96 18.20 | 0.932 
26.40 28.52 Fae 


| 


0.982 1.020 
0.966 1.037 
0.959 1.043 
0.933 1.074 
0.925 1.081 
0.901 1.112 
0.878 1.138 
0.866 1.158 
0.928 1.078 
0.888 1.127 
2 108 Bp bined 
loge =X log. —| _con- 
f f 1 r | ductor 
1.609 8.787| Wire 
1.526 8.492 . 
1.758 8.215 « 
1.798 8.000 i 
1.968 7.709 s 
2.278 6.966} Cable 
2.543 6.551] Wire 
2.777 6.263] Cable 
2.639 6.254 § 
2.989 5.858| Wire 
2.901 5.736] Cable 
3.341 5.263 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1929 


LINE A CONDUCTOR 1-2-3-4 
RELATION BETWEEN Cy ANDO 


Fy .80 90 1,00 
On) 


Fic. 31.—Corona loss 


TABLE XV 
>A REDUCTION OF RELATION OF c/f-TO — 
22/f CORRECTED TO 25 DEG. CENT. —76 CM. BAROMETRIC PRESSURE 


100 s 10% : 

| Test log, (ei x) log.— aes © | log, ( (c2/f) x) | log.— 

| No. 8 r 

aaa 1.609 8.787 | 126 | 2.543 "6.551. | 

| 92 1.526 8.492 18 2.777 6.263 | 

| 86 1.758 8.215 80 | 2.639 6.254 

| 138 1.798 8.000 125 2.989 5.858 

137 1.968 | 7.709 | 73 2.901 5.736 | 
77 2.278 6.966 | 100 3.341 5.263 

| 10.94. | 48.169 | 17.20 35.925 


100 x 
A = log, ( (c/f) X aa, =-6.260 


1900- 
Dz log, | (2/f) X =) =28.14 
: a 
s 
A 2 log, — =12.244 
r 


s 
= log, — =84.094 
? 


101 F 
log. (C2 x—— ) =-0.5 log,—- +e" 
3 r 
1010 s +4 
Si (= ) 
8 r 
r 
&/af=c"\/ —10 
s 
raat 
a=0/f.. =344 — x10-18 
s 


x 
1930 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA {June 29 
This gives: 


a=3uuV © x10-" per cm. of total cond. at 25 deg. cent., 


76 cm. barometer, 


and this is the final value of the constant. 


TABLE XVI 


r 


CALCULATION OF CURVE 32 FROM (c?/f) X10! =344 / = 
s 


Ss 7 | 2 
ag es) — 1010 
r s 
250 0.0633 21.84 
500 0.0447 15.44 
1000 0.0316 10.92 
1500 0.0258 8.92 
2000 0.0224 he 
3000 0.0183 6.32 
4000 0.0158 5.44 
6000 0.0128 4.44 
eel es ona 
i et as Ses TN 
28 r +— +. at 1 | 
| L ‘ 
4 | [RELATION BETWEEN x 1 ano 
24 7 r 
ss He 
oe 20 
i 
Slo 18 
all 
‘ajo '° 
a 14 
ol 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 = 


Fic. 32.—Corona loss 


Curve 32 is plotted from the points calculated in Table XVI 
. . ’ 
while the circles show the actual experimental points. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1931 


Curve 33 shows a straight line relation between loge s/r and 


log a. We may now write the equation for the power loss at 
‘25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometric pressure: 


p=344 iv ~(e—e)? 10- 


where p=the energy loss per centimeter of total conductor in 

kilowatts. 

e=kilovolts to neutral. 

e)=disruptive critical kilovolts to neutral at 25 deg. cent. 
and 76 cm. barometric pressure. 

f=the frequency in cycles per second. 

r=the radius of the conductor in cm. 

s=is the distance between conductor centers in cm. 


! iN 1 e210 1_ Tl “| 
RELATION BETWEEN log, (F*s Ano loge () 


ow 


love (r) 


Fic. 33.—Corona loss 


The value of e) varies with the radius of the conductor, 7, 
P and the spacing s, and will be discussed in section VI. 


VI. Tue Disruptive CRITICAL VOLTAGE 
The point of greatest stress for a cylindrical conductor is at 
its surface. Where s/r is large the gradient at the surface of 
the conductor may be expressed: 
ee Dade a 
or dx 


r loge = 


a 

j 

z 
om 

3 

a 


where e=the voltage to neutral. 


1932 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


s=distance between conductor centers. 

r=the radius. 
Where r and s are in cm. and e is in kilovolts, g is expressed in. 
kilovolts per cm. » Now if eo the disruptive critical voltage is 
taken for e we have: 


€0 
Ais > 
r loge — 
BE 7 
TABLE XVII 


DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE GRADIENT FOR WIRES. VALUES 
CORRECTED TO 76 CM. BAROMETER AND 25 DEG. CENT. 


} 
Test Spacing Diam. g. Kv/cm. hee Berton 
No. cm. cm. max. from mean max, to min. 
a tae 
129 122 0.051 29.8 | 
133 183 29.8 | 
131 244 29.8 
130 366 29.8 . 
132 488 29.8 | 
Avg =29.8 arte a 
91 | 152 0.168 Bao | 
94 229 31.6 | 
92 410 29.1 | 
+| 95 550 36.5 . 
Avg =30.9 5.8 7.9 
134 122 0.328 28.8 
135 183 27.1 
136 244 29.0 
137 366 25.7 
| 138 488 25.3 
Avg =27.2 7.0 1 
125 91.4 0.518 28.7 
126 183 26.5 
| 127 275 26.0 
| 128 397 26.2 
Avg =26.9 6.7 9.4 
122 |- 91.4 0.927 OLA 
123 183 30.4 
120 | 214 ; 30.5 | 
124 275 31.0 | 
Avg =30.1 4.8 7.6 | 


Total Avg.29.0 


ye 


¢ 


pert) PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1933 


TABLE XVIII 


DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE GRADIENT FOR CABLES. VALUES 
CORRECTED TO 76 CM. BAR. AND 25 DEG. CENT. 


j | | 
| fe peacine eee g. seg jvatiation Saristior | 
5 : rom mean max. to min. 
| i ae 
| 73 91.4 0.585 26.5 
80 152 24.0 
79 244 23.9 | 
77 310 i 23.9 | 
$2 432 25.0 
Avg =24 
100 91.4 0.953 z ae ies a 
115 91.4 26.2 
baie. |. 183 26.0 
bai87 275 26.4 
18 366 28.1 
Ave=26:4 6.4 9.3 | 
Line A -1-2-3-4 
| 18 310 1.181 B55 
| 36 « 26.0 
37 a 25.3 
84 Z 25.8 
| 1017 2 26.5 
| 103 ‘ 26.1 
| 104 “ 25.7 
| 105 « 26 .0 
109 4 25.8 | 
119 2 25.1 | 
119 “ 26.0 | 
Avg =25.8 Bp eo, 5.3 | 
| Total Avg. 25.7 5.5 8.1 | 


go then is the stress at the conductor surface corresponding to 
éy, and will be called the disruptive gradient, to distinguish it from 


the visual gradient g,. Values of go for wires and cables taken 


under a great variety of conditions are given in Tables XVII 
and XVIII. These values are corrected to standard tempera- 
ture and pressure as explained in section XI. 

If we examine the values of ¢é for standard line A (1.8 cm. 
7-strand cable) we find that the average value of go is 25.8 kv. 
per cm. maximum. For cables between 0.583 cm. and 1.18 cm. 


1934 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


in diameter and various spacings, the average value of go is 
25.6 kv. per cm. maximum, or, in other words, go is constant 
for all sizes of cables, at all spacings, and 1s 25.6 kv. per cm. maxi- 
mum. In determining the value go for seven-strand cables r 
was taken for convenience as the outside radius. Hence the 
above go is not the actual go as obtained for wires, but is an 
apparent go. The actual go would be obtained by taking some 
mean radius r, between the outside radius r, and the radius to the 
point of contact of the outside strands r;. 7, approaches r in 
value as the number of strands are increased. 

The values of go for wires varying in diameter from 0.0508 cm. 
to 0.928 cm., and for spacings from 90 to 600 cm. are constant 
within the limits of experimental error. The mean value is: 


go = 29 kv. per cm. at 25 deg. cent and76 cm. barometric pressure 


EMO as Shia eS 


=“ 
DISRUPTIVE GRADIENTS i 
FOR WIRES AND CABLES 
X— WIRES 
© = CABLES 


GRADIENT MAX. KILOVOLTS PER CM. 
Bs 


Pe eC Ma Te ee ee a mes OCI De Oy OTe PE 
DIAMETER IN CM. 


Fic. 34 


Considerable variation should be expected in gp values due to: 

1. Necessarily imperfect conductors, kinks, etc., in an out- 
door line of this length. 

2. Progressive change in the value of successive points on a 
given curve due to slight changes of wave shape, etc., as the 
voltage is increased, and the apparent shift of eo. 

The close agreement of go for wires is for the above reasons 
remarkable. 

Discrepancies due to progressive change were not to be expected 
for standard line 4 to any great extent as the conductor spacing 
was always the same, and test conditions were kept as nearly 
constant as possible. 


From the above, then, go 7s constant for all diameters of con- 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1935 


ductors and all spacings. This immediately suggests that go 
is the actual rupturing gradient of air. More will be said of 
this in Section IX. Also 


go cables 


; = Mo 
Zo Wires 
where mp is a fraction which approaches unity as the irregularity 
of the surface is reduced, or number of strands increased. This 
factor is further discussed in Section X. 

Then 


€o9=6 Mo Zor loge = (5) 


(See curve Fig. 34). 
The loss equation may now be written 


2 


mai | e-8mgyrloge +} (6) 


where p expresses the loss above the visual critical voltage 
e,. The loss at the lower part of the curve will now be consid- 
ered. 


VII. Losses NEAR THE DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE — éo 


If the conductors could be made perfect no loss would occur 
below the visual critical voltage. However, at low values of 
corona, two effects occur, which cause a deviation of the loss 
from the quadratic law, equation (1), and which affect the loss in 
opposite directions: 

a. The loss of power does not begin at the voltage éo, at which 
the disruptive gradient is reached at the conductor surface, but 
only after the disruptive strength of air has been exceeded over a 
finite and appreciable distance X from the conductor, that is, 
at a higher voltage ¢,, as fully explained in Section VIII. See 
Fig. 39. Since the convergency of the lines of dielectric force 
is great at the surface of small conductors, with such conductors 


a considerable increase of the voltage is required to extend the 


disruptive gradient to some distance from the conductor, and 
e, is considerably higher than eo, and thereby the decrease of 
loss below that given by equation (1) is appreciable with small 


“conductors within the range between é and @,, as seen in Fig. 37. 


1936 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


With large conductors, however, the lesser convergency of the 
lines of dielectric force at the conductor surface requires a lesser 
voltage increase beyond é to extend the disruptive gradient to 
some distance from the conductor; ¢) and e, are therefore closer 
together, and this decrease of the loss below the theoretical value 
given by equation (1) is not appreciable. 

b. As the conductor surface can never be perfect, some loss 
of power occurs at and below the disruptive critical voltage at 
isolated points of the conductor, where irregularities of the 
surface, scratches, spots of mud or dirt, etc., give a higher po- 
tential gradient than that corresponding to the curvature of the 
conductor surface. With small conductors, this loss is rarely 
appreciable, since the curvature of the conductor surface is of the 


LINE A- 1-2-3-4 


18 PLOTTED TO LARGE SCALE TEST NO. 36 
7 TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 CM. 
SPACING 310 


i Yo7 STRAND CABLE. DIAM. 1.18 99 
1 


KILOWATTS =P 


100 120 140 160 180 200 BETWEEN LINES 
50 60 70 80 90 100 TO NEUTRAL 
KILOVOLTS 


Fic. 35.—Corona loss near critical point 


same magnitude as that of its irregularities. It becomes ap- 
preciable, however, for larger conductors, as seen in Fig. 35. This 
excess of the loss beyond that given by the quadratic law equation 
(1) essentially depends on the conductor surface, and is the larger, 
the rougher or dirtier the surface is. It is a maximum at the 
disruptive critical voltage e 9, and decreases above and below 
€o, and is with fair accuracy represented by the probability curve, 


p=q Eh (eo-e)? (4) 


where q is a coefficient depending on the number of spots, and 
h is a coefficient depending upon the size of spots. 

Snow, sleet and rain losses seem to be of the same nature, but 
frequently of far greater magnitude. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1937 


Equation (4) is probably of no practical importance, as the 
loss is small, and g and h naturally cover a wide range of values 
depending upon the condition of the conductor surface. Ex- 
perimental values near é) are taken from Table I and tabulated 
in Table XIX, together with values calculated by the quadratic 


TABLE XIX 
LINE A 1-2-3-4. FROM TABLE I. TEST 36. c=0.0115, e=72.1 
Kilovolts 
between Kw. Kw. Excess 
conductors exp. p= loss 
e po 0.0115 (e— eo)? pi=(po- >) | log, (p1 X10?) (eo — e)? 
120.4 0.11 — One 2.40 141.6 
130.2 0.15 — 0.15 2.71 49.0 
139.2 0.22 — 0.22 3.09 6.2 
150 0.40 0.10 0.30 3.40 8.5 
159 0.79 0.63 0.16 Ql 54.7 
165.8 1.42 1.34 0.08 2.10 117.0 


law. Corresponding experimental and calculated values are 
subtracted and also tabulated. 

Fig. 35 is plotted to a large scale to show the excess loss near 
é). This is for large conductors, éo and e, are near together, and 


Zl | [Pee | 


| : | | LINE A-1-2-3 4 TEST NO, 36 
a 7 | ——}—| TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109500 0M.|~ |_| 
SPACING B10. «6 |e 


43/0 -7 STRAND CABLE DIAM. 1.18 «6 


oll 


Loae(p x 107) 


0 20 40 60 50 100 120 140 


(éy—e)* 


160 
Fic. 36.—Corona loss. Method of reducing loss near critical point 


the effect of (b) predominates. In order to see if equation (4) 
holds, write 
loge Pi=loge g—h (e0—e)” 


Then the curve between loge p: and (eo—e)® should be a straight 
line, This is shown in Fig. 36, 


1938 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


Values of g and h are of the following order for line A: 


Test No. qg per cm. total conductor h 

30 3.19X10-° — 0.0220 
105 7 Ae 3 lhe: —0.0208 
103 214 ~ — 0.0304 


Fig. 37 is plotted from values for a small smooth conductor. 
Here e and e, are far apart, and as the curvature of the con- 
ductor surface is of the same magnitude as its irregularities they 
do not greatly influence the loss. The (a) effect here pre- 
dominates—that is, the loss near éo is lower than that shown by 
the quadratic law. 


~ (LINE B TEST NO.134 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR 
LENGTH 29050 CM, 
SPACING 122 CM, 
8 HARD CRAWN COPPER 
WIRE DIAM, .328 CM. 


100 120 
BETWEEN LINES 


50-60 
KILOVOLTS T° NEUTRAL 


Fic. 37.—Corona loss near critical point 


A phenomenon of the same nature as the above seems to occur 
in the striking distance between needle points. ‘‘ Theoretically 
the relation between volts and striking distance should be a 
straight line. This is practically so at high voltages, while at 
low voltages the curve deviates from the straight line. The 
voltage for small striking distances is higher than “ theory ”’ 
would warrant. This seems to be because a certain finite amount 
of energy must be stored in the dielectric about the point of dis- 
charge or, in other words, the voltage must be raised sufficiently 
above the ‘‘ theoretical ’’ voltage in order to extend the rupturing 
gradient over a finite distance. This is further discussed for 
visual corona on wires in Section VIII. 


” 


ae 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1939 


VIII. Visuat TEsts 


Visual tests were made on two parallel conductors, supported 
indoors on a frame of treated wood. Wooden pins were used 
throughout the construction of this frame. The end supports 
were wooden wheels. This circular curvature prevented a flux 
concentration at the ends of the conductors.- Two separate 
frames were used. One gave an active length per conductor of 
308 cm., the other an active length of 610 cm. The distance 
above the floor was 150 cm. The maximum spacing between 
conductors was 107 cm. 

The visual critical point, or point where visual corona starts, 
is very definite for polished conductors, and can be repeatedly 
checked within a small per cent. The tests were made in a dark 
room and the method of procedure was as follows: Conductors 
of a given size were placed on the framework. Critical points 
were then taken at various spacings up to 107 cm. 

The maximum intensity at the surface of one of two parallel 
conductors may be written 


de Cy 


S 
r loge 


where e, =the (maximum) voltage to neutral. 
r=the radius of the conductor in centimeters. 
s=the distance between the centers of conductors in 
centimeters. 


This holds where s/r is large, or when the flux is uniformly dis- 
tributed at the surface of the conductors. 
When s/r is small, that is, when the conductors are large and 


the spacing small, the flux is not uniform and g, may be more 


closely approximated thus: 


The following Table XX shows a typical set of readings. 
Note that g, is constant for all spacings, for a given size conductor. 


1940 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE XX 
VISUAL CRITICAL VOLTAGES 
(gv WITH VARYING SPACING AND CONSTANT DIAMETER) 
POLISHED COPPER CONDUCTOR, DIAMETER 0.0343 cm. 


ev’ kilovolts ev’ kilovolts | gu 

Ss between conductors between conductors ko/cm 
cm. (effective) (maximum) (maximum) 
eg oi eo) | ee SS ee eee ot 

| 2.54 12.1 17 99.5 

| 2.93 12.4 17.4 99 
3.18 12.5 5 er 98.5 

3.81 13.0 18.4 99 
4.45 13.5 19.0 99.5 

5.08 13.8 19.4 100 

5.73 14.0 19.8 99 

| 7.62 14.5 20.5 } 99 
| 15.2 16.0 22.6 97.2 
30.5 URL 25 97.2 
45.6 18.7 26.3 96.1 

| 61.0 19.4 27.4 98 
106.8 20.6 29 97.2 
Average 99 


Sets of readings similar to the above were taken on wires 
varying in diameter from 0.02 to 0.93 cm. The average values 
are tabulated in Table XXI. 

Note that these values are taken for a number of different 
metals. The points all fall on the curve plotted between g» 
and diameter. That is, the critical gradient is independent 
of the conductor material. 

Now it seems reasonable to assume that air under constant 
conditions should break down at a constant potential gradient 
g. An examination of Table XXI shows that g» increases 
as the diameter of the conductor decreases. This is also shown 
on the curve Fig. 38. The apparent increase in the dielectric 
strength of air surrounding small conductors was explained by 
Steinmetz some years ago by the assumption of a condensed 
air film at the surface of the conductor. If this were so, a greater 
critical gradient would be expected for tungsten than for alum- 
inum. That is, the air film should be denser around the denser 
metals. As already noted, Table XXI and curve, Fig. 38, show 
that the gradient is not affected by the material or density of the 
conductor. In a paper read at the Annual Convention of the 


ee SS 


1911} PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1941 


A. 1. E. E., June, 1910,* by Hayden and Steinmetz, it was shown 

that energy as well as voltage was necessary to rupture insulation. 

Also see Ryan’s} explanation by the ionization theory. Applying 

this definite energy theory to corona formation, it means that 

the potential gradient at the surface of the conductor must be 

raised above the actual breakdown gradient in order to store 
TABLE XXI 


VARIATION OF gv WITH DIAMETER OF CONDUCTORS (AVERAGE VALUES 
FOR POLISHED WIRE). CORRECTED TO 25 DEG. CENT. 76 CM, BAROMETRIC 


PRESSURE 
de 
“ped =8u 
Diameter kv/cm. Material 
ia es De LA oe see a max. * 
0.0196 116 Tungsten 
0.0343 99 : Copper 
0.0351 94. « 
0.0508 84 | Aluminum 
| 0.0577 82 bs 
0.0635 81 Tungsten 
0.0780 76 Copper 
0.0813 74 < 
| 0.1637 64 « 
0.1660 64 Iron 
0.2043 59 Copper 
0. 2560 57 {| Aluminum 
0.3200 5A Copper 
0.3230 50.5 a 
0.5130 49 4 
0.5180 46 P 
0.6550 . 44. | - 
| 0.8260 42.5 | 
0.9280 41 « 


sufficient energy in the air immediately surrounding the con- 
ductor to cause breakdown at a distance x from the conductor 
surface. This distance x from the surface must be finite and the 
gradient at the point x a constant and equal to the dielectric 
strength of air g. See Fig. 39. i ge 
* Disruptive Strength with Transient Voltages, by J. L. R. Hayden and 
C. P. Steinmetz; Transactions A.I.E.E., 1910, XXIX, LE py 1125: 
+Open Atmosphere and Dry Transformer Otl as High-Voltage Insulators, 


- by Harris J. Ryan, TRANSACTIONS SAP SUER APSO TEM lee SONG DG eg ales oh 


1942 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA {June 29 


On the above assumptions we may write 


e z : 
2.=—— rik visual gradient 
r (loge— 
( Se ) 
ey 
g= = constant 
(r+x) loge igi 

| * Tl a 

ae rt te | 

110 ——+ + | t | L 1. i 4 

100}+—- +—} = = 
s He (Jv AT 76 CM, B, AND 25 o= 29,8 (1+.301) | 
s gs VOLTAGE GRADIENT PER CM. 
uw 80 
a 
= 70 
i=) 
» 0 
5 50 
(e) 
5 40 
a 
<x 30 

20 

10 


123 4 5 6 7 8 8 101112 18141516 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 
DIAMETER IN CM. 


Fic. 38.—Visual critical voltage gradient—Two parallel wires 


J, 4 4 COPPER WIRE 
DIAM. .518 CMS. 


GRADIENT CURVE 


\ DISTANCE FROM CONDUCTOR 
Nee x CONDUCTOR 
ENERGY ENVELOPE 


Fic. 39.—Potential gradient in air surrounding one of two paralle! 
conductors 


Now theoretically one is led to expect that x is not constant for 
all values of r, but 
x=¢ (7) 


Then we may write 


ey 


££ ee 
(r-+9 (7) log, 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


TABLE XXII 


1943 


RELATION OF VISUAL CRITICAL VOLTAGE GRADIENT TO RADIUS(WIRES) 


(EXPERIMENTAL VALUES) 


CORRECTED TO 76 CM. BAROMETER AND 25 DEG. CENT. 

ae 

| Diam gv Radius Vy 

cm. kv/cm. 7r=cm. cm. 

0.0196 116.0 0.0098 10.10 
0.0343 99.0 0.0172 7.65 | 

0.0350 94.0 0.0175 7.58 

0.0508 84.0 0.0254 6.27 
0.0577 81.5 0.0288 5.90 | 

0.0635 81.0 0.0317 5.64 

0.078 76.0 0.0390 5.08 

| 0.0813 73.5 0.0406 4.96 

0.1635 63.8 0.0818 3.51 

0.1660 63.4 0.0830 3.45 

| 0.202 59.1 0.1010 we 

| 0.257 56.7 0.128 2.76 

| 0.320 54.3 0.160 2.51 

| 0.322 49.6 0.161 2.51 
- | 0.513 48.8 0.256 2.01 
| 0.518 44.5 0.259 1.94 | 
| 0.655 43.7 0.327 1.82 | 
| 0.826 42.2 0.413 1.57 | 
| 0.928 40.6 0.464 1.44 | 

ise aa ie 


menace OF REDUCING RELATION 


1 ie 


100 


ao 
=) 


g,, KILOVOLTS PER CM. 
iS 


Sse SS kT UC 
8 ‘S} 
<a 
w 
ww 
- 
or 
° 
_ 
ao 
© 


. 
ne IN CM. 


Fic. 40.—Visual critical voltage gradient 


1944 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


A study of the experimental values shows that if g, is plotted 
with 1/ Vy, the curve is a straight line. See Table XXII and 


Fig. 40. That is, 
iz) 
Peas a = 
ane (14-7 


In order to give proper weight to all of the experimental points 
the = A method is used in the evaluation of the constants. See 
Table XXIII. 


TABLE XXIII 


RELATION OF gv AND —= 


Vr 
(= A reduction) 
1 1 
gu Vr ge Vr 
99 7.65 59 3.13 
82 5.90 54 Dok 
81 5.64 50.5 2.51 
76 5.08 49 2.01 
74 4.96 41 1.44 
> 412 z 29.23 > 253.5 > 11.60 
1 
A = gv =158.5 As — = =17.63 
Vr 
2B gv =665.5 zz LK =40.83. 
Vr 
158.5 
1 =— =9.00 
17.63 
665.5-9 X40.8 
g=—_—_—_—_——- = 29.8 
10 
herefore 


gv= 29.8+—= 
r 


e 0.301 
=29.8 (1 Sees 

These values give 29.8 kilovolts per cm. maximum as a rup- 
turing gradient of air at 25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. barometer. We 


may find x thus: 


vou 
ey 
r (loge s/r) 
Zo _ ey r+x 


o-_- = 


g  (r+x) loges/r r 


oe —-” - 1: _ 
Wi v= . 


“h 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1945 


therefore 


r+x 0.301 
hg = hi pate 
r ( ve Vr ) 


«=0.301 V7 


Fig. 38 is plotted from equation (6). The experimental points 
are shown as circles. Taking the correction factor given in 
Section XI for barometric pressure and temperature we may now 
write: 


301 


Ly = 29.8 m, 6 (14 is ) kv. per cm. maximum 
r 


=21.1 m, 6 (1+ = ) kv. per cm. effective 
Vr 
$$. 
Qj;VOLTAGE GRADIENT PER CM. 76 CM, B. AND 25 C 
i—i——| DECIDED CORONA il 

< LOCAL CORONA 

50 r 4 
| el 
= sol 
cc 
w 40 
a 
2) 
i 
oil 
030 
> 
(e} 
= 
+ . a 5 
ye 70 N.B. NUMERALS DENOTE NUMBER OF STRANDS IN CABLES 
< L CRITICAL POINTS ON POLISHED COPPER WIRE jee ale 
= II DECIDED CORONA ALL ALONG CABLE 
210 IIL LOCAL CORONA ALL ALONG CABLE 


1.2 1.4 1.6 


22 A 6 8 1.0 
DIAMETER IN CM. 


Fic. 41.—Visual critical voltage gradient—Two parallel cables 


_. Also 
ey =21.1m,6r (1+ os) loge = effective kv. to neutral (5) 
‘ r 


The numerical value of g determined above is practically the same 
as the numerical value of go determined from the disruptive critical 
voltage. ‘The above values are for polished wires. 

While the visual critical point is quite sharp and definite for 
wires it is not so for cables. This point forcables seems to come 
on gradually and cover a considerable range. 

Table XXIV and Fig. 41 give average values for cables. 


1946 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE XXIV 
VISUAL TESTS ON CABLES 


| Decided corona Local corona 
gu max. 
corr. 

ped ee enue: 25°C. 76 cm. Avg. eX. 25° C76 cm.| Avg. 
0.585 | ay 40.4 38.9 | 39.2 37.8 | 
0.585 7 39.3 36.2). | 37.1 36.5 23.7% 3523 
0.585 a 38.4 36.3 J 36.1 34.3 | 
0.831 7 37.0 35.7 35.7 33.4 32.4 32 4 
1.020 7 34.9 3327 33.7 32.0 31.9 31 
1.063 19 36.7 35.4 35.4 34.8 33.7 S357 
1.181 7 33.4 32.7 31.4 30.9 ) 
1.181 7 24.3 23.0 21.5 20.4 | 
Teka! 7 28.2 27.0 Bay 25.4 24.4 ae. 
1.181 7 34.2 33.0 32.0 31.9 
1.193 19 30.6 30.1 30.1 28.2 277 27.7 
1.209 37 37.2 36.4 36.4 35.8 35.1 35.1 
1.485 19 2) 9828.7 28.3 28.3 28.0 27.6 27.6 


The values for wires are plotted on the same sheet. There is 
neatly a constant difference between the two curves, that is, the 
visual critical gradient for cables, g,’, equals the visual critical 
gradient for polished wires, gy, times the constant mp. Increas- 
ing the number of strands in a cable appears to increase the value 
of My. 

Photographic Study. A photographie study of corona on wires 
and cables was made as follows: Two parallel conductors were 
spaced 122 cm. between centers. The camera was focused on one 
conductor only. The distance to the lens was such as to show 
the conductors at approximately actual size. An exposure was 
made for a given time at a given voltage. The plate was then 
shifted slightly, the voltage was raised, and an exposure made 
for the same time. That is, a given series shows the same part 
of the same single wire at different voltages. This operation 
was repeated until the series for a given wire was complete. 
See Fig. 42. These photographs are shown in Figs. 43-50. 

Fig. 43 shows corona on a bright tinned phosphor bronze 
wire—0.051 cm. in diameter. 

Fig. 44 shows corona on a bright copper wire (0.186 cm.) 
diameter—polished after each exposure. 


——— sr rCaS 
. 
\ 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1947 


Fig. 45 shows the same wire used iu Fig. 44, but allowed to 
remain idle a few hours after running at 200 kv. 

Fig. 46 shows a weathered (0.168-cm. diameter) galvanized 
iron wire. 


Fig. 47 shows a bright polished rod, and a new unpolished 3/0 
copper cable. 


S= 122..0M, — ¢-)-- 
; 
ie ee Ee Ss es pute 


PLATE DIRECTION OF SHIFT 


Fic. 42.—Method of making photographs of corona on short length 
Gr conductors 


These photographs explain much in the study of corona, for 
instance, variations in k, and go, the effect of moisture, loss at low 
voltage, etc. A complete discussion must be left to another 
paper. The conditions shown cover more than the practical 
range. 


Fic. 43.—Phosphor bronze bright tinned wire. Diameter 0.051 cm. 


IX. RELATION BETWEEN VISUAL CRITICAL VOLTAGE AND 
DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE 
In Section VIII it was shown by loss measurements that for 


wires: 
go=constant =29 kv. per cm. maximum 


1948 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


By visual measurements, in Section VIII, it was shown that 


0.301 ) 


t 
Var 


where g=29.8. 


Fic. 44.—Polished' copper wire. Diameter 0.186 cm. Polished after 
each exposure 


Fic. 45.—Polished copper wire. 0.186 cm. Run at 200 ky., then allowed 
to stand idle. (This shows effect of oxidation) 


Then where r=, or for flat surfaces, g,=g=29.8. 

The agreement between g as determined visually and go 
as determined by loss measurement is remarkable, considering 
the different methods followed. It means that gox=g=29.8 kv. 


per cm.=<dielectric strength of air at 25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. 


. eam 


1911} PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1949 


More weight is given to 29.8 as the value for the dielectric 
strength of air, as it was made on polished wire, and by a direct 
method, while gy was necessarily determined on long lengths of 
unpolished and more or less kinky wires by an indirect method. 
See Fig. 51. 


Fic. 46.—Weathered galvanized iron wire. Diameter 0.168 cm. 


ad 
New Yy Copper Cable. Olam, 1.48. crm, 


3 oe aa 
220 ky. 3 


ail ee 


sll, 


180 Av. 
3 7: 


Fic. 47.—1.25-cm. polished brass rod and unpolished copper cable 


X, IRREGULARITY Factor 
Two factors affecting ¢ and the apparent go have been used 
in equations and discussed. The numerical values covering the 
range of transmission practise are: 
For wires: 


m,=mo=1, polished wire. 
=0.98 to 0.93, roughened or weathered wire. 


1959 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


Fic. 48.—No. 3/0 weathered cable 


Fic. 50.—No. 3/0 line cable—Wet 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1951 


For cables: 
My =0.87 to 0.83 


m,=0.82 to 0.72 


k in equation (6) will vary somewhat with wave shape, etc., 
But this variation can generally be neglected, as it enters the 
equation directly, while the e) variation enters as the square. 
The value given should cover practical conditions. 


XI. TEMPERATURE AND BAROMETRIC PRESSURE 


Values of the disruptive critical voltage e9 covering a consid- 
erable temperature range are tabulated below. In Table XXV 


20-CURVES. is <) : oe anes 


110}{--A-VISUAL GRADIENT FOR POLISHED WIRES ey 
B-VISUAL GRADIENT FOR CABLES- (neciDED CORONA) += FOG a]. 
100 Vv TLOG, 
©-VISUAL GRADIENT FOR CABLES- (LOCAL CORONA) € 
= 
° 90 D- DISRUPTIVE GRADIENT AT 0.301\/7 CM, FROM 
rr SURFACE OF POLISHED WIRES-(j = __Yv_—=29.8= CONSTANT 
a So}— 0 “1,307 
r 
7 
E- DISRUPTIVE GRADIENT FOR CABLES (J, = 25.7 =CONSTAN 
60 T Ni 37 
50 i 


i sie a 
T rest = == 


| 
= 
. 0 
DIAMETER IN CM, 


Fic: 51.—Visual and disruptive gradients for wires and cables 


correction is made to a barometric pressure of 76 cm. on the 
assumption that eo’ varies directly with the pressure. In Fig. 52 
1/eo’ is plotted with temperature. The straight line through 
these points cuts the temperature axis at —273 deg. cent. or 
absolute zero. Temperature was always measured in the shade. 
The points that do not fall well on the curve are the summer 
sunny day points. Thisis what would be expected as the conduc- 
tors were at a higher temperature than the temperature read. 

Fig. 52 shows that the critical voltage or the rupturing gradient 
varies inversely as the air density. 

The density of air at 25 deg. cent. and 76 cm.. barometric 
pressure is used as the standard in this paper. 


- 


1952 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE XXV 
TEMPERATURE AND DISRUPTIVE CRITICAL VOLTAGE eo 
(Standard line A 1-2-3-4) 


| Test Lene | Bar eee Es oy 

No Wet Dry | Piss lines 76 cm. 1/eo’ Weather 
18 16 18.5 75.5 138.5 140 0.00715 | Bright sun 
15 20 22 75.2 140 142 0.00705 | Cloudy sun 
37 10 13 (Pet 141 14 0.00705 | Bright sun 
36 10 12 75.0 144 146.5 0.00683 | Cloudy 
109 -3 -2 73.9 148.8 150.8 0.00663 | Hazy sun 
84 1 3 | 75.2 ; 149 151 0.00662 | Cloudy 
101 -1 -1 74.7 153.8 156.8 | 0.00638 | Cloudy 
103 - 4.9 - 4.5 15.7 155.3 156.7 0.00638 | Sun 

104 - 9.5 - 9.5 76.2 157 157.0 0.00637 | Sun 

119 - 6.5 -6 76.5 156.6 156.1 0.00642 | Sun 

105 -13 -13 76.2 161 161 0.00622 | Sun 


The factor for reducing the density of air, taken at a given 
standard temperature and pressure, to any desired temperature 
and pressure, may be deduced as follows, and the factor which 
has been called 6 in the previous discussion obtained.* 


erie, Os OUSO ED 
273-+¢ 


where w=the weight of air in grams per cubic cm. 
bh=barometric pressure in cm. 
t=the temperature in degrees centigrade. 


At 25 deg. cent., 76 cm., 


0.00465 X76 


W25°-76 em =~ 973 195 =(.001185 grams 


: b 
w at desired temperature and pre ee 
p pressure Wi» = 973 +1 


we ____0.00465b _ _ 3.926 _s 
ar Cream: (273-4t) O.O0LIShs 21a Lhe 


ce nee oe ee ee 

*This is the method used by Professor Ryan as the result of his labora- 
tory experiments. The above table is a check on his work on a large 
scale. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1953 
where (273+2) =7T=absolute temperature, deg. cent. 


3.92 b Pens 
=——-—_ = correction factor. 


~ 27344 
Then if eo increases directly with the air density, 


ont = 3-92 b 
omen 7a 4ce° 


where é is the critical voltage at 25 deg. cent. and 76 cm. baro- 
metric pressure, and é” is the critical voltage at the desired 


Th ‘a Cae 


4 ee t = 


EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE 
LINES 1-2-3-4 


240 200 160 120 80 
273°C DEGREES C 


465) 0. 40) 0-00 


Fic. 52.—Corona loss 


temperature and pressure—of course the corresponding values of 
go may be found the same way. 


XII. Humipiry, SMOKE, WIND 
Humidity. Vine A was kept as a standard throughout the 
tests. A careful study of the disruptive critical voltage and 
.c2/f shows no effect of either humidity or ‘‘ vapor products ’’.* 
Visual tests made on two short parallel wires indoors and over a 
great humidity range also bear this out. 


*High Voltage Measuremenis at Niagara, by R. D. Mershon, TRANS- 
actions A. I. E. E., 1908, X XVII, II, p. 845. 


1954 | PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE XXVI 
+STANDARD LINE A. CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 


| Test persis Relative Vapor go reduced to 
| No. Wet Dry humidity product 25° C. 76 cm. bar. 
15 20 22 0.84 0.55 18.8 
18 16 18.5 0.75 0.35 18.5 
36 10 12 0.78 0.25 18.8 
37. 10 13 0.67 0.21 18.3 
$i 1 3 .69 0.11 18.7 
101 -1 = 1 1.00 0.17 19.2 
103 - 4.9 - 4.9 1.00 0.13 18.9 
104 - 9.5 - 9.5 1.00 0.08 18.6 
105 -13 -13 1.00 0.06 18.8 
109 -2 } =2 1.00 0.12 18.7 


Theoretically there should be no appreciable effect due to 
humidity, since even if the water vapor, which may be consid- 
ered as a gas dissolved in air, has a different disruptive gradient 
from air, the percentage of the gas in the mixture should be too 
small to cause any appreciable change. It has been suggested 
that ‘‘ vapor products "’ is a measure of ionization and, in that 
way, the critical voltage varies with vapor products. This does 
not seem likely, because with all ordinary atmospheric air the 
percentage of ionization is so small that it would not be expected 
to produce any effect. To test this, the visual critical point 
was determined on two parallel wires. The room was then 
closed and the wires were run at a point very much above the 
critical point for about an hour, or until a very intense odor 
of ozone filled the room. The voltage was then taken off and the 
surface of the wires cleaned in order to remove oxidization. 
The critical point was then redetermined and found to be the 
same, although the amount of ionized air was many times that 
which could be expected in free atmospheric air. Of course if 
the percentage of ionization is enough to change the constitution 
o” the air, as for instance in an ozone machine, a change in the 
disruptive strength would then be expected. 

It has been claimed that ultra-violet light reduces the spark- 
ing point. This is not borne out in tests, where any quantity 
of power is involved. Though ultra-violet light, ionized air, 


tLine A was kept at constant test conditions for use as a standard in 
the study of varying atmospheric conditions, etc. 


— 
\ ' 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1955 


and various radiations, cause the small energy in condensers to 
discharge when applied over comparatively great time, in case 
of large energy discharge in a very short time, as spark discharge 
and corona, no appreciable effect should be expected, or can be 
observed, since the discharge which takes place by ionized air is 
not of the same order of magnitude as the spark discharge. 

The conditions are not the same with fog; here there is not a 
mixture of two gases, air and water vapor, as is the case where 
humidity is concerned, but actual water particles are in the air. 
It has been observed by Steinmetz that fog actually raises the 
striking distance between needle points. This is because the 
conducting water particles have the effect of increasing the 
size of the discharge points. With balls as electrodes, or where 
the electrodes are already large, fog would. probably decrease 
the striking distance. Greater loss should be expected in corona 
measurements during fog due to charge and discharge of the 
water particles. This causes loss at lower voltages and has the 
effect of decreasing the critical point; it is more fully discussed in 
Section XIII. 

Smoke. It was difficult to get measurements to show the 
effect of smoke, as the prevailing winds were from over the fields 
and towards the city. At one time, however, during a change in 
the wind thick smoke was blown over the line from rubbish 
dump and smokestacks of a factory. The loss was increased. 
This, however, will probably not be a serious consideration in 
practise. 

Wind. Losses measured during very heavy winds show no 
variation from losses measured during calm weather. 


XIII. Moisture, Frost, Foc, SLEET, RAIN AND SNOW 


During some of the first tests it was noted that the losses were 
sometimes greater on the ‘going up curve’’ than on the 
‘coming down curve”’, especially in the early mornings after 
heavy dew. The losses became less after the line had been run 
for a while at high voltage; Fig. 53 shows this well for a conductor 
with a coating of frost. This excess loss was thought at first 
to be due to leakage through moisture on the insulators. Insu- 
lators were put up without line wires, but measurements showed 
a very small insulation loss even during storms. It was then 
concluded to be due to moisture on the conductors themselves. 
Visual tests made on short lengths of wet and dry cables showed 
this in a very striking manner. Two parallel dry cables were 


1956 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


brought up to the critical point. Water was then thrown on 
the cables. What was a glow on the surface of the dry cables 
now became, at the wet spots, a discharge extending as much as 
5 to 8 cm. from the cable surface. This discharge reminded 
one of an illuminated atomizer. Illustrations, Figs. 49 and 50, 
show this, but a great part of the effect is lost in reproduction. 
The wires became quite dry and down to normal discharge 
after running at high voltage for a very few minutes. 

The curves, Fig. 54, taken during fog also show the combined 
effect of condensed moisture on the cables, and free water par- 
ticles in the air. The moisture particles on the conductor be- 
come charged and are repelled. The particles in the air also 


DATA 


6 LINE A 
TOTAL CONDUCTOR LENGTH 109,500 CM. 
SPACING 310 CM. 
#* 36-7 STRAND CABLE DIAM. 1.18 CM. 
3° 


TEMPERATURE WET -3°C 
“ 


DRY -2°C 
BAROMETER 74 CM, 
HAZY SUN, SLIGHT BREEZE 
© GOING UP 
4 * GOING DOWN 
iS 


; 220 240 
0 BETWEEN LINES 
50 Ck 80 90 100 ‘120 
KILOVOLTS TO NEUTRAL 


Fic. 53.—Corona loss 


become charged and discharged, thus increasing the loss very 
greatly above that for dry conductors. 

The losses during snow and rain storms are much greater than 
fair weather losses at the same temperature and barometric 
pressure. In Fig. 56 the actual measured loss is plotted, and 
also a corresponding calculated fair weather loss. The difference 
between the two curves shows the excess loss due to snow. The 
effect of snow is greater than that of any other storm condition. 
This is because the particles are larger and a greater number 
strike the line, or come near the line. 

The sleet curves are of special interest. Sleet had already 
started to form on the conductors, and was still falling when the 


1911] 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


19}—+- 
LINE A— CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
18 P,= TOTAL MEASURED LOSs DURING FOG. | 
ia jp) = CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER LOSS. ies 
i D,= D;= P= INCREASED LOSS DUE TO STORM, 
TEST NO. 112 
15 T 
14 | 
2) 
13 | 
sas {Ve fe 
il i| ie 2 
> oO 
rf S| 
o i! KS 
Ft S/F| 
<9 ope 7 
> os 
5 8 Cg = 
= affs| £ 
Sa SHs | & 
s 
6 RID 
rs) oF 
5 = = \e 
eal. oe 
4 Co) 
o™ 
3 + 
2 
1 L 


ti 
110 130 150 170 190 210 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


230 


Fic. 54.—Corona loss during fog. Wires wet 


18 
17 
: LINE A- CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
ie ‘Pt =TOTAL MEASURED LOSS DURING FOG 
: 7) =CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER LOSS 
55 “Ps=Pt—P=INCREASED LOSS DUE TO FOG 
TEST NO, 113 g 
4 
13 =a 
2 132 r | 
iis any 
o fo} 
- 10 ig 
= | BS 
5g Off | 
: ff 
=iiees - ES. 
Zz Ne 
y | oS: = 
&/fy % 4 
Se | SL 
6 tf [eae 
S/F | 
5 ¥ 6 YS: 
: lg KO 
4 — — og Aig oy 
w 
Ks = 
3 a 
¥ 
2 a 
x « 
1 Se 
Oe 


110 130 150 170 190 210 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 55.—Corona loss during fog. Wires wet 


1957 


1958 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


tests were started. Fig. 57 shows the loss curves. After the 
curves were taken the line was kept at 200,000 volts for over an 
hour with no apparent diminution of sleet. This seems to show 
that sleet will form on high voltage transmission lines. 


18 LINE A- CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
{Pt=TOTAL MEASURED LOSS DURING 
Ww Loss 
16 {) =CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER LOSS 
AT SAME TEMP, & BAR. PRESSURE FS 
Paz Py-P =NCREASED LOSS DUE TO 
15 STORM 
TEST NO, 107 
14 _ 
13 =) 
. 2b Nee 
2) © 
2S 
$4 — J | 
o 088 
ke 10 ry, <0 fy 
ke 2 i» 7 s 
<9 + a 
> 
[se at Mae PS 
rt 
be bY 
7 S; 
= EE, 
6 pw 
| & 
br } cS + 
3 
4} | rt % — 
Cy 
3-——_L - a 
& | 
x 
2 iE { = wo te. 
1 — Ls = 
90 10 130 150 170 190 210 


KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 56.—Corona loss during snow storm 


a LINE A—CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 l 
P,=1OTAL MEASURED LOSS GOING UP, 


. J. =CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER LCCS 
6 #7 €AML TEMP. AND BAR. PRESSURE,| 


P= 1)-= D= INCREASED LOSS DUE 
"| TO SLEET, 


ce 


TEST NO. 110 


a | 


- 


KILOWATTS 


1i0 130 150 170 190 210 
2VOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 57.—Corona loss during sleet storm 


The day after these tests were made was bright and clear and 
the conductors were still coated with sleet. A set of readings 
was taken, and it is interesting to note that the excess loss here 
was as great as when sleet was falling. See Figs. 58 and 59. 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1959 


The excess loss for sleet, rain or snow storms (over the fair 
weather loss) seems with increasing voltage to approach a maxi- 
mum and then to decrease again (the latter at values very far 
above the disruptive critical voltage), and the curves of loss seem 


12 LINE A—CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
11}— Pp, =TOTAL MEASURED LOSS GOING UP, <= 
7) = CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER LOSS 
10}—} aT SAME TEMP, AND GAR. PRESSURE, 
g |__|] P= ,= P= INCREASED LOSS DUE TO SLEET. 12 
TEST NO. 111 
wo 8 
a 
Pa S 
= Ra 
oO 6 ] > w 
bai oY & 
SZ 5 s € 
a 
4 i Rg 
9 
3 — = 
On 
2 xc 
S 
: |_| 


11013805 150) «170. e190 210-230 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 


Fic. 58.—Corona loss—Wires coated with sleet 


LINE A—CONDUCTORS 1-2-3-4 
7 DP, =TOTAL MEASURED LOSS GOING DOWN. 


40 =CALCULATED FAIR WEATHER Loss 
| AT SAME TEMP. AND BAR. PRESSURE. 


10 0=D=P= INCREASED LOSS DUE TO SLEET. 
‘ie TEST NO.111 
9 
8 
wo 
Fea 
ke 
6 
= 6 
ie 
2 5 
4 I 
| 3 
; 2 
bn 
; ii 
. ea eens 
: liu 130.250 «170:2~=«WssiL 
KILOVOLTS BETWEEN LINES 
4 . . 
; Fic. 59.—Corona loss— Wires coated with sleet 


to have the general shape of the probability curve, as is to 


be expected theoretically. ; | 
The above readings show the importance of taking weather 


conditions into account in the design of high voltage transmission 


lines. 


1960 


PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 


{June 29 


TABLE XXVII 


CORONA LOSS. DURING FOG 


(Data for curves Fig. 54) 


ee ee SS oe 


Fair 
Kv. Kw. weather loss 
between read calculated Kw. excess loss 
lines Amperes total p= or snow loss 
e total Pt a f (e- eo)? bt-P=Ps 

| — 
101.0 0.109 | 0.41 | — 0.41 
121.0 0.130 | 0.93 | — 0.93 
140.0 0.156 1.81 —— 1.81 
161.2 0.185 4.25 | 0.36 3.89 
180.0 0.214 6.94 2.42 4.52 
202.0 | 0.257 ln 4 13:.66 | 7.15 6.51 
202.0 0.252 | 13.07 7.15 5.92 
202.0 Oa252. ey oer 7.15 5.62 
218.0 0.288 | 18.79 12.20 6.59 
211.0 0.272 16.02 9.85 | 6.17 
202.0 0.250 12.77 7.15 5.62 
190.0 0.229 | 9.21 4.27 4.94 
185.0 0.217 | 7.63 | 3.28 4.35 
180.0 0.215 | 6.60 2.42 4.18 
180.0 0.200 4.95 : 2.42 2.53 
166.0 0.189 3.99 0.71 3.66 
156.0 0.177 2.82 0.11 2.71 
144.0 0.160 1.65 — 1.65 
142.0 0.159 1.45 — 1.45 
132.5 | 0.146 0.97 — 0.97 
123.7 0.131 0.62 -— 0.62 
112.5 0.119 0.26 —— 0.26 
102.5 0.110 0.15 —— 0.15 


Total conductor length 


Line A. 


Pe et ot ee ce es Sore ee 109,500 cm. 
No. 3/0 7-strand cable diameter. ......... eee eee rere cece 
Spachng sss cesar eaves « 4: 2.0pe 3 nope duals gabede sais shar ene iam anisla als 


1-2-3-4. Test No. 112 


1.18 cm. 
310 cm. 
Wet 2 deg. cent. 


Temperature since sc cos ole 6 vine Held cenibieyactnisis waka reread 


BGLOreber snc a esc pale 86 6 soon, oe hv Mhavn @ecayellp is: etptararmaUterens Nere? sie els 


eo fair weather 


Dry 2 deg, cent. 
75.5 cm. 
74.7 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1961 


. TABLE XXVIII 
CORONA LOSS. DURING FOG 
(Data for curves Fig. 55) 


| | 
| Fair 

Kv. Kw. weather loss 

between read calculated | Kw. excess loss 
lines Amperes total p= or snow loss 

e total Pt | a f (e— 0)? bt-pb=Ps 
101.5 0.103 0.16 ee : 0.16 
110.0 OL 217 0.27 — 0.27 
121.5 0.129 0.64 — 0.64 
131.5 0.145 12, — | 1,12 
141.5 0.157 | 1.85 —_ 1.85 
150.0 0.170 2.73 — 223 
159.6 0.182 Statoil 0.26 3.35 
Ano 0.196 §.31 1.21 4.10 
183.0 0.219 7.74 2.92 4.82 
192.0 0.232 10.21 4.68 5.53 
201.0 0.247 12.87 6.90 5.97 
213.0 0.272 16.92 10.50 6.42 
201.0 0.247 12.87 6.92 5.97 
178.0 0.207 6.16 yall 4.05 
157.0 0.177 81 0.15 2.65 
134.0 0.150 0.38 — 0.38 
Tincued Meee 2a 40 a est, NO.etLo 
Total conductor length. ccc. cene voce cee cine seen reese 109,500 cm. 
4 No. 3/0 7-strand cable diameter. .....-..-++e+s+eerser cee 1.18 cm. 
Gracitigun seit ra sinclar occacins cis ueuuet ce eve oie eS ioe 310 cm, 
, ; Wet 2 deg. cent. 
TS aegeYe raUEW Once oa thtePagiOic el Gite PIO. KOs NRE I I a 
Dry 2 deg. cent. 
TRE orp nuie Coyams RO craig 4 oo ae ONO ae aaa 75.5 cm. 
74.7 


ay feet, AGEN he ge bed Oo 0 CUI O USUI Sana CI a Scene 


2 4 


1962 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA {June 29 


TABLE XXIX 
CORONA LOSS. DURING SNOW STORM 
| POINTS TAKEN GOING UP ON LINES 1-2-3-4 


(Data for curves Fig. 56) 


| 
Fair 
Kv. Kw. weather loss 
between read a Kw. excess loss 
lines Amperes total ' or snow loss 
é " : Pt often ei)? ae ee bt-b=Ps 
80 ~~ 0.38 hers, 0.38 
90.5 0.62 — 0.62 
100.5 1.09 1.09 
ULES: 1.88 1.88 
120.5 2.63 2.63 
132.5 4.08 — | 4.08 
132.5 3.68 — 3.68 
140.5 4.86 — | 4.86 
153.0 6.83 0.06 6uT7 
161.4 7.46 0.46 7.00 
170.4 10,28 Pe 1-38 9.00 
182.8 12.75 314 9.64 
192.0 | 15,02 4.98 10.06 
202.0 \ 17.46 | 7.53 | 9.93 
Line A. 1-2-3-4. Test No. 107 
Total conductor lengthi dd. cots fad lec SOs ens ewielva siwehe ctu 109,500 cm. 
No. 3/0 7-strand cable diameter. ........c cece eeesevecnes 1.18 cm. 
Saini hele h oe 5 viih daiche law ere 's,s0m Bieamaberd oe Soe e wa lakes lahat) ere Mewelers 310 cm. 
Wet —O deg. cent. 
Ternpérattire. siiiacs cow cate vgn Use od nie persis, ote aint aNisrnue wis erts 
Dry —O deg. cent. 
Barometer, ccc.cc.c.0s sates often 6 ee IO NLS are wes Stoney san oiralarureers 74.2 cm. 
éortair: weathers. + és semis sia raed le ohne Sh(a ane ope babi Ma RSSiORe ated ask are 74.1 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1963 


TABLE XXX 
CORONA LOSS. DURING SLEET STORM 
POINTS TAKEN GOING UP ON LINES 1-2-3-4 
(Data for curves Fig. 57) 


Fair 
Kv. Kw. weather loss | 
between read calculated Kw. excess loss 
lines Amperes ~ total p= or snow loss 
e Pt af (e— 0)? pti-P=Ps 
; Tie 0.21 — 0.2 | 
150.0 1.25 — 1.25 | 
160.0 1.81 0.21 1.60 | 
| 
. 169.0 2.51 0.83 1.68 
180.6 3.58 2.26 1.32 
191.6 5.35 4.26 1.09 
102.0 0.13 — 0.13 
133.0 0.48 — 0.48 
151.0 1.25 —. 1.25 
172.4 2.80 1.18 1.62 
192.9 5.75 4.52 1.23 
194.0 5.74 4.78 0.96 
192.8 5.54 4.52 1.02 
4 187.6 4.76 3.46 ew) 
: 176.6 3.34 1.69 1.65 
q 165.0 | 2.40 0.50 1.90 | 
| 
. 156.0 | 1.59 0.06 1.53 | 
194.0 5.74 4.78 0.96 | 
194.0 5.74 4.78 0.96 
TanesA. 4-9-3-4. ‘Test No, 110 
Total conductor length. <5 so. 556 cee ee ese eee see ce eens 109,500 cm. 
No. 3/0 7-strand cable diameter........---+++seseeerreees 1.18 cm. 
Seon ili suk 6 og Gores d oh Sic0 a. OBO O CIn SO Sen nee OR 310 cm, 
Wet —1 deg. cent. 
Aten pietiett CMCm Aes «le ley ai alaile « aaetete recess (are, shai #0080844 enh cio ile eal sete 
Dry —1 deg, cent. 
TD etas ST tin +, Sg CCE cx 0 ec COO MCEC IONE CIC CTI Manos i iad 75.4 cm. 
75.6 


op TERS SGA AOS Agno OD OOD OO OTN Cn Mca aaa 


1964 PEEK: LAW OF CORONA [June 29 


TABLE XXXI 


CORONA LOSS 
WITH SLEET ON WIRES. BRIGHT SUNNY DAY. POINTS TAKEN ON LINES 
1-2-3-4 
(Data for curves Figs. 58 and 59) 


ee a ee nan 


| { 
Fair 
Kv. Kw. weather loss 
between read calculated Kw. excess loss 
lines Amperes total p= or snow loss 
é pt af (e- 0)? bt-p=DPs. 
Going down 
202.0 | 10 | 0.36 
| 222.4 | 10.10 10.87 -0.77 
| 208.0 |. oe 6.58 0.66 
ZO 5.38 5.10 0.28 
188.0 3.55 2.39 0.16 
177e 6) 2.67 1.03 1.64 
| 170.0 | | 2.07 0.41 1.66 
| 
160.0 | 1.47 0.02 1.45 
150.0 | 1.10 — 1.10 
139.0 | Oxcr | — 0.71 
130.0 | | 0.52 — 0.52 
Going up 
60.0 0.03 _—_— 0.03 
70.0 | 0.07 | -_— 0.07 
80.5 | 0.13 | ; —— 0.13 
91.4 | 0.23 —_— 0.23 
101.0 0.40 -—— 0.40 
119.3 0.83 —— | 0.83 
142.5 | 1.66 — 1.66 
162.6 | 2.94 0.06 2.88 
| 180.8 | | 4.41 1.38 3.03 
| 201.0 ; 6.81 4.87 1.94 
| 222.4 | | 11.29 | 10.87 0.42 
eae ee ee er 
Line A. 1-2-3-4. Test No. 111 
Total conductor length... ...ccs cee v erence veceereeversenee 109,500 cm. 
No. 3/0 7-strand cable diameter. ......... esse eee eeeeee 1.18 cm. 
Spacing’ als «vines ole vviewieryds, ews oi Wid oe le Myeivi slalom Melt 310 cm, 
Wet —10 deg. cent. 
Temperature 


Dry -10 deg. cent. 
Barometer’. <0). 0:6 v0 vioves oie wis els o'st is 2tsp ore ei arnisiinte Sipiaiph scoraieners 76 cm. 


eg. fale WEATHEL, 5.00 27:01:59 0.416 06 epasninis © eine tie el oie aieual atora asa oe 78.8 


1911] PEEK: LAW OF CORONA 1965 


XIV. REMARKS 


There is still much left for further discussion, and many 
speculations to put forth, which, for lack of time, must be 
left to a future and more theoretical paper. Under this heading 
may be mentioned: 

Rationalization of equations. 

*Energy storage at the conductor surface through the distance 
x before the visual point is reached. 

*Purther relations between capacity and a in equation (2) and 
value of a for very small conductors. 

The extension of corona from the conductor surface and the 
resulting increase in capacity. 

A further discussion of the quadratic law, and the losses at 
low voltages. 

Storm losses. 

Photographic study. 

Unexplained corona phenomena. 


*Work on rationalization of x and a seems to show that the values 
given are the first terms of a series. 


1966 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


Discussion on “ ELvectric STRENGTH OF ArR, II,” “ THE LAW 
or CoRONA AND DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF Atrr.’’ CHICAGO, 
June 29, 1911. 


C. P. Steinmetz: The papers of Dr. Whitehead and Mr. 
Peek, Jr., are of momentous importance by solving the problem 
which threatened to stop the further advance of high voltage 
power transmission, the corona or loss of power by discharge 
into the air. From an unknown danger, corona thus becomes a 
phenomenon amenable to exact calculation and predetermination. 

Mr. Peek’s paper, while very voluminous, is only a short 
abstract of some of the more important results of an investiga- 
tion, which is probably one of the most extensive experimental 
electrical engineering investigations ever undertaken. 

Some of its results are: 

The loss of power by corona is proportional to the frequency 
and to the square of the excess voltage above a certain critical 
voltage, the disruptive critical voltage. 

This disruptive critical voltage is that voltage at which at 
- the conductor surface a certain definite and constant potential 
gradient is reached, which is 30 kv. per centimeter, independent 
of size of wires and distance, but is proportional to the air 
density, that is, the barometric pressure and the absolute 
temperature, and may be considered as the dielectric strength of 
air. 

The corona, involving luminosity and conductivity of the air 
and loss of power, does not yet begin when the dielectric strength 
of air, that is, the disruptive voltage gradient, has been reached 
at the conductor surface, but only after the disruptive gradient 
has extended a finite distance from the conductor, that is, after 
an envelope of dielectrically over-strained air of a finite thick- 
ness has been formed around the conductor, and a definite 
amount of energy has become available thereby. In this re- 
spect, corona formation is analogous to other phenomena of gas 
conduction, as the electric arc, which latter also requires a 
definite amount of energy for its starting. 

There are thus two definite critical points: the disruptive 
critical voltage, eo, at which the disruptive critical gradient, 
that is, the dielectric strength of air, of 30 kv. per cm., is reached 
at the conductor surface, and the visual critical voltage ey, 
at which the disruptive critical gradient has spread from the 
conductor to a sufficient distance to give the energy of corona 
formation, and luminosity and power loss begins. At the latter 
voltage, the gradient at the conductor surface is higher than the 
disruptive critical gradient, the more so, the smaller the con- 
ductor diameter, and the ratio between the visual and the dis- 
ruptive voltage gradients, respectively, is given by equation (1) 
of Dr. Whitehead’s paper, which is, not only in its form, but even 
in its numerical constants, the same as the corresponding equa- 
tion of Mr. Peek’s paper. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1967 


The theoretical loss curve, that is, that of a conductor of per- 
fect surface, would then have the shape as shown in Fig. 1, that 
is, start abruptly with a finite value at e,, while the dotted 
part from éo to ey, is unstable, just as in the arc characteristic a 
similar discontinuity occurs at the intersection with the ‘“‘ sta- 
bility curve.” 

Another interesting result of Mr. Peek’s paper is, that the 
lower part of the numerous previously published corona loss 
curves, which has been variously expressed as ‘‘ sub-corona,”’ 
or “‘ part corona,” etc., is nothing but the effect of the irregularity 
of the conductor surface, and as such follows the probability law. 

Humidity of the air is by Peek’s paper finally eliminated 
as one of the factors which might have an effect on corona. So 
also is the free ionization of the air. A pronounced effect, how- 
ever, is produced by any solid or liquid contained in the air, as 


oe 


27-7 


€o fey | +> 
140 160 180 200 


Sil 
200 220 


Fic. 1 


smoke, rain, snow, sleet, etc., and the effect is a great increase of 
loss and decrease of the voltage where the loss begins. _ 

Dr. Whitehead’s paper specifically deals with the quantity, 
which in Peek’s paper is called the “ visual critical voltage ey 
and the “visual critical gradient g.,” the values of voltage at 
which corona begins, that is, at which, according to Peek, the 
disruptive strength of air has been exceeded for a sufficient 
distance from the conductor to supply the energy required to 
start the luminous discharge or corona. 

There are some apparent discrepancies between. the results 
of Dr. Whitehead and those of Peek: Peek shows that the dis- 
ruptive critical voltage, the dielectric strength of air, and the 
constants of the corona equation are independent of the fre- 
quency, while Dr. Whitehead shows that the visual critical volt- 
age slightly decreases with the frequency. Peek shows that the 


1968 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


dielectric strength of air is proportional to the density, while 
Whitehead, extending his observations over a wide range of 
pressure, shows the visual critical voltage to vary less than 
proportionally to the air density. However, these discrepancies 
are only apparent, as Peek refers to the disruptive critical voltage 
€y, Whitehead to the visual critical voltage eé., and the effect 
observed by Whitehead should rationally be expected from Peek’s 
results: Peek shows the disruptive critical gradient go to be pro- 
portional to the air density, but corona to begin when the dis- 
ruptive gradient has extended a finite distance from the con- 
ductor, that is, after the formation of an envelope which supplies 
the energy of disruption. At this point, at the conductor surface 
a higher gradient g, has been reached. At lower air densities, 
the energy of the dielectric field is less, and it should therefore 
be expected that a greater thickness of envelope would be re- 
quired to supply the energy of disruption, that is, the visual 
gradient g, should vary less than proportionally to the air density. 
Similarly, at higher frequency and thus greater flow of power 
into the dielectric field of the conductor, less thickness of the 
envelope of overstrained air would be required to give the energy 
of corona formation, and increase of frequency thus should have 
the effect of decreasing the visual critical voltage e,, at constant 
disruptive critical voltage e). That is, in Peek’s equation re- 
lating the visual gradient g, and the disruptive gradient go 


Sih — 
0 - Vr 


(which is equation (1) of Whitehead’s paper), the constant 
0.301 should contain the air density 6 and the frequency f as 
terms. 

This is a field for further investigation. 

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate Dr. Whitehead, not 
only on the valuable results of his paper, but more still on the 
form in which the results are given, as empirical facts without 
coloration by the terminology of any metaphysical speculation, 
as unfortunately is done so often today, but the speculative 
interpretation is separated from the statements of the facts. 
However, from the point of view of the ionic theory—in which I 
do not believe—the facts of Peek’s and Whitehead’s papers appear 
easy of interpretation. 

The dielectric strength of air or disruptive critical gradient 
is that field intensity, which during the main free path of an ion 
gives it a velocity sufficient to produce ions by collision. The 
dielectric strength of air thus must be a constant, independent 
of the size and distance of the terminals. The corona then is 
the result of ionization by collision, and the density of the ions 
in the corona is enormously high compared with the highest 
natural ionization of air. Starting then from the few free ions 


—— * -=-. -. - 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1969 


existing near the conductor, in the formation of corona these 


ions accelerate by the dielectric field to form new ions by colli- 
sion, these again accelerate to collision velocity, and in this 
manner, by successive collisions of the free ions formed by colli- 
sion, gradually the ionic density increases to the value required 
to give conductivity and luminosity, that is, corona. Asa very 
large number of successive collisions are required to increase 
the ionic density to that in the corona, it follows that the ioniza- 
tion density of the dielectric field must extend over a distance 
from the conductor which is very large compared with the 
free path of the ion, that is, an envelope of finite thickness of 
over-strained air is required for corona formation, as brought 
out by the facts of Peek’s paper. Or, from the energy point of 
view, a finite amount of energy is required for corona formation: 


2 
the > 5 of all the ions which have been accelerated to 


collision velocity, until corona density of ions is reached. 

At lower air densities, the free path of the ions is longer and 
the field intensity required to produce collision velocity, that is, 
the disruptive critical gradient, or dielectric strength of air, 
proportionally lower. However, at the longer free path, a 
greater thickness of the envelope of over-strained air is required 
to increase the ionic density by successive collisions to that re- 
quired by the corona, and thus the visual critical gradient must 
vary less than proportionally to the air density, in agreement 
with the results of Whitehead’s paper, while the disruptive 
critical gradient should be directly proportional to the air 
density, as given by Peek’s paper. 

The free ionization of the air can have no effect on the critical 
alternating voltage, where corona begins, nor on the power loss, 
since at every half wave of alternating voltage the corona forma- 
tion starts not with the free ionization of the air, but with the 
residual ionization of the preceding half wave, which, while 
extremely small compared with the ionic density in the corona, 
is large compared with the free ionization of the air. This 
residual ionization, however, should to some extent vary with the 
frequency, and at higher frequency be higher, thus requiring a 
lesser thickness of the ionizing envelope, that is, a lower visual 
critical voltage ey, in accordance with Whitehead’s paper. Fol- 
lowing an exponential function, the ionic density at the forma- 
tion of the corona, and at its disappearance, should pass through 
the critical corona value very abruptly, that is, the point where 
corona forms, and where it disappears, should be the same and 
very sharply defined, as in agreement with empirical evidence. 

While the free ionization of the air can have no effect on alter- 
nating corona, it should have an effect on corona formation by a 
single voltage impulse of very short duration, and such a very 
short transient voltage should either give no corona at all—if 
its duration is less than the time required to reach corona density 


‘ 


1970 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


by successive collisions—or only at a very much higher, and 
more or less indefinite voltage. That is, a much greater thick- 
ness of ionizing envelope should be required to reach corona 
ionization from the low natural ionization of the air, than from 
the higher residual ionization of the alternating corona. With 
alternating corona, this should give a corona transient probably 
extending over several half waves. Experience seems to point 
to the absence, or the much lesser extent of corona with transient 
voltages, than with alternating voltages. Thus for instance 
insulators, designed to flash around much below their puncturing 
voltage, frequently puncture with transient voltages of short 
duration, as lightning, without flashing over. That is, with an 
alternating impressed voltage, corona spreads over the insulator 
until followed by a disruptive discharge over the surface, long 
before the disruptive strength of the insulator material is 
reached. At a short transient voltage, however, none or very 
little corona seems to form, and the flash-over voltage thus be- 
comes much higher, and above the puncture voltage. However, 
this entire field of corona formation with transient voltages, 
though of high industrial importance, is still practically un- 
known and work in its exploration is contemplated. 

Cassius M. Davis: During the investigations made to de- 
termine the relation between the visual corona voltage, the diam- 
eter of the conductors and the distances between them, the ob- 
servations were carried down to very small distances of separa- 
tion, even below the point where corona ceases to form and dis- 
ruptive discharge takes place, and some rather interesting re- 
sults were obtained. 

Where voltage is applied to two parallel wires or conductors 
the distribution of potential between the conductors is not 
uniform, but the potential gradient is greater at the conductor 
surface than at any other point. If the applied voltage is high 
enough the air immediately surrounding the wires becomes 
conducting and luminous as far as the potential gradient exceeds 
the dielectric strength of air. Since the medium surrounding 
the wires is now conducting, the real surface is no longer the 
metallic surface of the wire but some surface distant from it 
by the depth of the conducting envelope about it. The bound- 
ary of the corona is determined not by the equipotential sur- 
faces surrounding the conductor, but by the equigradient sur- 
faces. These curves are not concentric with the metallic con- 
ductors, but are nearer together. 

The general mechanism of corona formation may be de- 
scribed as follows: Upon the gradual increase of the applied 
voltage a value is reached which gives, at the conductor surface, 
a potential gradient sufficient to break down the air. In this 
way the air becomes conducting as far from the conductor as the 
gradient exceeds the breakdown value. This decreases the 
distance between the conductors, but increases their diameter. 
The former tends to increase, the latter to decrease the gradient 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO Ll 


at the surface of the effective conductor. If then the distance 
between the wires is large compared with their diameter, the 
decrease of gradient due to the increasing conductor diameter 
is greater than the increase due to their decreasing distance, 
since the decrease of distance is a relatively small part of the 
total distance between wires. At the outside of the effective 
conductor, that is, outside of the space filled by the conducting 
air or corona, the gradient is less than it would be at the surface 
of the wires, and the discharge between wires thus limits itself 
to a corona extending as a more or less uniform glow, up to the 
distance at which the potential gradient is the breakdown 
gradient. If, however, the distance between the conductors is 
so small that the increase of potential gradient due to the de- 
crease of distance between the effective conductors, resulting 
from the corona formation, would be greater than the decrease 


o 
Ss 
i} 
| 


10} ++ +—} - L —- 

eon le i | ! | i i 

andl SUERS RS MLO NTTE 18 LONI Ue Danie 15, 16pi7, 2d) 19) 20) 21 
DISTANCE BETWEEN WIRES IN CM. 


KILOVOLTS. CRITICAL VOLTAGE (MAX) 


Fic. 1 


due to the increasing conductor diameter, corona cannot form, 
but as soon as the discharge into the air begins at the conductor 
surface, it increases the potential gradient and thereby passes 
across between conductors as a disruptive discharge. Thus if 
the conducting envelope produces a decrease of the potential 
gradient between the wires, corona appears; if it produces an 
increase, disruptive discharge takes place. : 

The transition from disruptive discharge to corona 1s rather 
interesting to observe. Starting with the conductors very close 
together and gradually separating them, maintaining the po- 
tential at the critical value all the while, a point 1s reached where 
the disruptive discharges become less sharply defined and less 
snappy; and intermittently between the more noisy discharges 
are very quiet and what may be called “ puff discharges. These 
are intermediate in intensity between the disruptive and corona 


1972 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


discharges. If the distance is further increased a point will be 
found where corona begins, and by carefully adjusting the 
distance a position can be determined where, at the same applied 
potential difference, all three discharges take place one after 
another in various orders of succession. This shows very nicely 
that corona, like the Geissler tube discharge, is a form of dis- 
_ ruptive discharge. 
If the wires are separated by a greater amount than this 
critical distance and corona is produced at the critical voltage, 
a disruptive discharge may again be brought about by raising 
the voltage above the critical value of corona formation. Thus 
if a curve is plotted between voltage or potential gradient and 
separation between conductors it consists of a single line up to 
the critical distance, then at that point it divides, forming two 
branches, one for disruptive discharge and one for corona. Two 


POTENTIAL GRADIENT KV. PER CM. 


doce 


fe Lo! Jem 
0 1 28/8 4 5.6 7 8 O 10 1 12 13 1 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
DISTANCE BETWEEN WIRES IN CM, 


Fic. 2 


such curves, one showing the voltage, the other the potential 
gradient at the conductor surface, are given in Figs. 1 and 2. 
The critical distance where corona begins increases with in- 
creasing diameter and should probably be of such a value as to 
give a constant ratio between the separation distance and the 
diameter. It is rather difficult to calculate this ratio because 
of the complex shape of the equigradient surfaces. Based on 
cylinders whose sections are circles concentric with the metallic 
conductor, the ratio is about 3.3; and based on cylinders whose 
sections are eccentric circles with constant distance between the 
outside surfaces, the ratio is about 4.1. Experimentally this 
ratio seems to be about 25, indicating that the precise shape of 
the equigradient surfaces should be determined and used in the 
calculation. The accompanying table gives the experimental 
values of the diameter, critical distance, critical potential dif- 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1973 


ference to neutral in kilovolts, gradient at the surface and ratio 
of critical distance to diameter. 


Critical Visual Potential Ratio 

Diameter distance critical gradient critical distance 
cm. * cm. potential at surface diameter 

0.0344 1.8 aS 96.4 §2.3 
0.0780 AM 13.0 81.1 34.6 
0.1662 3.6 19.7 66.4 21.6 
0.204 3'..6 20.7 60.6 17.6 
0.320 fe: 35.0 58.6 24.4 
0.513 it: 13.3, 49.1 50.2 25.1 


No great accuracy is claimed for these results, since the 
apparatus used in the experiments was designed to be em- 
ployed for comparatively great distances, and small distances 
were difficult to measure accurately; however, they serve to show 
_the general magnitude of the values. 

The disruptive branches beyond the critical distance (giving 
the relation between voltage and size of conductors) approach 
each other, and beyond separation distances of 10 cm. have 
practically the same values for wire diameters within the range 
used in the tests. The lower end of the disruptive branch, that 
is, the part below the critical distance, seems to point toward 
approximately the value 30 kv., at zero distance, determining 
the dielectric strength of air in another way. This is reasonable 
because the surfaces when very close together become planes 
and the distance between them becomes less than the thickness 
of any envelope of conducting air around them, and thus the 
gradient at the surface of the conductor becomes the breakdown 
gradient of air. 

The accuracy with which the critical voltage can be determined 
visually is quite remarkable. Observations can be made with 
very little practise which check within one per cent of each 
other. This applies as well for laboratory measurements as for 
determinations made upon an actual transmission line. The 
visual method has the advantage over other methods in that the 
effect of point discharges can be eliminated since a portion of 
the conductor can be selected for observations which is free 
from irregularities. That the visual point is the point where 
ionization begins is very nicely illustrated in the papers by 
Messrs. Whitehead and Peek, in which, working independently, 
each derives almost the identical equation for critical voltage: 
one using the ionization point, the other the visual point; one 
using a conductor concentrically located in a cylinder, the 
other two parallel wires. 

The appearance of corona is greatly dependent upon the 
surface condition of the conductor. A perfectly sinooth and 
polished copper wire exhibits corona as.a very soft uniform 


1974 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR {June 29 


glow; however, if the discharge is allowed to continue a short 
time the glow becomes less homogeneous and soon appears 1n 
tufts with the space between almost non-luminous, giving the 
wire the appearance of a string of bright beads. An examina- 
tion of the conductor after this ‘‘ beading ’’ has continued a while 
shows alternate stripes of the bright wire and dull oxide which 
latter rubs off easily as a black substance. 

The mass of information now available upon the subject of 
corona formation on transmission lines is quite voluminous, and 
high-potential lines can be designed with considerable accuracy 
with regard to the amount of energy dissipated into the air; 
also the critical voltages can be calculated very accurately and 
avoided. With other apparatus conditions are different, and 
while the critical voltage can be estimated very closely, and in a 
measure avoided, yet with insulation other than air, which is 
hardly ever homogeneous, and very limited distances of separa- 
tion, the means of eliminating corona and its accompanying 
deleterious effects are less understood and a very large field is 
offered for investigation. 

A. B. Hendricks, Jr.: One of the most striking features of 
the papers of Whitehead and Peek is the great accuracy of the 
results reported, especially in the determination of the voltage 
required to produce visual and audible corona. This at once 
suggests the possibility of constructing a corona voltmeter as 
proposed by Professor Ryan and others—and its use for high- 
tension measurements in place of the needle point spark gap. 
Such an instrument could be made to give both visible and audible 
indications with a probable accuracy of one-half per cent. 

The form and arrangement of electrodes should of course be 
such as to produce corona at a voltage far below the arcing volt- 
age, thus avoiding short circuits and high-frequency oscillations 
in the high-potential system. This feature, together with the 
reliability of the indications, would render the device very valu- 
able for high-tension investigations and much superior to the 
needle point spark gap. 

The accuracy of Whitehead and Peek’s measurements also 
demonstrates the usefulness of the voltmeter coil on the high- 
tension transformer core, as nearly allof the determinations were 
made by this means, though checked by independent methods. 
This method has met with some criticism on the score of alleged 
inaccuracy, therefore the results are very gratifying and furnish 
sufficient proof of reliability. 

Theory seems to indicate that the dielectric strength of the 
air between concentric cylinders is a maximum for a ratio of 
cylinder diameters equal to 2.718 or the base of the natural 
logarithms. Experiment shows that this is not the case but that 
the actual ratio is very much greater. For example—with a 
diameter of 5} in. for the outer cylinder, the maximum was 
reached with an inner cylinder one-eighth inch in diameter, 
whereas theory indicates that this should be one and five-eighths 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1975 


inches. The most definite results I have obtained illustrating 
this point, are on transformer oil and are best shown by the ac- 
companying curve Fig. 1. In this case, the ratio of diameters 
for maximum dielectric strength was found equal to seven. 
Possibly from their own investigations, the authors may be 
able to give an explanation of the cause of this discrepancy. 
At any rate, the fact seems to be established and should be 
taken into account in high-tension design. 

Another interesting phenomenon, though not directly con- 

Hecica With the subject sol yo 
these papers, is the effect of ae La 
pressure on the dielectric 4 
strength of oil. I have in- 
vestigated this point but 
slightly and find that the 
dielectric strength is increased 
about 50 per cent by a rise in 
gage pressure from zero to 
200 lb. per squareinch. Pre- 
sumably others have more | 
complete information regard- 0 I 2 Se oiat taea) 
ing this effect, and, if so, it OUTSIDE DIAM. OF INNER CYLINDER IN INCHES 
Pe evected that their resulta? “iside diamever oflouter: cylinder =5:20 in. 
would be of great value and d= outside diameter of inner cylinder = 0.005 
interest if presented to this a Oe: 
Institute. This property of oil 
may render possible the con- 
struction of apparatus for extreme high tensions, normally 
operating under high oil pressure. 

Charles F. Scott: I will not attempt to contribute to the 
technical discussion of the subject. The former speakers have 
dwelt upon these technical points and given a most excellent 
discussion. I would like, for a moment, however, to take a 
general survey, to show the progress we are making in trans- 
mission. 

It is not so very many years since 40,000 volts marked the 
high range of potential of operating pressure. A paper before 
the Institute a dozen or thirteen years ago, describing Mr. 
Mershon’s work at Telluride, gives tests which were limited to 
two and a half or three miles in length, in which the voltages 
used were in the main from 50,000 to 70,000, although a few 
tests ran up to 110,000 volts, which I believe was the limit of 
insulation of the transformer, as demonstrated by the test 
itself, with inadequate instruments and methods devised by Mr. 
Mershon on the ground under the greatest difficulties—those 
were the conditions only a few years ago. 

A few years later, in the static investigations to which the 
Chairman referred, which were made by Mr. Thomas himself, 
the potential was as high as seventy thousand volts, and the 
tests were made on a number of commercial lines in the West. 


2) 
Ss 
9 


- 
Ss 


ww 
c—) 

| 

| 

| 


ARCING VOLTAGE KILOVOLTS EFFECTIVE 
S 
Ss 


Fic. 1.—Arcing voltage between con- 
centric cylinders under oil 


1976 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


Now, we have tests covering three hundred miles of line, for 
normal operation, at 100,000 volts, and we have a fundamental 
knowledge of the phenomena on which to base the tests, which are 
made with instruments which were not in existence until a few 
years ago. The oscillograph has opened up and given us photo- 
graphs of just what is going on which made possible a new 
order of investigation and enlightenment. 

A word should be said as to the amount of time, labor and 
money which must be expended on tests of this kind; also com- 
mendation should be made of the excellent policy of presenting 
so freely and fully these measurements before the Institute, not 
only with the results obtained on lines in the west, but those 
on the experimental lines at Schenectady. The general result 
of all these investigations has been most valuable. All papers 
of this morning have contributed to our kriowledge of the con- 
ditions in the high-voltage field, and have not busied themselves 
in bringing up impediments and difficulties, but they have de- 
fined the conditions of operation, and have been extending the 
possibilities and the certainties of high-tension transmission by 
showing definitely what those conditions are. Sometimes 
papers deal with the discovery of some phenomena which are 
impediments, sometimes papers deal with special devices for 
overcoming special difficulties, but here we have a larger sci- 
entific investigation, showing what the conditions are, and 
fortunately, if I am not mistaken, not bringing up new hin- 
drances, but blazing the way for the extended commercial de- 
velopment of high-tension transmission and making its operation 
more sure. 

Harris J. Ryan: Dr. Whitehead has evolved out of the 
original crude concentric cylinders outfit for the laboratory 
study of corona an instrument of precision that offers a wide 
range of application in the exact study of the essentials of corona 
phenomena. In the concentric cylinders method the atmosphere 
between the cylinders is stressed in a balanced electric field. 
When the surface of the central cylinder is true and free from all 
foreign material, ideal conditions exist and the turbulent ele- 
ments that enter into the practical case, giving rise to the “ ir- 
regularity factor,’ are absent. Dr. Whitehead’s studies are 
therefore particularly valuable because his results constitute 
a foundation or base upon which to rest judgment of the condi- 
tions and relations that exist in the practical cases as they arise. 
He has found that the electric surface-intensities which start to 
cover a clean cylindrical conductor with visible corona in a 
balanced electric field are 


13.4 
E aa = 32 —— 
1= Ay = 32+ "i 


while Mr. Peek has found that these same corresponding electric 
intensities which start to cover a clean cylindrical conductor 


— 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1977 


in the unbalanced field set up between two equal parallel cylinders 
are 


=29.8+ oe es 


nt) 
Vd 


E, =29.8 (1 os 
‘anes 


The ratios of these corresponding values are nearly constant 
for all diameters likely to be employed in engineering, as may be 
seen in the table below: 


| 
| d Eo Ey 
cms, kv/em. kv/cm. E;/Eo | 
| 0.2 61.95 58.17 0.939 | 
2.0 41.47 38.77 0.935 
| 6.0 37.46 34.98 0.934 
: | 


When these formulas are applied to the case of parallel plate 
electrodes, Vd=, and the values of Ey and F, are the cor- 


‘responding ultimate dielectric strengths of the normal atmos- 


phere stressed by a uniform electric field: 

E,)=32 kilovolts per centimeter, 

E,=29.8 kilovolts per centimeter. 

There should be no question about the integrity of each of 
these values. Their ratio is 


For some time physicists have concluded through methods 
peculiar to their studies of the conduction of electricity through 
gases that the dielectric strength against rupture of the normal . 
atmosphere using unbalanced electric fields in the open is quite 
close to 30 kv. per cm. Mr. Peek’s value of 29.8 found by 
totally different methods is quite in agreement therewith. Dr. 
Whitehead’s value of 32 applies to the normal atmosphere en- 
closed and stressed in a balanced electric field. It applies, there- 
fore, to conditions in which all irregularity effects are quite 
completely eliminated. Therefore, one may safely use 32 kv. 
per cm. for the ultimate dielectric strength of the normal at- 
mosphere in constructing a rational formula for the critical 
visual corona voltage provided the factor 0.93 is included, 
due to the change in the electric fields from one that is enclosed 
and balanced to one that is in the open and unbalanced, 7.e., 
as set up between two equal parallel cylinders. 

In the present papers we have placed before us’ conclusive 
evidence that corona starts to cover a round conductor in the 
open when the normal air is stressed to 30 kv. per cm. at a 


distance of a=0.301 V7 cm. radially from the conductor surface. 


1978 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


The theory of ionization by collision which accounts for this 
phenomenon insists that the normal rupturing strength, 30 kv. 
per cm., must be directly proportional to the atmospheric density 
factor 


3.92 b 


= 97341 


and to 0.301Vr.f(6). There is substantial evidence* that 


f (6) in 0.301 Vr .f (6) is so nearly constant and so near unity 
over the whole range of natural atmospheric variations observed 
by barometer and thermometer that it is entirely safe to use 


f (6) =1 in a=0.301 Vr.f (6). Thus beyond all doubt, so far as 
theoretical reasoning can settle such matters, the barometer- 
thermometer correction factor in the rational visual corona 
critical voltage formula must be 


_ 3.926 


a5 273+1 


Dr. Whitehead has again undertaken to show that I am wrong 
in regard to the effect of electrified atmosphere upon the visual 
corona critical voltage; he does this by proving what I have all 
along stoutly maintained, viz., that no amount of electrification 
will alter the critical voltage as observed in his apparatus. The 
theory of ionization by collision that applies here necessarily 
makes this so. In the open atmosphere about parallel cylinders 
which never remain ‘‘ clean ’’ and with their unbalanced electric 
field it is a different matter. The ‘coring up’’ phenomenon 
comes in and electrification or ‘‘ antecedent ionization ’’ intro- 
duces part-corona or local corona which starts at lower surface 
gradients and therefore at lower critical voltages. He also 
renews his objection to the experiment referred to in Fig. 28+ 
of my January 138, 1911, paper. My reply to that objection 
appearst{ in the corona discussion published in the TRANSACTIONS, 
1911, XXX, I. He offers also the conjecture that some of the 
surface intensities reported in my paper are erratic as to position 
because of lack of care as to high-voltage wave forms employed 
and in making the visual settings for the initial corona. I do not 
think this is so. I refer to this matter later on so as to reply to 
the question here raised. 

Regarding Mershon’s work at Niagara Falls referred to several 
times in the present corona papers, anyone who repeats Mer- 
shon’s observations at the same point as to location and under 
the same circumstances as to wind and weather should find just 
about the same values that he found. In doing this the be- 
~ *[Transactions A. I. E. E., 1911, XXX, Part I, curves I and III Fig. 4, 


p. 6; also, compare the Townsend values Fig. 156, p. 21 and the B-P-S 
values of Fig. 6, p. 8 of the same paper. 


{See TRANsactTions, 1911, XXX, I, p. 52. { p. 127. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1979 


havior of the high-voltage circuit with ungrounded neutral 
must be kept in mind, as well as the importance of the electrifica- 
tion of the atmosphere produced by the falls in connection with 
conductors having surfaces in various physical states. 

All who are interested in the corona problem will find Mr. Peek’s 
paper a mine of valuable results, well produced and applied. 
His work has decided a number of things about which uncer- 
tainties have heretofore existed. He shows conclusively that: 

1. The dielectric strength of the normal atmosphere at 
rupture is very close to 30 kv. per cm. This is in agreement 
with the corresponding value found by the physicists who have 
employed entirely different methods. 

2. Corona will form and cover the surface of a clean conductor 
in the normal air whenever the potential of the conductor is 
raised to the value whereat the air is stressed to the breaking 
point, 30 kv. per cm., at a critical distance normal to the con- 
ductor surface, thus vindicating the conclusions drawn from the 
results of Steinmetz and Hayden by the energy-storage method, 
of Townsend through his established theory of ionization 
by collision and of Baille-Paschen-Schuster by the critical spark- 
ing distances between metal spheres. 

3. The initial corona-forming voltage is proportional to the 
density of the atmosphere. ' 

4. An irregularity factor must be applied in the rational formula 
for the initial corona voltage in the practical case because of 
turbulent elements that are not subject to systematic coordina- 
tion. Judgment with a knowledge of the conditions must be 
employed to determine the value of this irregularity factor. 


In addition thereto the paper gives the law governing the 
loss of power in corona about a high-tension transmission line 
as the voltage is elevated from the corona-starting value. This 
is likewise of much importance. It will help the engineer to 
know in advance how much power will be lost by corona in a 
high-tension transmission that must in emergencies or otherwise 
be operated at a voltage above that which inaugurates corona. 
It is altogether possible, too, that high-tension transmission lines 
may be operated at critical corona voltage over strategic sec- 
tions or over branches, loaded or unloaded, as an aid to or as a 
substitute for the static arrester. Should such practise come 
about this corona power law will become invaluable in connec- 
tion therewith. 

Mr. Peek has found that the critical radial distance from the 
cylindrical conductor surface through the initial corona envelope 
is such as to make the radius of the outer surface of the envelope 


py (1+ 1) pA. 80S 
© 


wherein 1, is the radius of such corona envelope; 
r is the radius of the conductor. 


1980 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


It is a great satisfaction to find that the thickness of the 
initial corona envelope is a simple function of the radius of the 
conductor, because the rational derivation of the initial corona- 
forming voltage formula must include this thickness. There 
can be no question about the integrity of this result, applicable 
to engineering sizes. There are at hand three independent 
checks, as follows: 

Dr. Whitehead’s corona-starting surface-intensities are given 
by the expression 


13.4 


=9,=32+—— 
E=g Aaah ye 


which may be written in the form 


sais (eee re ) 
Lome pre 


a=0.296 Vr 


wherein a is the corona striking distance or thickness of the 
initial corona envelope, corresponding to Mr. Peek’s value: 


a=0.301 Vr 


The critical striking distances between metal spheres in the 
normal atmosphere observed by continuous voltage many 
years ago* give an average of 


a=0.300 Vr 


Mr. Peek’s method for evaluating a has been applied to the 
surface-intensity values observed some years ago by the con- 
centric cylinders visual method.t (See accompanying diagram 
Fig. 1.) The resulting value of the initial corona thickness is 


a=0.316 Vr 


These are all in remarkable agreement, considering the cir- 
cumstances. Less confidence is placed in the last value than in 
the others. It is higher by five per cent, due more likely to the 
character of the surfaces of the conductors used than to errors 
in observation. All settings were repeated several times; wave- 
forms were watched by means of a special oscillograph con- 
nected in series with the high-tension test circuit, also in series 
with an air condenser across such circuit, besides, the maximums 
of all high-voltage waves were carefully checked with needle 


*TRANSACTIONS A. I. E. E., 1911, Vol. XXX, I, p. 8. 
{Transactions A, I. E. E., 1904, Vol. XXIII, p. 101. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1981 


point spark gaps. It is not thought that these 1904 values are 
erratic so much through errors of observation as suggested by 
Dr. Whitehead in his present paper. The cause is probably the 
condition of the surfaces of the brass rods used for all sizes above 
0.2 inch. While clean in the ordinary sense they were not 
‘clean ’’ as the present day corona term implies. It is a happy 
event to have this corona feature cleared up so well by Mr. 
Peek. It establishes the integrity of the rational formula for 
the visual critical corona voltage, which is written by him thus: 


0.189 S 
ey =2.302 my Zo OF 1+ = logic Sayre at .[(5a) p. 1899] 
r 
520 — L < 
180 ; a aaa a 
440 
400 is 
360 . 
oO 
z geo t 
ui 280}—+ 
oOo 
he ao} T 
al 
Q 200 > 5 
g £ 
=" 160 = 
2 1 ; gy=76.(1 +9182) 7 IN INCHES 
J 120 4 ried 
= % y= 30.(1-+ S31) In cM 
50 
* a ] 


CMG AES MLO nL aL Loot No 20 eae Are 20ST Eo? 
Ge’ r, IN INCHES 


Bic 


and as given in the January 1911 corona paper thus: 


17.96 d+2a 
ieee a 


wherein E.,i; =critical loss in kilovolts, effective sine-wave. 
(This is the same as visual critical voltage.) 


Eiri =0.455 k [((3) p. 69, Part I] 


k  =factor selected by judgment guided by the results 
of practical tests and experience. | 

d  =outer diameter of wires or cables in inches. 

a@  =corona striking distance in inches obtained from 


curve in Fig. 2, p. 4, Part I. 
= barometer, inches of mercury. 
=temperature, degs. fahr. 
=capacity of the line in microfarads per 1000 feet. 


es eis 


1982 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


This applies to the single-phase line. For the three-phase 
line, Evin and C are taken to neutral. 
Substituting Mr. Peek’s function for the conductor radius, 


0.301 Vr, for the corona striking distance or thickness of the 
initial corona envelope (a) the above formula [(3) p. 69] becomes 
in English measure 


17.96 d+0.267 Vd 


vee Pe is 
Keri 0.455 k 459+1 C at a Dey qlee Leia 


or, in Mr. Peek’s notation: 


d+0.267 Vd 


e,=0.455 m, 6 C 


This is a somewhat more convenient form of the rational 
formula for use. One can take the values of C from the usual 
capacity tables in lieu of having to work out logs/r. This 
formula has now been checked for all conductor sizes varying 
from diameters of 0.005 to 0.5 of an inch, while there is good 
laboratory evidence through the critical surface intensities and 
striking distances found with spherical electrodes that the 
formula will be correct for all conductor diameters below 2.5 in. 

It is a matter, for the present at least, more of theoretical 
than of practical interest, that a=0.189 Vr does not hold for 
diameters much above 2.5 in. Where r=, i.e., with plate 
electrodes, this value for a becomes », while under these cir- 
cumstances the critical surface-intensity occurs at a striking 
distance already known to be 


a=(0.268 inch. 
Available evidence shows that the value of a as a function of 


the conductor radius or rather of the diameter d between the 
limits of d=0.25 in. and d= © will be found to be quite close to 


2a=——; lnm 
1.4+4+1.86d 

a eT 
hess 


When d=, 


a=0.268 inch. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1983 


The corresponding rational formula for the critical visual 
corona voltage would be 


1 d 
el 0485 on 
eu 0-455 my 0 (er) C 


This formula is in close agreement with Mr. Peek’s correspond- 
ing formula for all diameters from 0.25 to 2.5 in. while it is 
probably quite correct for all larger diameters. As just stated, 
it is perhaps more of theoretical than of practical interest. 
However, it is in further support of the integrity of Mr. Peek’s 


values, a=0.189 V7, because the relation 


2a= e 
1.4+1.86d 

is known to be true for the largest diameter, d=0o, and atthe 

same time covers his values between the limits d=0.25 and 

is DAS 

The critical striking distance a is now known, therefore, quite 
exactly between the limits of d=0.005 and d=0.5 in. and its 
function of the conductor diameter for all larger sizes is probably 
known within five per cent of the true values. 

Mr. Peek’s conclusions in regard to the values of the irregu- 
larity factor are important, based as they are on such extensive 
outdoor line tests. They are further supported by a considerable 
number of less comprehensive tests reported in the present 
TRANSACTIONS.* His formulas (3) and (5) for “disruptive critical 
voltage’ are rational in their derivation and their constants 
are now all known with fair exactness; exception is made for the 
irregularity factor (m,); which in the nature of things must, in 
part at least, be settled by judgment. The facts brought out in 
this paper are a great help to decide upon the value of this 
factor in most actual cases as they arise. In due course of time, 
doubtless, more data will be brought forward to help one to 
decide upon this factor under the most trying or extraordinary 
conditions. These formulas (8) and (5) will hereafter be a 
reliable guide to the high-tension engineer in designing trans- 
mission lines so that waste of power in corona will be avoided. 

The high-voltage measurements here reported upon were 
made on circuits operated with the neutral grounded. This 
should always be the case when definite results are to be obtained. 
Initial corona values on a completely insulated high-voltage 
circuit in the open will vary somewhat because the absolute 
potential of the line, under these circumstances, will vary, due 
to the electrification of the atmosphere. Unless the purpose is 


SS eee eee 
*Transactions A. I. E. E., 1911, Vol. XXX, I, p. 70. 


1984 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


to watch the varying effects upon initial corona values due to 
the electrification of the atmosphere surrounding a completely 


insulated high-tension circuit such circuit should be grounded | 


at the neutral. 

John B. Whitehead: Before replying to the discussion of 
my own paper I shall comment briefly on that of Mr. Peek. 
The Institute is to be congratulated on the mass of data which it 
contains and on the liberal spirit of the company he represents 
not only in conducting the experiments, but in offering the results 
to the profession. Such experiments on a scale approaching the 
conditions of practise, paralleled by accurate laboratory in- 
vestigations, will quickly settle the uncertainties of this great 
corona problem or indeed of any other of the many constantly 
before us in the applications of electricity. It is a great pleasure 
to find that where the work of Mr. Peek has coincided in sphere 
with my own, the results are in such good agreement. 

The title of my paper is the ‘‘ Electric Strength of Air.” 
The word electric indicates that the air is considered as regards 
its behavior under electric intensity or strain. The word “ di- 
electric ’’ by its origin and long usage refers to the inductive prop- 
erty of a substance, which property has no definite relation to 
its disruptive strength. The term “dielectric strength ” 
therefore suggests the specific inductive capacity or perhaps 
some limit of specific inductive capacity. The term as adopted 
by Mr. Peek to describe the disruptive strength has been used 
rather commonly in this country, but the origin and present 
sense of the word dielectric would seem to indicate that its use 
in this connection is a mistaken one. 

A further question of terminology is suggested by the ex- 
pression “‘ disruptive critical voltage.’’ As defined by Mr. Peek 
the “ disruptive gradient "’ for air is constant; it is the same for 
all sizes of wire and cable and has the value 380 kv. percm. The 
obvious objection to this definition lies in the fact that the air 
will break down under this gradient only in the theoretical 
case of infinite parallel planes, and that it may be subjected to 
far higher gradients in the neighborhood of wires and cables 
without giving any evidence whatever of breakdown or loss. 
Mr. Peek and Dr. Steinmetz, to explain this inconsistency, state 
that in the case of wires or cables the ‘ disruptive gradient ”’ 
must be reached at a distance from the surface. Now this means 
either that breakdown occurs first at a distance from the surface, 
a condition of which there is no experimental evidence, or that 
the first breakdown occurs at a higher gradient than 30 kv. per 
cm. Since it is certain that a higher gradient than 30 kv. per 
cm. can be applied to air without breaking it down, we are 
hardly justified in saying that its electric strength is constant, 
or in calling the constant term of my formula (1) [Mr. Peek’s 
corresponding formula has no reference number], a ‘“‘ critical ”’ 
gradient. 


By producing the quadratic loss curves backward to the 


~_ * 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1985 


voltage of zero loss Mr. Peek deduces a series of values of voltage 
gradient whose mean is very close to the value 80 kv. per cm. 
above referred to and this is his principle reason for defining 
this constant gradient as “‘ disruptive gradient ”’ as already dis- 
cussed. This approximate constancy is extremely interesting 
as there is no obvious reason why it should occur. It must be 
remembered, however, that the quadratic law is obeyed with great 
accuracy by all the observations on the upper portions of the 
curve, whereas there is a rather wide percentage variation among 
the gradients calculated as above described, almost too wide to 
be attributed to experimental error. Further, since the quadratic 
law is deduced from the portion of the curve above the visual 
corona voltage, and since the latter is always greater than that 
corresponding to the constant term of my equation (1), it may 
be that the approximate agreement of the zero-loss-gradient, 
as obtained by extending the quadratic curve backward, and 
the constant term is fortuitous. 

A third reason for defining the ‘‘ disruptive critical voltage ’ 
is that suggested by Mr. Davis in his experiments on the spark- 


y 


- ing voltage of two wires brought close together. He states 


that sparking sometimes takes place at lower voltages than 
those corresponding to corona voltage. I should be very much 
interested to see a more detailed account of his experiments and 
observations. There are several evident reasons which might 
explain a lowering of the sparking voltage below that correspond- 
ing to visual corona intensity. First, with parallel wires close 
together the equipotential gradient surfaces, if I may use the 
term, are not concentric with the wires. This means that the 
total circumference of such a surface is greater in the case of 
the parallel wires than in the case of concentric cylinders. This 
means that the volume of air involved in the strain of a given 
value of gradient is greater in the former case. We have already 
seen that in the case of larger volumes, as for example with larger 
wires in the case of concentric cylinders, the breakdown takes 
place at a lower value of gradient. Another possible cause for 
lowering of the sparking gradient is the drawing together of the 
wires by electrostatic attraction or a lack of true straightness. 
It is possible that errors of this nature were provided against, 
but the apparatus described by Mr. Peek shows a span rather 
long as compared with the small distances suggested by Mr. 
Davis. 

Mr. Peek has accepted Ryan’s conclusion that the disruptive 
critical voltage or rupturing gradient varies directly as the at- 
mospheric pressure. He also finds from his own experiments 
that these quantities vary inversely as the absolute temperature. 
My experiments are at considerable variance with these conclu- 
sions. As regards temperature neither Mr. Peek’s nor my own 
experiments are sufficiently extended to justify a discussion of 
their differences. In the matter of pressure, however, my paper 
describes experiments showing that while the relation between 


1986 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


critical gradient and pressure is linear, it is not one of direct 
proportionality, and further, the slope of the linear relation varies 
with the size of wire. Dr. Steinmetz states that there is no real 
discrepancy, and explains in terms of his idea of the storage of 
energy in an envelope of air around the wire. Among other 
things he states: ‘‘ At lower air densities the energy of the di- 
electric field is less.” This idea is also adopted by Mr. Peek 
in a reference to the Hayden-Steinmetz paper in which Dr. 
Steinmetz first introduced it. The suggestion is a novel one, 
but in the absence of confirmatory experimental evidence or 
further explanation of the form of the stored energy and of its 
relation to present physical theory, it is hardly possible that it 
will be accepted in explanation of the phenomena we are now 
discussing. Dr. Steinmetz makes some further interesting 
suggestions in his explanations in terms of the ionization theory. 
It is regrettable that he has no interest in this theory. If there 
is one thing it does do it is to permit quantitative calculations; 
in the hands of Dr. Steinmetz, with his splendid power of analysis, 
I believe that many of our present uncertainties in this most 
fascinating field would be cleared up, and new problems set 
before us. Professor Ryan remarks that my conclusions as to 
the absence of the influence of foregoing ionization on the corona 
voltage are in accord with his own, and that therefore my refer- 
ence to his three-wire experiment is pointless. Replying I would 
state that even if a distinction between ‘‘ part corona”’ and 
‘full corona ’”’ be granted, no conclusions are permissible from 
his experiment since the voltage gradients are necessarily different 
in the two conditions which he compares. 

F. W. Peek, Jr.: When the investigations given in the present 
paper were first planned it was decided to erect a short ex- 
perimental line to represent practical conditions, and to supple- 
ment this study by extensive laboratory work. A short line of 
this sort has the advantage over a long operating line in that there 
are no impossible corrections to make due to voltage rise and 
variable elevations, weather, temperature, etc., along the line. 
Thousands of readings were taken for various conditions. The 
present paper though quite long is necessarily very much con- 
densed on account of the vast amount of material to discuss. 
While the formulas given cover any conditions to be met with 
in practise, as frequency range, natural range of barometric 
pressure, etc., it is hoped at some future date to go further into 
the relations determined, more from the speculative and the- 
oretical standpoint. For instance in the expression: 


Vr is probably the first term of a convergent series, etc. 
Dr. Whitehead’s paper deals with what comes under visual 


op 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1987 


test, Section VIII, of my paper. Dr. Whitehead is to be con- 
geratulated on the ingenious and accurate method which he has 
devised to determine the critical surface intensity and also 
upon the general arrangement of his data. In our laboratory 
tests we have preferred the visual method in determining the 
critical intensity as it has been found to give consistent results, 
is easy of manipulation, and the effects of slight imperfections on 
the conductor surface can be seen at once and eliminated. Dr. 
Steinmetz has pointed out that the discrepancies between Dr. 
Whitehead’s paper and mine are only apparent. Thus go should » 
be independent of the frequency and proportional to the air 
density, but the visual critical gradient g., covered by Dr. 
Whitehead’s experiments, should be dependent on, and increase 
with the frequency, to some extent, as greater energy is stored 
in the ‘“ disruptive envelope ”’ for a given thickness, as the fre- 
quency is raised. For a similar reason g, should probably vary 
more slowly than the air density. Thus theoretically both 6 and f 
should enter the constant 0.301 in the relation between g, and 
go. However, this correction is very small in the practical 
ranges of frequency and natural atmospheric conditions. The 
ionic theory can be nicely applied here, as Dr. Steinmetz and 
Professor Ryan have shown. 

Dr. Whitehead objects to the term “‘ disruptive critical volt- 
age”. As there is every evidence that two critical voltages 
exist, they must be distinguished. The term was introduced 
to separate this constant gradient critical voltage from the 
already known visual critical voltage. The various evidences 
of the disruptive critical voltage or a constant breakdown 
gradient for air are: 

1. The eo of the quadratic law gives a constant gradient. 


2. The e in the equation ¢, =éo 147 : 
r 


3. Observations of Professor Ryan and others, who have de- 
termined a constant breakdown gradient of air of about 30 kilo- 
volts per cm. 

4. The reason suggested in the discussion of Mr. Davis. 

All the values agree in magnitude and point to this constant 
breakdown gradient. 

Dr. Whitehead states that the go values vary to a considerable 
extent. It must be remembered that these values were not de- 
termined on short lengths of carefully polished conductors in a 
laboratory as were the gy values, but on weathered wires out of 
doors, on an actual line, and having a considerable range of 
surface conditions or irregularity factors. It also must be 
remembered that e) is not determined directly as é& but by an 
indirect method which would also account for variations, as 
discussed in the paper. 

Mr. Hendricks’ experimental observations that the strength 
of air between two concentric cylinders is not a maximum when 


1988 ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR [June 29 


the ratio of diameters is 2.718, as theory would at first seem to 
indicate, but at a greater ratio, I think is what would be ex- 
pected. Thus before the spark-over potential is reached the 
inner cylinder has a much greater diameter, due to the con- 
ducting corona envelope, and the actual metallic ratio is not the 
true ratio, 

Professor Ryan has added a very interesting and instructive 
discussion. Of special interest is the value of a that he has 
deduced. Thus he has taken values from his paper of 1904 and 
deduced values of a, the thickness of the ‘‘ energy envelope ’’, 
by the method described in my paper, for comparison. The 
close agreement between these values and those of the present 
papers is quite remarkable. Professor Ryan has also shown that 
this is in agreement with measurements made on spheres some 
years ago. 


A discussion al the 28th Annual Convention of 
the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1912. By A.I.E.E. 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 


INTRODUCTION 
BY PERCY H, THOMAS 


The High-Tension Transmission Committee this year wished 
to give opportunity for the consideration of matters pertaining 
to the design and operation of extra high tension transmission 
systems, that is, systems of 80,000 volts or higher. As we have 
a number of these systems in actual operation, the time appears 
ripe for a first discussion or interchange of ideas on this subject. 
The committee during the early part of the year sent out a list 
of questions to some seven plants, which are operating at such 
voltages, with a request for brief categorical answers to the 
questions which had_been prepared. The committee has te- 
ceived from Messrs. Jollyman, Lee, Hebgen and Hanscom the 
four following communications. 

The original questions were as follows: 


1. Do you operate with a grounded neutral? If so, with or without 
resistance, with how much and of what type? 

2. Do you use overhead ground wires, if so how many and how spaced 
and how frequently grounded? 

3. Standard span, length, material of conductor, spacing of con- 
ductors, clearance from the earth, etc. Also, data on special spans of 
interest. 

4. Occurrences of lightning, how frequent, its effects on the system. 

5. What is the charging current of your line? Give if possible accurate 
data as to length of line, size and spacing of conductors, frequency, etc., 
at the time of the making of the measurement. Note any peculiarity in 
charging current. oe 

6. Experience with insulators, electrical and mechanical, swinging of 
conductors with suspension insulators. — 

7. Experience with high-tension switches, opening charging current 
and load current, type of switch used. ; 

8. Supply and control of charging current; is there synchronous 
receiving apparatus on line? Minimum size of generator and trans- 
former units. Actual number and capacity of generators connected to 
the system. ‘ 

9, Experience with outlets and terminals. — 3 

10. Experience with electrolytic and other high-tension arresters, 
11. Experience with wind and sleet. 


1989 


1990 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


12. Experience with corona effects. : ; 

13. Experience with telephone communication and disturbance thereof. 
14. Regulation. ‘ 

15. Notes on towers, type, foundations, corrosion, etc. 

16. How long has your system been operating at its present voltage? 


I will take a few minutes to bring out some of the matters which 
appear to be of greatest interest in these reports, and make some 
comments based on other data. The general conclusion from 
these communications seems to be that the operation of 80,000 
and 100,000 volt systems is satisfactory, not that operation is 
perfect in all cases, but that it is as satisfactory as operation 
at lower voltages. 

It appears from the actual experiences of these plants that 
some of them are very close to the practical corona limit. Al- 
though no plant is actually handicapped in its operation by 
corona loss, there is good evidence that the voltage could not be 
greatly raised in these cases without a serious loss. We can 
now figure quite closely, however, in future plants on the results 
we may expect to get. 

The feature of greatest interest is the operation and design of 
the constructions utilizing conductors hung on suspended insu- 
lators, conductors which are not mechanically rigidly fixed 
to the tower at the insulator, as with the pin type. You will all 
recognize that wires suspended in this manner become what 
may be called an elastic medium, that is, if there is a displacement 
in the wire at any tower, lengthwise or sideways, there is a re- 
turning force, which gives the effect of elasticity to the wires. 
The wires also have inertia. We have, then, elasticity and inertia, 
which are two quantities necessary to produce wave motion 
in any other mechanical device. Elasticity and inertia cor- 
respond to capacity and inductance, respectively, in transmission 
circuits. 

We must then consider whether we are to experience in sus- 

-pended conductors the sort of waves that we have found so 
troublesome in alternating circuits. Contrary to the first ex- 
pectations of the engineers laying out suspended inductors, it 
turns out that trouble from these waves is to be apprehended 
in some cases. Some of our plants it is true have operated 
without a suspicion of trouble from mechanical waves, or me- 
chanical motions of suspended conductors, but others have had 
difficulties, and it becomes of importance to outline and set 
forth and study, especially study, what are the conditions which 
will magnify the effects of mechanical waves and which will 
restrain them; also under what conditions they may be expected 
to be serious. 

The laws of wave motion are well worked out in other direc- 
tions. They may be briefly summarized by saying that a wave 
in any system, passing along on a uniform conductor, will tend 
to maintain its velocity and its amplitude, except for friction 
losses, until it strikes a reflecting point or dividing point. If it 
strikes a point of total reflection, that is, a rigid support, the wave 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1991 


will be returned in the reverse direction without losing strength 
by the reflection, but at the reflecting point there is a strain 
of double amplitude. With a recurrent source of waves and a 
reflecting point, there will be outcoming and returning waves, 
continually passing and re-passing, and where they pass they 
make stationary waves of double magnitude. Any particular 
suspended transmission conductor will have a definite period of 
swing. It swings like a pendulum. The velocity of these 
waves passing along will be relatively small. 

When any point of the transmission line is thrown to one side 
and released, it produces a wave, or if it is thrown and suspended 
in the thrown position, the first act of throwing sends a wave 
along the line. 

We must consider the matter of resonance. If for any cause 
we have a portion of a line swinging in a definite period, waves 
will be sent along the line, and if they are reflected and return 
to the original point, there may be a building up of the amplitude 
. of the swing, as with a coil and condenser, or any other form of 
resonance. This condition is not likely to occur very often in 
suspended conductors. The independent, constant, source of 
energy which will maintain an exciting oscillation is likely to be 
absent. There might be a case where a line of heavy mass has 
been set swinging, and some line of lesser mass is connected to it, 
and in that case the stored energy in the swinging of the heavier 
mass may serve to send out a number of impulses into the branch 
circuit. 

The thing that is likely to give difficulty in a suspended con- 
ductor in practical operation is the amplitude of the swing. If 
the swing is great enough, the conductor may come near enough 
to its support to permit a spark to pass. This has occurred 
in many instances in the last two or three years. 

What is it that determines the amplitude of the swing? In 
the first place, the amplitude is restrained by the fact that as the 
wire swings to the side it is lifted and gravity tends to return it— 
if the suspending connection, the chain of insulators, is short, the 
length of the pendulum is short, and the conductor rapidly rises 
against gravity as it swings to the side, and the motion becomes 
a short motion. If the length of the supporting chain is long, 
however, the amplitude of the swing in feet will be greater. _The 
amplitude in angular degrees may be the same, but the amplitude 
in feet will be greater. Thus, if instead of using the necessary four 
suspension insulators, in a certain case, a big margin of safety is 
demanded and seven or eight insulators are used, there would 
result a much wider amplitude of swing from the added disks 
with possibly disastrous results. In avoiding one trouble there 
would be danger of getting into another. 

The length of the span will, of course, have a good deal to do 
with the amplitude, because the sag will be greater on long spans. 
The greater the sag, from the same reasoning, the greater will be. 
the amplitude of the side swing in the center of the span; that 1s, 


1992 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


if you take a small conductor, and to keep within its strength you 
use a very great sag, that sag exposes the line to a much wider 
amplitude of swing for a given disturbing impulse than a line 
with a lesser sag, and that is a fact to be borne carefully in mind 
in design work. This condition may in some cases be the 
limiting factor in determining the length of span with small wires. 

There is another difficulty, which is shown in the accompanying 
sketch. Suppose the custom of the country would naturally give 
us a very long.span as shown at A and suppose this is a little too 
long and a tower is placed at the point P, making the contour 
like the line B. If it were not for the central support, the 
tendency would be for the line to have a long swing at the point P, 
corresponding to the long span, because it has a large sag from 
the point of support. The effect of the tower at the point P 
is to relieve the long span of only a small portion of its weight. 
That is, if the line starts to swing at the center the weight sup- 
ported by the tower at P has very little restraining force and the 
energy of the main portion of the span may carry the conductor 
up against the cross arm. This is a real danger and a matter 
which is very easily overlooked in laying out a line. Be very 
sure that there is a sufficient weight hanging on the intermediate 
insulator so that as the wire rises at this insulator due to the re- 


straint of the short link, a sufficient weight is affected so that 
there is a big natural returning force. 

There is another situation with suspended conductors which 
tends to give trouble. Assume a two-circuit line, with two over- 
head ground wires, the ground wires being steel and the line 
conductors aluminum. If, now, swinging is set up the steel and 
the aluminum will not swing in the same time period and clear- 
ance must be provided for the most unfavorable positions of 
various conductors. 

Ordinarily in systems of suspended conductors there is very 
little swinging, and what occurs is apt to be very slow and steady, 
but there do come conditions in which the oscillations are not 
uniform and in which they are very severe. Wind is, of course, 
the chief exciting cause. It is not, however, necessarily the only 
exciting cause. There is the possible effect of current on the 
swinging of suspended conductors. With a short-circuit on two 
parallel wires of a circuit, the wires would tend to spread. If 
you have two loops, one on each side of a system, situated parallel, 
a short-circuit may tend to spread both wires and bring together 
the two inside wires or throw them against some other wire. 
The spreading force depends on the square of the current and is 
thus not very large with very high tension systems, except when 


=" 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 1993 


of enormous capacity. Toshow what may occur in some instances, 
however, I will tell of one instance, which occurred on a 10,000- 
volt plant. There were two wires something like 20 or 
30 in. apart with spans of about 150 feet. A short-circuit 
occurred somewhere on this line, a short way from the power 
house, and the force of repulsion, due to the short-circuit cur- 
rent, was sufficiently great to separate the wires under great 
tension, storing considerable energy in the elasticity of the wire. 
The action of a circuit breaker cutting off the current allowed 
these wires to come together until they wrapped around each 
other, and stayed permanently there, and a good deal of force 
was required to unwind them. A force of that magnitude, in 
most of our present suspended conductors, would make trouble, 


but, of course, on 50,000 or 100,000-volt systems, no such currents 


are obtainable as are met with near a large power house on a 
10,000-volt circuit. : 

There is still another point which must be borne in mind in 
connection with suspended conductors. If we have a short 
span and a long span adjacent, and these two spans are set 
with the suspension link vertical on a warm day, in cold weather 
these spans are much tighter, and the stresses will no longer be 
equal on account of the difference in lengths of the spans. The 
wire will thus pull toward the shorter span as the temperature 
gets lower. If the spans are long this may pull the insulator 
far out of plumb, reducing somewhat the clearance, and throwing 
twisting strains on the cross arm. That is one of the object- 
tions to having a long span and a short span closely adjacent. 

Mr. Hebgen, I believe, suggested providing for slipping of a 
clamp on the conductor, changing its location as between hot 
weather and cold weather. That might be a practicable thing 
to do. 

There are many other interesting points brought out in these 
communications, which I will not take the time to mention. 
The maximum span is about 3,000 feet. Telephone lines are 
successfully operated through split inductance. The matter of 
tower foundations is called to our attention—do not sit in the 
office and prescribe a certain type of foundation for the whole 
line, to be used both in rock bottom and in the marshes. It is 
necessary to consider each foundation in the light of the character 
of the ground, and not only the character of the ground when 
inspected, but the condition it is likely to be in at the worst 
time of year. 

The experience with lightning appears to be the same as with 
the ordinary high-tension lines. Some plants had trouble, and 
others did not. There are some cases where the hooksin cement 
types of insulators have pulled out. Sleet has been reported 
weighing 1.9 lb. per running foot on No. 0 wire. This means 
over two inches in diameter, outside of the wire, if symmetrically 
spaced. One report was brought in of six inches of sleet, but the 
manager of the plant suggested that “ possibly that was an 
exaggeration.” 


A communication presented at the 28th Annual 
Convention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT WESTERN 
POWER COMPANY 


BY J. P. JOLLYMAN- 


The Great Western Power Company operates a long-distance, 
extra high-tension transmission system which extends from its 
hydroelectric plant at Big Bend, 16 miles north of Oroville, 
Cal., to Oakland, Cal. The nominal line voltage is 100,000, at 
60 cycles. The length of the main line is 153.6 miles. A branch 
line 1.1 miles long taps the main line 136.5 miles from Big Bend. 
Both the main and branch lines are double circuit. Both are 
supported on steel towers. 

1. The high-tension sides of all the transformers are delta 
connected. There is no connection to ground, except through 

-the electrolytic lightning arresters. 

2. One ground wire, supported on the apex of the towers, is 
used. This is grounded at every tower. 

3. The standard span is 750 feet. 3/0, seven-strand copper 
cable is used on the main line, No. 6 copper on the branch. 
Each circuit is completely transposed about every 10 miles. 
The arrangement of the conductors is shown in Fig. 1. 

The longest span with regular towers and cable is 1998 feet. 
The longest span is 2740 feet. This is across the San Joaquin 
River near Antioch. Special towers are used. The conductors 
clear high water 125 feet. The six conductors are in a hori- 
zontal plane, 15 feet apart. 

4. We have never yet had any lightning whatever. 

5. The measured value of the charging current is very nearly 
the same as the value determined by using the ordinary formula 
for charging current based on the capacity of two parallel con- 

1994 


a 


1911] JOLLYMAN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 1995 


ductors. The distance between the conductors is taken as the 
average distance of 13.33 feet. 


VALUES OF CHARGING CURRENT 


Volts at | Computed Observed 

Big Bend i current Current | Kv-a. 
70,000 Boi | 36.0 4360 
80,000 40.8 : 41.5 | 5750 
90,000 | 46 47 ; 7330 


6. Line insulators used. G. E. strain type, Locke strain type, 
Thomas strain and suspension types. Only three or four insu- 
lators have broken down during the past year. In no case have 
we any reason to believe that the insulator may not have been 
damaged mechanically before it failed electrically. We consider 
that the suspension insulator is a success. 


GROUND wiRE 


SAG FOR 5% — 


750/SPAN Sv 
MESSENGER CABLE ca 
=F an HANGER) -TeLEPHONE/~ 
o . 


TTA AWTS IAW LNCS 


Pat | 
* le > 
2 3] = 

ids] a! 21 3/2 
\ 


Fe at S 
46/4". 
29/10" 


Aeas ots 


SST RSTRNT TROT AN ATW TITAS 


TGoel 


We have had no trouble with swinging of conductors with 
suspension insulators. 

7. G. E. type T and type K-10 oil switches are both used. 
We have had no difficulty in opening load, short-circuit or charg- 
ing current. The indications are that these switches could be 
safely used on a considerably larger system than we now operate. 

8 We have all kinds of load connected to our system, includ- 
ing synchronous motors. No attempt is made to neutralize the 
charging current by reducing the field on any synchronous load. 
Under ordinary conditions the power factor at the generating 
station is nearly unity. 

For the convenience, speed and safety of operation, each 
generating unit should have a capacity of at least equal to the 
charging current of one line. In our case this means units of 
about 10,000 kw. We have at present four 10,000-kw. generators 


1996 JOLLYMAN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION (June 29 


at Big Bend, each with a 10,000-kw., three-phase transformer. 
The station is planned to ultimately contain eight 10,000-kw. 
units. 

9. Transformer Terminals. Oil-filled terminals were supplied. 
It has been found difficult to maintain them free from the possi- 
bility of leakage. They have been refilled with compounds 
designed to reduce the chance of leakage. 

Oil Switch Terminals. Wehaveused compound-filled terminals. 
Experience has shown that compounds for use in high-tension 
terminals must be very carefully tested in practical operation 
before their suitability can be definitely decided upon. 

Outlets. The outlets from our buildings are primarily com- 
posed of plate glass windows five feet square, through the center 
of which the conductor passes. Various arrangements of extra 
insulation around the conductor have been tried. Our experi- 
ence seems to show that the best arrangement of plate glass 
windows is to use a bare conductor of large diameter and leave as 
large an opening around the conductor as climatic conditions 
permit. The window should be so protected that rain may not 
run over the surface of the glass. 

10. We are using electrolytic lightning arresters at each end of 
the main line. Having had no lightning, we have had no ex- 
perience with them as lightning arresters. We have operated 
one circuit without lightning arresters at either end for some 
time. Our experience has shown that they can not absorb 
much energy without being damaged and therefore their critical 
voltage must be higher than any dynamic voltage that may ever 
occur upon the system. 

11. We have had no sleet, nor any trouble from wind since 
the line was finished. 

12. There is no appreciable corona effect on the main line. 
Probably no very great increase in voltage would produce corona 
on the branch line of No. 6 copper wire. No part of the line is 
over 2,000 feet elevation above sea level. 

13. The telephone line is strung on the towers. In regular 
spans it is supported by three hangers which are carried by a 
grounded messenger cable. - Drainage coils consisting of the — 
2200-volt winding of a two-kw. transformer with the center point 
grounded are used at both ends and in the center of the line. 
These reduce the voltage to ‘ground of the telephone line to a 
very low value, probably less than 100 volts. This obviates the 
necessity for especially high insulation and reduces the noise due 


= 


1911] JOLLYMAN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 1997 


to unequal leakage. Highly insulated repeating coils are used 
where connections are made to telephones at which it is im- 
possible to insure adequate insulation to ground of the person 
using the instrument. The telephone line is transposed at 
every tower where the towers are evenly spaced. Where the 
tower spacing is uneven the distance between transpositions is 
made as even as possible. The service obtained from this line 
is very satisfactory and is not more than momentarily inter- 
rupted by disturbances on the power line. 

14. The only difficulty in maintaining satisfactory voltage 
regulation is at times when changes in load amounting to a large 
percentage of the total occur suddenly. 

15. Steel towers whose general dimensions are given in Fig. 1 
are used. Foundations suitable to the character of the ground 
must be used. Piles are used in very soft ground, cut off below 
the ground water level. The tower footing is attached to the top 
of the pile. All the tower footings are set in concrete. There 
have been no signs of corrosion in two years. 

16. The system has been operated at 100,000 volts since 
November 1, 1909. 


GENERAL COMMENTS 


Our experience indicates that the following points should 
receive special attention when planning an extra high tension, 
long distance transmission system: 

Generator capacity to handle the charging current. 

Provision for the proper control of the system under all possible 
emergency conditions. 

If delta operation is Panic’ insulation should be pro- 
vided that will safely withstand the full delta voltage. The 
insulation should he of a character especially adapted to with- 
stand transient voltage strains considerably in excess of the delta 
voltage. 


A communication presented at the 28th Annual 
Convention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE SOUTHERN POWER 
' COMPANY 


BY W. S. LEE 

The following data are submitted in regard to the operation 
of the high-tension transmission lines of the Southern Power 
Company, of Charlotte, N. C. 

1. 100,000 volt system. Transformers for stepping up delta- 
connected on 44,000-volt side and star-connected on 100,000- 
volt side, with neutral grounded. No resistance. 44,000-volt 
system is delta-delta non-grounded. 

2. Overhead ground wires are used. One from peak to peak 
of the twin circuit steel towers upon which the two three-phase 
circuits are arranged in vertical planes, one on each side of each 
tower. Towers are not set in concrete, thus the ground wire is 
grounded at each tower, as each of the four legs is set about eight 
feet in the earth. Ground wire is 3-in. S. M. strand. 

3. Conductors are 2/0 seven-strand copper and 2,/0 seven- 
strand aluminum. Our standard span on 100,000-volt circuit 
is 600 ft., and we always have 20 ft. clearance at the middle point 
of sag. We use both copper and aluminum and make very little 
difference in sag. On 100,000-volt towers there are two circuits; 
three wires held vertically on each side of towers. Length of 
cross-arm 15 ft. 10 in. on old towers, 18 ft. 4 in. on new towers. 
Vertical distance between cross-arms 8 ft. 4 in. on old towers, 
10 ft. 6 in. on new towers. We have many spans over 1000 ft. 
long and several 1500-ft. and 1600-ft. spans in both the copper 
and aluminum. We use strain towers at each end of these spans 
and keep the strain on the conductor the same as on the short 
spans. 

4. Frequent lightning storms. The 100,000-volt lines stood 

1998 


1911] "LEE: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION | 1999 


the lightning better the one season since they have been in 
service than the lower voltage lines. 

From January 1, 1910 to date the Great Falls-Greenville 
line, 963 miles long, 858 towers, had eight shut-downs due to 
lightning damaging either the 100,000-volt apparatus or lines. 
Time lost, 39 minutes. 

From January 1, 1910 to date the Great Falls-Greensboro 
line, 161 miles long, of which 18 miles is a branch 100,000-volt 
pole line with 338 poles—main line with 1300 towers—had 14 
shut-downs due to lightning damaging 100,000-volt apparatus 
or lines. Time lost, 59 minutes. 

5. The only time the charging current was measured was when 
we started up the first 143 miles. We had 88,000 volts at the 
step-up transformers and we measured on the 2440-volt side of 
the transformers 1436 amperes, which is 6185 kv-a. The cal- 
culated current is 1450. This was on 2/0 copper at 60 cycles. 

6. Some hooks have pulled out of insulators; these were the 
only defects we have found. We have never had a line put out 
of service due to failure of insulators, except during a sleet 
storm when three hooks pulled out. Insulators swing with the 
line in the wind. We have had no trouble from circuits on op- 
posite sides of the tower swinging together and have never ob- 
served any dangerous or noticeable tendency to do so. 

7. G. A. type switches with condenser terminals are used. There 
has been no more trouble switching and handling the 100,000- 
volt line than we had with our 44,000-volt and 10,000-volt 
lines. ‘The same methods of operation, repair, control and dis- 
tribution used on the 100,000-volt line as on other lines. There 
are 13 100,000-volt substations, in most of which transformation 
is made direct from 100,000 volts to 2300 volts by a bank of 
three 1000-kw. transformers, connected delta-delta. 

8. There is practically no synchronous receiving apparatus 
on the lines. The minimum size of transformers is 1,000 kv-a. 
The minimum size of generators is 750 kw. in the Catawba plant, 
which is often in parallel with other stations, all of which supply 
the 100,000-volt transformers from the 44,000-volt system. The 
smallest generators ever used exclusively on 100,000-volt lines 
are 3,000 kw. and never less than three for the two lines. 


DD Da Reh Min akin 3,000-kw. generators 
Mo eee pena 900 “ « 
fog Ak On ea 750, /< « 


are connected to the 44,000-volt system from which the 100,000- 
volt system is derived through six 4000-kv-a. transformers. 


[June 29 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 


LEE 


2000 


OL6L 
pgced "a eslasted GSC a ar ue 
FHF 5-5 “000 001 
SHEE S47 5- yawoL-ir-000 + 
Pest - > os 000 O01 
Saaearek Limes | ies aces Lukens ie 
™—"Lv¥3dO NI S3NIT 310d 110A 000 LL 
Q31939rO¥d OSLNVId ‘d @ NOILVH3dO NI 

G 06 Cl OL © O 

es a ee eae See 

8371W 40 3WOS 

WALSAS NOISSINSNVYL JO d¥W 

°O°N 3LLOTYVHO 


v. . © Ris) aXe eke 


Pi \) O a 
: = 000 ze sgloa9 AF 0% eS os 3 ness 
O03 Y3MOd NYSHIN S > : : 
M\ nos é I ee ay a—- Py es On AS 
d°H 000 ce aieh VOAG D Ps ea } 5 ee. 
yaa.ty Bul StALyit j A ated w ae 
ee Po : nokwiswvag) -7 a 
les ’ 7e-T J... ., POTS aTIPAUdaI gS WO z 


Po a 
hoses } s N 


i 
i 


| 


ay rome 


Lf ox 
Ne, S[[UA SALTS 


‘a 
ane 


. AT MEH 


se icons, 2 


\ et 


1911] LEE: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 2001 


9. Porcelain bushings set into 5-ft. square slate slabs are used 
as outlets. Only one has broken down, and this was caused by 
bushing being cracked. There has been very little trouble with 
terminals except in a few damp places. 

10. Two sets of 100,000-volt electrolytic arresters, each 
consisting of four units, are in successful and satisfactory opera- 
tion. 

11. Wind has caused no trouble whatever, and outside of three 
hooks pulling out soon after the line was put up, sleet has caused 
no trouble. 

12. Have no corona éffects except that in one case a very high 
resistance ground through-a line entrance bushing caused the 
small No. 2 copper equivalent aluminum to glow. 

13. We have had more telephone disturbance than with any 
other line. 

14. In regard to the matter of voltage regulation, there is no 
distinction between the 100,000-volt lines and the 44,000-volt 
lines. 

15. The towers which are set in earth have been erected about 
18 months and have given no trouble because of corrosion or 
through unstable anchorages. 

16. We have been operating at 100,000 volts since October 24, 
1909. 


A communication presented al the 28th Annual 
Convention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT .FALLS 
POWER COMPANY 


BY M. HEBGEN 


The Great Falls Power Company is at present operating a 
total of 282 miles of transmission line at 100,000 volts. The 
principal transmission is from Great Falls to Butte, Montana, 
a distance of 130 miles. Over this distance two separate, single- 
circuit, tower lines are used, a single line being extended from 
Butte to Anaconda, a distance of 22 miles. ; 

1. All transformers connected to the system are delta-con- 

nected, this form of connection being very satisfactory in every 
way. 
2. Above the transmission wires are located two ground wires 
consisting of §-in. seven-wire, Siemens Martin steel strand, gal- 
vanized. These ground wires are clamped to the steel towers 
and are thus grounded at every tower through the tower legs. 
The tower legs extend six feet into the earth, and terminate 
in flat steel feet, which act as ground plates. No additional 
ground is provided. 

3. The standard span for level country is 600 ft. In hilly 
country, however, there is no regularity in the length of the spans, 
and spans of from 1000 to 2000 ft. are common, no special con- 
struction being employed except to side-guy the towers. The 
conductors are spaced 10 ft. 4 in., and all three conductors lie 
in a horizontal plane with no transpositions whatever. The 
conductor is No. 0 B. & S. gauge, six-wire, hard drawn copper 
strand with hemp center. The normal clearance of wires from 
the earth is 29 feet. 

The longest span in the line is 3034 ft., and occurs at the cross- 
ing of the Missouri River. In this span 2-in., Siemens Martin 

2002 


1911] HEBGEN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 20038 


steel strand is substituted for the copper conductors, and a 
spacing of 20 ft. between wires is employed, two conductors 
only being supported by each tower. Standard towers and 
insulators were used, the insulators being doubled. 

4. During the summer severe lightning storms are frequent in 
the vicinity of the line, and several of these have occurred since 
the line was put in commission at 100,000 volts, but as yet no 
shut-downs have been occasioned by lightning and only mild 
discharges have taken place over the lightning arresters. It is 
believed that the overhead ground wires are largely responsible 
for this immunity from lightning. 

5. The charging current of 130 miles of single line at 60 cycles 
and 100,000 volts at the generating end is 89 amperes per wire 
or. 0.3 ampere per mile. This current was measured directly 
with a high-voltage ammeter, and checks closely with the cal- 


culated charging current. 


6. The insulators used are of the suspension type and consist 
of six units, 10 in. in diameter, with the under side of each unit 
corrugated. The caps and pins are cemented to the porcelain 
with Portland cement. The insulators have an ultimate strength 
of approximately 10,000 Ib. and will flash over, wet, at somewhat 
over 300,000 volts. Up to the present time there has not been a 
single insulator failure, either mechanical or electrical. 

It is true that shortly after the line was erected an insulator 
was shot in two by a high powered rifle, the bullet cutting a deep 
groove in the forged steel pin, cutting in two the clevis ears and 
destroying the porcelain of one unit. This, however, could 
hardly be classed as a failure. 

No difficulty has been experienced with the insulators swinging 
in the wind. With a 60-mile wind blowing at right angles to 
the line it is believed that the insulators will swing side-ways and 
stand at an angle of approximately 40 deg. with the vertical. 
The maximum deflection observed so far, however,’ has not been 
over 30 deg. A considerable deflection has been noticed in 
insulators which are located between a long span and a short 


‘span, due to changes in temperature. The tension in a short 


span varies more with changes in temperature than does the 
tension in a long span, consequently during cold weather the 
insulators deflect along the line toward the short span while in 
hot weather the deflection is in the opposite direction. This 
action deserves considerable attention, and to accommodate the 
different positions of the insulator at different times of the year 


2004 HEBGEN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION © [June 29 


a wire clamp should be employed with a long bearing surface on 
the wire and a relatively short distance between the wire and the 
hinged point which supports the clamp. This form of clamp is 
desirable to prevent a sharp bend in the wire when the insulator 
stands at either extreme of its swing. 

7. The line is controlled at each end by 100,000-volt oil 
‘switches, solenoid operated, having a double vertical break. The 
switches are top-connected through’ oil filled bushings. These 
switches have been entirely satisfactory and have readily broken 
the short-circuit current supplied by the 21,000-kilowatt plant 
feeding the lines. To sectionalize the line out-doors, double air 
break switches are used of the three-pole, revolving arm type. 
The switch blades and jaws are mounted upon pedestal insulators 
made up of six insulator units in series very similar to the regular 
suspension insulators except that the cap of one unit is extended 
upward to form the pin of the next, thus making the insulators 
as a whole rigid. These switches have not as yet been used to 
break any charging current but from the standpoint of good 
insulation and mechanical strength and ease of operation they 
have been very satisfactory. 

8. The charging current of the line is at present entirely 
supplied by the main generating plant, which has a total ca- 
pacity of 21,000 kw., divided into six generating units of 3,500 
kw. each. 

The output of two generating units is utilized near the gen- 
erating plant, consequently there are at present installed only 
four banks of 100,000-volt step-up transformers, each bank having 
a capacity of 3,600 kw. The charging current of one line is 
well above the normal rated capacity of one generating unit. 
It has been found, however, that one generating unit and bank 
of transformers can readily supply the charging current of one 
line for a short time. 

The plant is now fully loaded with an induction motor load 
and the lagging current taken by the induction motors so nearly 
balances the charging current of the line that the power factor 
at the generating plant averages 99 per cent. 

There are installed in Butte three 1200-h.p. synchronous mo- 
tors direct-connected to air compressors. These are not yet 
connected to the line but will be in a short time, and it is ex- 
pected that they will aid slightly in regulating the voltage at 
Butte. ' 

9. The 100,000-volt outlets at the Rainbow Plant and at the 


j 
; 


1911) HEBGEN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 2005 


Butte substation, as well as the switching station at the middle of 
the line, are through the roofs of the buildings. Oil-filled porce- 
lain bushings are used, and these have proved entirely satisfac- 
tory. All transformer bushings and switch bushings are oil- 
filled and as yet have caused no trouble. 

10. Electrolytic lightning arresters are used at both ends of the 
line and in the middle, the latter being installed in the switching 
station. These arresters have discharged during lightning 
storms, and usually discharge when any high-tension switching is 
done. 

The original pedestal insulators upon which the horn gaps for 
these arresters were mounted proved weak mechanically. Two 
insulators broke off at the bottom connection without apparent 
cause. These have since been replaced with the type of insu- 
lator used on the line-sectionalizing switches and no further 
trouble has been experienced. 

11. The line has successfully withstood winds estimated at 
60 miles per hour, and has been through one sleet storm where 
sleet formed on the wires ‘‘ to a diameter of six inches a aS 
reported by one patrolman. ‘This, however, was doubtless an 
exaggeration. 

12. When the line was first put in commission corona was 
plainly visible on every live part of the system. The corona 
gradually became less until after about three weeks no corona at 
all was visible except in a few places in the stations, such as 
the points of switch blades and other sharp projections. It is 
believed that this corona formed on small points or other rough- 
nesses caused by the rough handling of the wire and that these 
have gradually worn off or burned off. 

13. A private telephone line parallels the transmission line 
from Great Falls to Butte. This line is erected on wooden poles 
and runs midway between the two tower lines at a distance of 
30 ft. from each. There was considerable static and much noise 
on this line when first put into operation. Reactance coils 
bridged across the line with their middle points grounded were 
installed at each end of the line and in the middle, and these 
reduced the induced voltage to about 50 volts between wires and 
ground, and did away almost altogether with the noise. The 
line now gives excellent service, and is easier to talk over : 
than the lines of the Bell Company. 

14. At no load there is a rise in voltage on the line of 3.5 per 
cent. With a load of 15,000 kw. at 85 per cent power factor on 


2006 HEBGEN: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


the two lines the drop in voltage is 7 per cent. With all this 
load on one line the drop in voltage is 17.5 per cent. Taps are 
provided on the high-tension winding of the step-up and step- 
down transformers, and the step-down transformers are con- 
nected on a 10 per cent lower tap than are the step-up transform- 
ers, thus compensating for a drop of 10 per cent. When it is 
necessary to carry the full load on one line the generating plant 
raises its voltage 10.5 per cent to take care of the additional drop. 

The switching station, which has been referred to, will pro- 
vide a cross-over in the middle of the line so that it will be neces- 
sary to cut out only half of one line in case of accident. This 
will considerably improve the regulation of the line as a whole. 

15. The towers have four legs and a single horizontal cross 
arm. The wires are supported at the two ends and in the 
middle of the cross arm and hang 40 ft. from the ground at the 
tower. The cross arm is supported at two points, each midway 
between the middle wire and the outside wire. The two ground 
wires are supported above the cross arm near its points of support. 

The tower is composed entirely of angles and flats, all connec- 
tions being by means of bolts. The cross arm is made of two 
4-in. channels placed back to back and separated in the middle. 
The tower is erected on four angle iron stubs set six feet in the 
ground, the bottoms of these stubs terminating in flat feet made 
of short pieces of channel section having an area of 144 sq. in. 
each. All parts of the tower are galvanized. : 

16. The system has been operating at 100,000 volts for six 
months and nothing has developed as yet to indicate that the 
operation of a 100,000-volt system is any more difficult than the 
operation of a 50,000-volt system. On the other hand, it is 
believed that the extra high insulation provided for this voltage 
prevents many breakdowns, due to lightning and surges, which 
would occur on a system operating at 50,000 or 60,000 volts with 
insulators designed for a factor of safety of two or three, as is 
common with such systems. 

_ After all, the normal voltage of a long transmission system has 
little to do with the voltage which must be insulated against. 
It is the abnormal voltages, caused by lightning, switching and 
accidental grounds, which really test the insulation of a system 
* such as this. 


— 


A communication presented at the 28th Ampnat 
Convention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, Chicago, Ill., June 29, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A.I.E.E. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE CENTRAL 
COLORADO POWER CO. 


BY P. T. HANSCOM 


1. The transformers at the Glenwood power house and at all 


_ substations are delta-connected. The transformers at the 


Boulder power house are Y-connected on account of better 
voltage ratio, and are operated with ungrounded neutral. 


" ; 314""BEVEL IN |6{’ 
376. | 144" pevEIN-5! oO Ege ol 
Z a 
= = 


—— a 
D : 4”"C@ bY #21’ 0 LONG 


GROUND WIRES)| 


10/41" 


41014" 


” 
6 


aon Q4"x x, 
23'3"LONG 


2 


14" x 984" 


Fic. 1. 


2. Two ground wires are used throughout on the Boulder line 
and for a distance of five miles from any station on the Glenwood 
line, also between Leadville and Dillon and across the Argentine 
and Haggerman Passes. The wires are grounded at each tower 
and spaced as shown in Fig. 1. 

3. The standard span is 660 ft. and the average throughout 


the lines 750 ft. 
2007 


2008 HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION (June 29 


The conductors on the Glenwood line are No. 0 B. & S. 
copper, composed of six strands with a hemp center, except 
between Leadville and Dillon where the conductors are No. 1 
copper. The Boulder line is also No. 1 copper. 

The conductors are drawn to an elastic limit of 35,000 Ib. per 
sq. in. and ultimate strength of 60,000 lb. per sq. in. 

There are a number of spans between 1,500 ft. and 2,000 ft. 
and one span of about 2,900 ft. with standard copper conductors. . 


At some of the railroad crossings and in a few spans, exposed 


to severe winds, }-in. high-strength stranded steel cable is used 


for conductors. 

4. The records of the operating department show 10 inter- 
ruptions from lightning during the season of 1910 from 63 re- 
corded lightning storms on the high-tension lines. 

The records of the operating department are as follows: 


CENTRAL COLORADO POWER COMPANY 


Record of lightning storms, June 1 to November 1, 1910 

June 13. In the afternoon lightning storms were general over all Central 
Colorado Power Company’s lines; no disturbance on Com- 
pany’s system during the day. 

June 14. Lightning and rain east of Argentine Pass; high winds be- 

tween Leadville and Dillon. Lightning lasted about six 

hours. A disturbance interrupted Dillon and Denver service 
once. On patrol next day broken insulator discs were found 

at the following towers near Leadville: Nos. 372, 378, 381 

and 435. These were repaired later during a prearranged shut- 

down, service being maintained over them in the meantime. 

The transmission line was not dead during the day. 

From 8:00 to 9:00 p.m. heavy lightning storm on Argentine 

Pass. One disturbance caused by a discharge to tower 752 

from the clips of the disconnecting switch. This arc caused 

a shut-down on the transmission line of 3 min., being the only 

disturbance experienced during the storm. 

June 16. Lightning and snow on Argentine Pass. No disturbance on 
line. 

June 17. Lightning and rain on Argentine Pass. No disturbance on 
line, 

June 18. Lightning and rain on Argentine Pass, at Idaho Springs and 
around Boulder. Generally stormy along Eastern Slope. 
No disturbance on system. 

June 20. Lightning and rain on west side of Argentine Pass, between 
Dillon and Leadville and west of Hagerman Pass. No dis- 
turbance on transmission line. One slight disturbance on 
13,000-volt feeder out of Dillon substation. One discharge on 
13,000-volt circuit in the Boulder district about 5 p.m. in- 
terrupting one customer. 


— 
co 


June 


1911] 


June 
June 
June 
June 


June 


June 


~ Jane 


June 


July 


July 


July 
July 
July 
July 


July 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


PALS 


28. 


29; 


30. 


i 


HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 2009 


Severe lightning around Barker and other parts of Boulder 
district. No disturbance on line. 

Lightning around Golden and Idaho Springs. No disturbance 
on system. 

Cloudy, with lightning around Boulder. No disturbance on 
system. 

Severe lightning between Denver and Boulder. No dis- 
turbance on system. 

Lightning around Denver, Golden and Boulder, also Idaho 
Springs. One disturbance which caused Denver Gas & Elec- 
tric Company’s switch in its West Side station to open, 
but did not affect service to Northern Colorado Power Co., 
or any other customer. 

Severe lightning around Boulder and Dillon all the afternoon 
up to 9 p.m. No disturbance on transmission system. One 
13,000-volt feeder circuit out of Boulder and one 13,000-volt 
circuit out of Dillon substation were interrupted. _ 
Lightning in Boulder district from 4.00 to 8.00 p.m. One 
disturbance on transmission line, caused by trouble originating 
on a 13,000-volt feeder out of Boulder. This did not affect 
service over the transmission line, but the Denver Gas & Elec- 
tric Company’s switch opened, separating the system. 
Generally cloudy and stormy. Severe lightning around 
Boulder in the afternoon. No disturbance on transmission 
system. One disturbance on a 13,000-volt feeder from 
Boulder. 

Lightning severe around Idaho Springs; some lightning 
around Denver in the afternoon. No disturbance on system. 
Storm around Dillon from 6.30 to9 p.m. One disturbance on 
line but not affecting delivery to substations. Denver Gas & 
- Electric Company tripped off of their end of the feeder. One 
disturbance on a 13,000-volt circuit out of Dillon substation. 
Lightning around Idaho Springs about 7.00 p.m. No dis- 
turbance on ystem. ' 

Severe lightning around Denver. No disturbance on Central 
Company’s system. 

Severe lightning storm on Argentine Pass and at Idaho 
Springs. No disturbance on system. 


Generally cloudy with some lightning. No disturbance on 
syst n. : 


Generally cloudy with lightning over almost the entire line 

system. One disturbance due to the discharge which was 

observed to strike between towers 938 and 939. Transmis- 

sion line was not dead, but regulation was poor for one-half 

min. The Denver Gas & Electric Company’s switch tripped 

out on this occurrence and they were separated from Central 
_Company’s service for 15 min. 


Pi a 


2010 HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


July 19. Severe lightning around Georgetown; cloudy over trans- 
mission line. Lightning broke insulators at towers 431, 487 
and 604, all between Dillon and Leadville, causing two in- 
terruptions. After the first one service was resumed, but 
after the second one the broken insulators prevented recharge 
of the line until they were replaced. 

July 20. Lightning storm general during the afternoon. One dis- 
charge observed to hit ground wires on towers 885 and 886 
but no customers were interrupted except Denver Gas & Elec- 
tric Company, whose switch opened automatically, separating 
the systems for 7 min., Leadville and Dillon substation in- 
struments showing continuity of service and no disturbance. 


July 21. General lightning storm in the afternoon. One disturbance 
on the 13,000-volt feeder out of Boulder which caused slight 
fluctuation on transmission line, but not affecting delivery to 
substations. During this disturbance the Denver Gas switch 
opened automatically, separating the systems for 6} min. 


July 27. Lightning around Dillon, Argentine and Leadville all day, 
around Shoshone and Boulder in the afternoon. One dis- 
turbance on transmission line caused momentary variation 
and separated Denver Gas from Central Company’s system 
for about 6 min. Voltage low on transmission line for about 
20 sec. During this storm other parts of the State were 
seriously affected. 


July 28. Lightning around Dillon and Boulderin the morning. During 
the afternoon very heavy rain with severe lightning was 
general over the whole state. One roof bushing at Boulder 
was damaged but was automatically disconnected without 
interrupting service in Leadville, Dillon or Denver substations. 
The automatic switch in the Denver Gas Company’s station 
opened, separating the system for 6 min. Four other slight 
disturbances, the first of which was caused by lightning 
breaking insulators at tower 389 near Leadville, the other 
three being caused by the remaining insulators furnishing 
insufficient insulation, which broke down at intervals until the 
line was disconnected by prearrangement to replace the 
damaged insulators. The Colorado Telephone Company’s 
service was seriously interferred with, both locally and on the 
toll lines. A great deal of cable on their Denver circuits was 
damaged, and it was reported that about 600 telephones in 
Denver were out of service. 


July 29. Heavy rains all day over the entire system. Lightning 


general. One disturbance; insulators on middle conductor 
at tower 1008} damaged. 


July 30. After 11.00 a.m. lightning was general around Barber, Dillon, 
Leadville and on the western slope. One disturbance at 
2.00 p.m. Transmission line not dead. 


July 31. Rain and lightning between Argentine Pass and Hagerman 
Pass. No disturbance. 


1911] 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


Aug. 


10. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


20. 


HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 2011 


About noon small local storm just west of Denver caused no 
disturbances on Central Company’s system. 

During the afternoon from 2.00 p.m. to 6.00 p.m. there was 
some lightning and slight showers along the transmission line. 
No disturbance. 

Partly cloudy during the day. No rain. Small lightning 
discharges in the afternoon. No disturbances. 

Weather cloudy. Showers in the afternoon. Lightning 
general over whole line. One severe discharge at 1.28 p.m. 
destroyed a roof bushing at the Denver substation and in- 
terrupted service to Denver and Boulder 17 min. No inter- 
ruption at Dillon or Leadville. Heavy rains at Boulder in 
the afternoon, accompanied by severe lightning. Caused two 
disturbances on the 13,000-volt distribution line without dis- 
turbing the transmission system. 

Wind, rain and lightning in the afternoon generally. No dis- 
turbance on transmission system. 

Lightning in afternoon east of Leadville, north of Dillon and 
around Idaho Springs. No disturbance on transmission 
system. 

Rain near Idaho Springs. Lightning in the afternoon west 
of Leadville and on Argentine Pass. No disturbances on 
transmission system. — 

Wind and rain storm from Idaho Springs to Denver in the 
afternoon, with some lightning. Very heavy lightning storm 
at Denver, in the evening, lasting about three hours. No dis- 
turbance. 

Partly cloudy. Storm around Idaho Springs and Boulder in 
the afternoon with rain at Boulder and some lightning. No 
disturbance. 

Weather cloudy. Rain and lightning between Leadville 
and Shoshone all day. Rain and lightning in Denver in the 
evening. No lightning disturbances on transmission system. 
Broken conductor between towers 126-127. Break. caused 
by bullet from rifle. 

General storm with rain from Argentine east. No disturbance 
on transmission system. 

Severe lightning and rain at Idaho Springs from 5 to 6 p.m. 
One disturbance caused a discharge across a transformer 
bushing at the Dillon substation. 

Rain west of Dillon with some lightning. No disturbance on 
transmission line. 

Lightning around Idaho Springs beginning at 1.30 p.m. 
Lightning around Boulder at about 3 p.m. Insulators punc- 
tured on tower 472 caused shutdown of transmission from 
Leadville east. 

Weather cloudy over whole system. Rain and lightning at 
Waldorf in the afternoon. 


2012 


Aug. 22. 


Aug. 23. 


Aug. 


Sept. 


Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 
Sept. 


Sept. 


Sept. 


Oct. ° 


24, 


HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


Weather cloudy and stormy. Lightning around Idaho Springs 
east of Denver. No disturbance. 

Stormy and rain from Shoshone to Leadville in the afternoon. 
Lightning from Shoshone to Argentine. One discharge near 
Shoshone caused the horn gap outside of Shoshone station to 
break down, shutting down Dillon and Leadville and causing 
the Denver Gas Company’s switch to trip. The attendant 
at the Denver substation disconnected the Shoshone line 
quickly enough to prevent an interruption to the Boulder 
customers, and load continued to be carried by the Boulder 
Plant. Service to Denver substation from Boulder was thus 
momentarily interrupted. 

Lightning around Denver in the afternoon. No disturbance 
on transmission line. 

Lightning storm in the evening from Basalt to Dillon, from 
Idaho Springs to Denver and Boulder. No disturbance on 
transmission system. One disturbance on a 13,000-volt line 
from Boulder. 

Lightning in the evening along line from Dillon to Denver. 
No disturbance. 

Lightning around Denver in the afternoon. No disturbance 
on system. ; 

Heavy lightning storm all along transmission line in after- 
noon. No disturbance on Central Company’s system. 

Some lightning along transmission line in the evening. No 
disturbance. 


Lightning around Idaho Springs in the afternoon. No dis- 
turbance. 


Severe lightning in afternoon and evening. Four dis- 
turbances on transmission system. One of these disturbances 
interrupted service. 


Severe lightning storm during early evening. No disturbances. 


Severe lightning storm with rain east of Argentine Pass. 
No disturbance. 


Severe lightning storm in afternoon around Denver over 
Boulder and Shoshone. No disturbance. 


Severe lightning storm in the afternoon broke insulator on 
tower 919. Interrupted no customers except Denver and 
Idaho Springs. 


Very severe lightning storm over Denver in the afternoon. 
No disturbance. 


Severe lightning storm in the afternoon and evening from 
Dillon west to Georgetown and north to Boulder. No dis- 
turbance on high-tension transmission system. One inter- 
ruption of all distribution lines from Boulder; three additional 
interruptions on one distribution circuit from Boulder with 
additional interruption on each of two other distribution cir- 
cuits from Boulder. 


1911] . HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 2013 


Oct. 15. Some lightning on Argentine Pass in the afternoon. No 
disturbance. 


Oct. 16. Some lightning on Argentine Pass in the afternoon. No 
disturbance. 


Nore.— 10 interruptions due to lightning on high-tension lines. 
63 recorded storms. 
135 days. 


5. Information on charging current is given in Part I of 
the 1911 Transactions. See paper by Faccioli and communi- 
cation by West, pages 337 and 77. 

6. No electrical difficulties have occurred chargeable to insu- 
lators and mechanical difficulties of insulators have been limited 
to two or three defective connecting links between units. The 
normal strength of links is equal to the No. 0 conductor. 

Some difficulties have been experienced from lack of stability 
of conductors in the more exposed sections of the line due to low 
horizontal stress and low vertical component at point of support. 
Such difficulties have occurred in local sections exposed to the 
more violent winds. 

In some of the spans on the eastern slope where the line crosses 
the openings of canons, the wind at times comes whirling out of 
the canon at excessive velocity, intersecting other currents of 
air which produce wind eddies with the effect of lifting the entire 
span, shaking the conductors violently and mixing them up 
generally. -To meet such conditions it has been necessary to 
dead-end the spans, increasing the horizontal stress, and in one 
span it has been found desirable to increase the spacing of con- 
ductors. 

7. No difficulties have been experienced from high-tension 
switches or operation of same with and without load. High- 
tension switches of the oil-break type are installed at all sub- 
stations, but none are installed at either of the two power sta- 
tions. 

8. Under present operating conditions the power factor at all 
power stations is about unity, hence no attempt has been made 
to control the charging current of the line. 

The system is operated in multiple with the following power 
stations: 

Leadville Light & Power Co. (steam). 
United Hydro Electric Co. (hydraulic). 
Denver Gas & Electric Co. (steam). 
Northern Colorado Power Co. (steam). 


2014 HANSCOM: HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


There are two 5000-kw. generators installed in the Glenwood 
power house and two generators of the same capacity are in- 
stalled at the Boulder power house. The combined waterwheel 
capacity at both plants is 39,000 h.p. The available generator 
capacity for continuous service is considerably in excess of the 
generator ratings given above. 

9. Some difficulty was experienced with high-tension bushings 
and terminals during the first few months of operation, but 
these difficulties have been practically eliminated by changes in 
design and method of supports. 

10. Aluminum cell lightning arresters are installed at Dillon, 
Denver and Boulder and their performance has been satisfactory. 
No difficulty has been experienced with the arresters. 

11. Experience with wind conditions is given above. During 
spring and fall months sleet and snow has collected on wires at 
the lower elevations, and in one instance before the line was placed 
in commission the accumulation of sleet and snow on a No. 0 
conductor was found to be 1.9 lb. per linear foot. 

12. Data on corona are given in Part I of the 1911 Trans- 
ACTIONS. See paper by Ryan, pp. 70-73; West, p. 77; Faccioli, 
p. 337; discussion by Faccioli, pp. 89-90; discussion by Ryan, 
p.)125. 

13. The telephone communication may be considered good, as 
there is no disturbance or interference under normal operating 
conditions. 

14. The voltage regulation at the Denver substation under 
normal operating conditions is within 1 per cent of a given value 
and the departure from this value for different periods of the 
day is about 8 per cent. 

15, The towers are angle construction for horizontal circuit. 


ee 
Tae 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2015 


Discussion ON ‘¢ TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS OF THE GREAT WEST- 
ERN Power Co.,” ‘THE SOUTHERN PowErR Co.,” ‘THE 
GREAT Farts Power Co.,” and ‘‘ THE CENTRAL COLORADO 
PowEr Co.”’ Cuicaco, JUNE 29, 1911. 


M.H.Collbohm: I note that some of the operating companies 
are using the ungrounded delta system. I would like to know 
what the considerations were which guided these companies in 
deciding for such a system. It would seem to me that the dis- 
turbances set up by an arcing ground in a system with excep- 
tionally long lines operating under very high voltage would be 
very marked. It has been stated that the aluminum arrester 
would be able to take care of such disturbances, but I have had 
experience in an ungrounded delta system, where such a type of 
arrester, properly installed and pronounced in good order by the 
manufacturer, had been blown up three or four times, without 
lightning being the cause, simply by surging, and it seems to me 
that perhaps the grounded Y system might be preferable. 

Paul M. Lincoln: My experience with the grounded neutral 


. on high-tension lines has been of a secondary nature for the 


last five or six years—it has come second-hand, so that anything 
I may say on the matter of grounded neutral is necessarily in- 
formation that came from some one else to me. However, 
making a general analysis of such information as I have been able 
to gather, I have formed the general opinion that the grounding 
of a neutral of high-tension transmission lines, preferably through 
a resistance, is a desirable practise. Some transmission lines, 
particularly those in the western states, have made it a practise 
to dead-ground their neutrals, and in some cases have gone so far 
as to use the ground as a conductor. Some single-phase cus- 
tomers of these transmission lines have been served by a single 
conductor, using the ground as a return. That is carrying the 
grounded neutral idea to its further point. However, in general, 
from such observation as I have been able to carry out on the 
transmission lines, I find that the grounding of the neutrals, 
although it tends to emphasize some difficulties, tends to reduce 
others, and in my opinion the reduction of the difficulties is 
greater than the increase, due to that method of operation. 

L..C. Nicholson: Concerning the question of grounding the 
neutral of a high-voltage transmission system, I agree with Mr. 
Lincoln that grounding through a limiting resistance gives best 
results. A neutral completely grounded is open to several grave 
objections. A ground on one wire constitutes a short-circuit 
through the earth as a return. This usually interrupts the de- 
livery of power, and causes destructive inductance in parallel 
telephone or telegraph circuits. 

With the neutral insulated, arcing grounds composed of the 
charging current of the system set up dangerous surges which 
often cause failure at some other point and thus develop into a 
phase-to-phase short-circuit. 

The advantages of inserting say 1,000 ohms in the neutral of 


2016 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


a 60,000-volt line are several. First, the earth current is limited 
to a value which does not disturb the voltage of the system and 
therefore does not disturb the load. Furthermore, such an arc 
is not persistent and will usually cease after a few seconds with- 
out the necessity of cutting out the line, which is not true of an 
are carrying large current as in the case of a neutral grounded 
without resistance. The chief advantage of resistance in the 
neutral is that it largely overcomes the fundamental objection to 
an ungrounded neutral, that is, surges. The fact that the arc 
carries a small power current, and not condenser current only, 
tends to make the arc a better and more continuous conductor, 
which prevents the rapid make and break effect of a true capacity 
arc, and in this way an arcing ground loses its power to produce 
destructive voltage surges. 

An operating advantage of a resistance is that a line or section 
of line equipped with oil switches may be cut out automatically 
in case of a ground on one conductor. This is not true of an 
ungrounded neutral. 

N. J. Neall: The question as to whether a line should be 
' operated without grounded neutral or with grounded neutral is, 
of course, an old one that we have all battled with, and I suppose, 
judging from what has been said this morning, that neither method P 
is objectionable, provided it does not interfere with continuity 
of service. 

There is one point, however, which the inquiries sent out by 
the Committee did not cover, and I think it of great interest, and 
that is the question—How do these large operating companies 
take care of customers on branch lines? Do they permit the 
branch customers to be tied into the main line directly, or do 
they operate them through oil switches or fuse connections? 
There seems to be no information on that score, and it is, I 
think, one of some importance. ' 

As far as lightning protection is concerned, I observe that Mr. 
Jollyman speaks of the electrolytic lightning arrester as having a 
definite limit of operation and recommends that the gaps shall 
presumably be set above the critical voltage of the transmission 
line. This is rather an extraordinary point of view, and does 
not coincide with the opinions expressed in the report. made to 
the Committee of the National Electric Light Association, on 
Lightning Protection, of which I happen to be a member this 
year, and in which we had some very full replies. The general 
impression in reading the returns would be that the electrolytic 
lightning arrester had established itself positively in operation 
without very much trouble. Its operation, however, has created 
difficulties which are being recognized and corrected, and I can 
simply say to you as a matter of record, because it is no secret, 
that you must be very careful not to take your electrolytic 
lightning arrester for granted. The electrolytic lightning ar- 
rester and other forms of lightning protective arresters are not 
widely different from the class which we call fuses, and while 


= 
‘ 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2017 


they represent a certain outlay, and loss is undesirable, yet | 
see no reason to object, if the loss of the electrolytic or any other 
type of lightning arrester is simply, presumably, to save your 
main generating apparatus. It represents, however, a standard 
which the users of apparatus are already creating, namely, that 
as generating apparatus, transformers and other types, are be- 
coming stronger against static disturbances, and they are having 
less failures, they are demanding that the protective apparatus 
which they were formerly willing to see fail, provided it saved the 
rest of the station, shall likewise increase in strength, all of 
which is piling up the insulation at all points, and they are thus 
expecting to have no interruptions whatsoever. I think that is 
a very difficult ideal to attain at the present time. The general 
improvement of arresters, plus the value of overhead line pro- 
tection, has materially changed conditions, as they were reported 
to the Committee, and in this connection, I have a communica- 
tion from Mr. Vaughan, which follows: 

J. F. Vaughan (communicated): The chairman of your High- 
Tension Transmission Committee has asked for information on 


_the results of the operation of the lightning protection devices 


adopted for the Taylor’s Falls transmission line of The Minne- 
apolis General Electric Company, following the experiments 
which were published by the writer in the TRANSACTIONS of the 
A. I. E. E., 1908, X XVII, I, p. 397. 

The original line, about 40 miles long, was built in 1905, 
operating at from 50,000 to 55,000 volts. It consists of wooden 
pole construction, carrying a three-phase line of No. 4/0 B. & S. 
gage copper cable, arranged on a 72-in. upright equilateral 
triangle. The original protection consisted in ‘flow equiva- 
lent ’ multigap arresters at each end of the line, a double gap 
selective resistance horn arrester at the power station, a single 
horn gap water resistance arrester at the substation, a triple 
gap selective resistance horn arrester at the middle of the line, 
and an electrolytic arrester without oil insulation at the sub- 
station. The line protection originally consisted of four ex- 
perimental half-mile sections of different forms of overhead 
ground wire, with occasional lightning rods on the transmission 
poles and also a few rods on separate poles alongside the line. 
The most pronounced effect was produced by the type of over- 
head ground wire consisting of two No. 6 ground wires mounted 
6 ft. apart 18 in. above the top transmission wire, which ap- 
peared to shield the line effectively, preventing spillover and 
breakdown of insulators. These troubles were frequent and 
serious on the unprotected portions of the line. The station 
protection was satisfactory. , 

The success with the overhead ground wire led the company 
to extend it year by year until the whole line was protected. 
Line failures and disturbances decreased in proportion as the 
ground wire was extended. 

This year a duplicate line was built alongside the first line, 


2018 HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION [June 29 


using semi-flexible “‘ A ”’ frame steel towers, with the wires ar- 
ranged in an inverted 72-in. equilateral triangle with a j-in. 
steel cable ground wire at the apex of the tower. Electrolytic 
arresters were installed in connection with the new line at both 
stations and the power station horn gap arrester was replaced 
by an electrolytic arrester as well. The horn arrester at the 
middle of the line was found unnecessary and removed. 

This season, up to the present writing, there have been 22 
thunder storms without causing any interruption to service on 
either the pole line or the tower line. In this and other points 
the operation of the system has confirmed the conclusions drawn 
from the original experiments as reported in the above-men- 
tioned Institute paper. 

Hugh Pastoriza: Mr. Hebgen mentions the swinging of 
suspension insulators in the direction of the line due to tem- 
perature effects on adjacent spans of unequal length. This is an 
interesting point and one which we have investigated in some 
detail in connection with line design for the Telluride System. 

As would be expected, the amount of deflection of insulators 
is greater the longer the spans concerned. With a given maxi- 
mum span the greatest deflection occurs when the adjacent span 
is approximately half the size. The worst condition appears to 
be five or six equal long spans adjacent to a series of five or 
six spans half as long. 

This swinging may be minimized by a proper proportioning of 
sags in the various spans. Ordinary practise is to stress all 
spans to the same amount (usually to the elastic limit) under 
maximum load and at fairly low temperature. This results in a 
very large unbalancing of tension between a long and a short 
span at low temperature when unloaded. If the tensions are 
equalized at average temperature and loading instead, the un- 
balancing of tension under extreme conditions is much diminished 
and the swinging of insulators considerably reduced. This 
method of stringing results in greater sags on the shorter spans 
than are given by the usual method, but as difficulties with 
ground clearance usually occur on the longest rather than the 
shorter spans, this is not objectionable. 

In some cases computed where tensions were not thus equal- 
ized, insulators were found to deflect as much as 30 degrees. 
This emphasizes Mr. Hebgen’s point regarding the desirable 
construction for wire clamps. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago. Ill., June 30, 1911 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


THE ECONOMICAL DESIGN OF DIRECT-CURRENT 
ELECTROMAGNETS 


BY R. WIKANDER 


The design of an electromagnet for a given duty can as a rule 
be varied considerably, and while it is comparatively easy to 
design a magnet that will serve a certain purpose, it requires 
careful consideration to find the most economical design in any 
given case. 

In some cases the most economical design of a magnet will 
be the one for which the annual cost of the energy which it con- 
sumes added to the depreciation and the interest on the price 
will be a minimum. In other cases it is of importance that the 
magnet should be of compact design and of light weight in order 
to be transported conveniently, or it forms a part of some 
apparatus and should occupy a minimum of space. 

In this paper we will limit our investigations to the design of 
the cheapest, the most compact or the lightest magnet which can 
perform a given duty. 

The following fundamental formulas apply to all types of 
electromagnets. 

The pull @ of a magnet of the pole surface S sq. cm. and the 
magnetic induction ® lines per sq. cm. 1S 


R? _ 1 
P=Sy— dynes, (1) 


provided that the air gap between the plunger and the stop is 
very small in proportion to the diameter of the core. 
The magnetic induction & is equal to the flux # in lines divided 
2019 


2020 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 380 


by the pole surface of the magnet or the section of the flux 
S in sq. cm. 


B= 2 lines per sq. cm. (2) 


The flux ® can be figured from the magnetomotive force £ 
and the reluctance ® of the magnetic circuit. 

The magnetomotive force depends upon the number of am- 
‘pere-turns of the electric circuit and can be expressed as follows: 


Be Xe. 


ees (N 


XA gilbert (3) 
where A is the number of ampere turns of the electric circuit. 

The reluctance ® of the magnetic circuit is figured from the 
reluctances of its various series or parallel connected parts in the 
same way as we figure the resistance of an electric circuit from 
the resistances of its constituent parts. 

The reluctance of an air gap is equal to its length, /, in cm., 
divided by its section in sq. cm. 


l 
R= > oersteds (4) 


where yw is the permeability of the metal, generally iron or steel, 
The magnetic flux @ in maxwells is: 


ee J 

o=3 6) 

It will be seen from (1), (2), (3) and (6) that we can express 
the pull @ in various ways, as follows: 


(3? 2 


emir Respect ge Ans (7) 


These formulas seem very simple but it is often difficult or 
impossible to apply them. 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2021 


Figs. 1 and 2 represent typical cases where the above formulas 
cannot be applied directly. A and B are iron cores and C is 
the magnetizing coil. We see that the section of the flux in the 
air is infinite and that the length of the different parts of same 
varies between a limited value and »*. Magnets of such types 
are mostly used for instruments or relays, while our discussions 
will be limited to magnets for comparatively heavy duty. Mag- 


( wu) 


eae 
Seco 


8 

38 
B 

ras 


cee 
rae 
aa 


re 
"ats 
= 
5 
2% 
See 


ee 
a 


a 
bao 
Ke 

p 
BOs 
BS 
ieee 


) 


"> 


: Fic. 2 EIGso 


nets of this kind have as a rule a magnetic circuit of definite 


shape (see Fig. 3). 
The principles governing the design of electromagnets are 
entirely different for direct and alternating current. At present 


*In his book on ‘ Solenoid Electromagnets and Electromagnetic 
Windings ”’ Mr. C. R. Underhill has published several tests made on 
magnets of such types, and from a comparison of the conditions and re- 
sults of those tests it will in many cases be possible to calculate the 
approximate pull that will be obtained with such magnets. 


2022 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


we will only treat the design of the former class, reserving the 
alternating-current magnets for a future presentation. 

We distinguish between magnets which have to carry the 
exciting current continuously and those in which the current is 
admitted to the coil for only a few seconds or minutes in order to 
perform a certain mechanical operation. 

We may further distinguish between magnets whose main 
function is to exert a certain final pull or pressure, and those 
which perform a certain amount of work, as when the product 
of the initial pull and the stroke is given, though it is often 
difficult to draw the line between these various classes. 

According to the above distinctions we will discuss the follow- 
ing cases separately. 

1. Continuously excited magnets for exertion of a certain pull 
or pressure or for a given final pull. 

2. Intermittently excited magnets for the same purpose. © 

3. Continuously excited magnets for the performance of a 
certain amount of work or for a given product of initial pull and 
stroke. | 

4. Intermittently excited magnets for the same purpose. 

In our analytical investigations regarding the most suitable 
dimensions of plunger type magnets we will make use of the 
following relations between the ordinate of a curve and the 
distance from the origin at which the tangent to the same point 
intersects the axis of the ordinates. 

If 6 is a function of the variable g, the equation 


bv=K.g 


expresses a curve which we can make tangent to any curve in 
the plane at any point whatsoever by assigning the proper 
values to x and K. 

We will in the following call this curve ‘a parabola of the 
degree x”’. 

Any tangent to the curve expressed by the above equation 
intersects the axis of the ordinates at a distance b, from origin, 


watee( $8 


or, in the present case, where 
a 1 
b=K* . g* 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2023 


and 
abd Rs cae 
by =b— ne ; Ks ' 
or 


nae) 


If we know the value of x this latter equation enables us to 
find by trial the parts of any curve whatsoever which are tangent 
to a parabola of the degree x. 

If we further have a function y which is proportional to the 
value of the expression Df“ or 


y=’ a Dé 


we know that y will decrease with decreasing values of D if 
the value of f (x) is positive and with increasing values of D if 
the value of f (x) is negative. 

If, further, the values of D corresponding to positive values of 
f (x) are all larger than any value of D corresponding to nega- 
tive values of the same function we can conclude that y will 
become a minimum for the values of D and x which correspond 
to the equation 


f (x) =0 


In the following examples we will use these formulas in order 
to find the most suitable parts of the magnetization curves, (or 
in some cases the pull curves) for various types of magnets. 

NOMENCLATURE 
A=the number of ampere-turns of the winding. 
a=the number of ampere-turns per inch of air gap. 
B=the flux density in the air gap in maxwells per sq. in. 
b=a function of g. 

b, =the distance from origin at which the tangent to a certain 

curve intersects with the axis of the ordinate. 


2024 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


C=the cost of the electromagnet in cents. 

C,=the cost of one cu. in. of the winding in cents. 

C,=the cost of one cu. in. of the magnetic circuit. 

D=the outside diameter of the winding in inches. 

d=the diameter of the core (=inside diameter of winding) 
in inches. 


= ¢ =the ratio of the core diameter to the outside diameter 


of the winding. 
=the voltage of the current supply system. 
e=the ratio of the volume of the total magnetic circuit to 
the core of the magnet. 
®=magnetic flux in lines (maxwells). 
G=the weight of the electromagnet in lb. 
G,=the weight of one cubic inch of winding in lb. 
G2=the weight of one cu. in. of the magnetic circuit. 
G3=the weight of z cu. in. of winding. 
g=a variable quantity. 
=the exciting current in amperes. 
K, Ki, Ke, K3, etc., constants. 


K,=e—1, if the function y expresses the volume of the magnet. 


.Ge—-Gi , ; ; 
aes a * if the function y expresses the weight of the 
1 
magnet. 
é.Ca—Gy.., : 
=- 77 ‘if the function y expresses the cost of the 
1 


magnet. 
L=the length of the winding in inches. 
1=the air-gap in inches. 
N =the number of turns per sq. in. of the section of the winding, 
n=the total number of turns of the winding. 
P=the pull required in lb. 
R=the resistance of m cu. in. of the winding. 
r=the resistance of the winding in ohms. 
S=section of magnet core in sq. cm. 
S-=the cooling surface of the winding in sq. in. 
V=the volume of the electromagnet in cu. in. 
W=the energy required for the excitation of the magnet in 
watts. 
W,=the ratio of this energy to the cooling surface of the coil 
in watts per sq. in. 


1911] *  WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2025 


W.=the ratio of this energy to the volume of the coil in watts 
per cu. in. of the winding. 
x, 2=exponents which express the degree of a parabola. 
y =a function which may express V, G or C depending upon 
the values of certain constants (Ke and Ks). 


1. CONTINUOUSLY EXCITED MAGNETS FOR A GIVEN FINAL PULL 
OR PRESSURE 


The limiting condition for the compact and cheap design of 
this kind of electromagnet is that the coil must be able to carry 
the exciting current continuously without overheating. 

The magnet must further be able to produce the required 
pressure or pull with a certain air gap which is required in order 
to prevent ‘‘ freezing’, to allow for the wear of contacts, or 
to meet other conditions depending upon the application of 
the magnet. 

The pull P in pounds can be expressed by the formula 


Pim O07 bg a LOS ie wa oly in lb. (8) 
Transposing, we can write 


Peril 


eaNNo a (9) 
or 
p= _P....in maxwells per sq. in. (10) 
or % 
4=9600 YP... .in inches (11) 


B 


The air-gap is supposed to be so short that the influence of 
the “ fringing ”’ or the pull produced by the flux around the edges 
outside of the air gap can be neglected. 

The induction B for a given magnet is a function of the ampere- 
turns of the coil. At low densities of the iron B increases 
approximately in proportion to the ampere-turns, while at 
higher densities the induction increases more slowly than the 
magnetizing current. We will first investigate which part of the 
magnetizing curve is the most economical one to work on. 
For any magnet of given dimensions we can assume that the 


2026 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


relation of the flux density to the magnetizing ampere-turns is 
expressed by the equation 


Be=K .A or A= ae (12) 


_—s 
K 


where x is a positive quantity increasing with the magnetization. 
We have 


A=I .n=F .N.L. arn (13) 


or 
At. om ee ae 


Pee fe (D—d)? K?. N?. L? (D—d)? 


(14) 


or if we substitute the value of B from equation (10) we can write 


9600" . PF . 4 


ia a. ; : x 
i Kern > iN 2 Le CD)? fo) 
The resistance of the winding can be expressed as follows: 
2 2 
“R= 7" .L (16) 


The surface of the coil which is available for heat dissipation 
or cooling can be expressed as follows: 


S.=L (D+d) x (17) 


We neglect the end surfaces of the winding because they 
do not help to conduct any heat from the center or hottest part 
of the coil. We count, however, the inside surface of the winding 
as cooling because no heat is produced in the adjacent core and 
therefore the high thermal conductivity of the same helps to cool 
the winding. 

We can express the energy of excitation as follows: 


W=L (D+d)z.W, (18) 


But it can also be expressed as a function of the current or 
the voltage and the resistance if the winding 


72 
WH? . a (19) 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2027 


Substituting the values of J? and r from (16) and (17) we can 
write 


9600” .P* ..R.(D*=—a@) L 


L(D+d)" Wir "kag NP. Lt (D—d)? (20) 


or 
DOO0E stk R 
Re Wi > DEN? 


L? (D—d) d= (21) 
For any given value of X corresponding to a certain part of the 
magnetizing curve, the quantities at the right-hand side of the 
equation (21) do not vary with L, D or d. 
The ratio = varies with the material of the winding and 
the space factor of same, but is comparatively constant for differ- 


ent sizes of wire. 


We can therefore write, approximately, 


L? (D—d) d*=K, (22) 
or ; 
L? DY (1-6) 6"=Ki (23) 


The volume of the electromagnet is equal to the sum of the 
volume of winding and magnetic circuit and can be expressed as 
follows: 

iw 


V=L(D'-@) F+e oe (24) 

or 
V=L (D+ (e-1) &) (25) 

or 
V=LD? (1+(e-1) &) 4 (26) 


The weight of the electromagnet can be expressed 


2 
G=L (D?—@) a ye OS § o* BGs (27) 


G=L (D+ exo : “) Gi. a (28) 


U1 


2028 ; WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


or 

aie e Ge—-G, :) us 

G=LD* (1+ pooh Ot) sages (29) 
and the cost can be expressed as follows: 

Cia pr aeie a) Cw es (30) 

Ci 4 

or 

C=r Dt (es wa aah oy) a. (31) 

Ci 


The equations (25), (26), (28), (29), (30) and (31) are of the 
general form 


y=L (D’+K2 d’) Ks (32) 


or 
y=L D? (1+ K2 6) Ks (33) 


where y expresses any of the quantities V, G or C depending upon 
the values we attribute to the constants K-2 and K-3. 

In order to keep the: volume, weight or cost of the electro- 
magnet as low as possible we should reduce the value of y to a 
minimum. We may vary the quantities L, D and d, but they 
must always satisfy the equations (22) and (23). 

From the equation (28) in which 6 is a positive quantity <1 
we can deduce the following equation: 


LD*=K,t . (1—6)-+ . 8-* . D> 2 (34) 


and this expression substituted in equation (33) gives the fol- 
lowing expression for y: 


> 9 _14+2% 
y=K,t . (1-8)-? . 6-* | D2? (14-38%) Ky ~ (36) 


If the exponent of D is positive, which is the case for low values 
of x and low densities, the function y will decrease with a de- 
crease in the diameter of the magnet core and winding. If this 
exponent is negative, which correspondg to high values of x 
and high densities, y will decrease with an increase in the, 
diameter of the magnet core and winding. By varying the diam- 
eter, or, which amounts to the same, by varying the flux density, 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2029 


we can thus in either case obtain a decrease in the value of y 
and consequently of the volume, weight or cost of the magnet. 

If the exponent of D is equal to 0 the value of y will not change 
with variations of the diameter. It follows that yis a minimum 
if we work on the part of the curve for which the value of x 
satisfies the equation 


1+2 
2-—5" =0 (36) 
which gives 
xa (37) 
and consequently 3 
Bee KA (38) 


The most economical value of the flux density is thus to be 
found on the part of the magnetization curve which is a parabola 
-of the degree S 
The tangent at any point intersects the axis of the ordinate 

at a distance from the origin 


x 


and in the present case where => this distance will be 


b,=(1—4) g= 38 (39) 


The magnetization curve of the magnet is not identical with 
that of the iron alone, because it includes the air gaps as well, 
and its shape varies with the ratio of the air gap to the total 
length of the magnetic circuit. 

In practical cases this ratio may vary from about 0.25 per 
cent (for a magnet of 3-in. core diameter, @y-in. total air gap and 
6-in. length of the magnetic circuit) to about 1.5 per cent (for 
a magnet of 5-in. core diameter, 1_in. total air gap and 17-in. 
length of the magnetic circuit.) 

In Fig. 4, A B is the magnetization curve for one inch of a 
high grade steel, the line O C representing the magnetization of 
an air gap of 0.0025 in. By adding the ampere-turns for each 


2030 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


value of B we find the magnetizing curve O D of one inch of iron 
and 0.0025 in. of air, which has the same shape as the magnetizing 
curve of the whole magnetic circuit. 

By trial we find the point E on this curve for which the ordinate 
E F is three times larger than the distance OG. G is the point 
where the tangent at E intersects the axis O Y. The cor- 
responding flux density is 81,000 lines per sq. in. or 12,600 lines 
per sq. cm. If the air gap is 1.5 per cent of the length of the 
magnetic circuit the line O C represents the magnetization of the 
air gap corresponding to § in. of iron. If we add to this line 
the ampere-turns required for the magnetization of § in. of iron, 
we find the curve O H, which represents the magnetization of 


FLUX DENSITY IN LINES PER SQUARE INCH 


1) 0 2 30 40 50 60 70F 80M 90 100 110 120 
AMPERE TURNS PER INCH OF IRON 


Fic. 4 
6 in. of iron and 0.0025 in. of air and is of the same shape (only 
the scale of the ampere-turns is different) as the magnetization 
curve of any magnet with 1.5 per cent air gap. We find by 
trial the point K on this curve, for which the tangent to the 
curve intersects the axis O Y at the point Land K M=3 X OL. 
The corresponding flux density is consequently 96,000 lines per 
sq. in. or 14,900 lines per sq. cm. 

The most economical flux density varies, consequently, be- 
tween 81,000 lines per sq. in. for magnets with small air gaps 
and 96,000 lines for magnets with large air gaps. This den- 
sity increases with the air gap. For average conditions the 
most economical flux density will be approximately 90,000 
lines per sq. in. or 14,000 lines per sq. cm. for steel or wrought 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2031 


iron of high magnetic permeability. For cast iron a correspond- 
ing point on the magnetizing curve of that material should be 
chosen. 

As soon as the flux density to be used has been decided, the 
core diameter can be determined from equation (11). There 
still remain to be determined the values of L and D and these 
can be found as follows: 


Substitute the value es for x in the equation (22), which then 


2, 
takes the form 
L? (D—d) ®=K, (40) 
or 
ain, den 
oes \ (D—d) @ (41) 


Substituting this value of L in equation (32) we have 


niedd Serbs 
(D—d) d 


y=K; (D?+K2 @) (42) 
Differentiating this expression with regard to D we find that 
y becomes a minimum for 
ee 
paca ae 7 


or 
d 3 
6= = (44) 
DD 24+V4+3 Ke 
From equations (23) to (28) we can see that K-2 always is 
> —1 and 6 is therefore always positive and <1. 
The curve Fig. 5 shows the variation of 6 with regard to K-2. 
From the values of d and 6 we find the corresponding value of 
the outside diameter of the winding: 


d 
a 

From the known value of the air gap we can calculate the cor- 

responding number of ampere-turns required to carry the flux 


density B through the gap and the iron. 
A=0.314 .B.1 _ (46) 


2032 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


This equation gives us the number of ampere-turns required 
to carry the flux through the air gaps. For the magnetization 
of the iron this value has to be increased from 7 per cent for 
magnets with comparatively large air gaps to 14 per cent for 
magnets with comparatively small gaps (see Fig. 4). 

From equations (14), (16), (18) and (19) can be deduced 


Lin gt) ys A? . 4 o 
Ree t Tes ME? (Doay 7 PtOT . Wi (48) 
or 
R ae | jaa © 
owas \ N?° (D—d) rt W, ao 


wherein the value of <*. depends upon the character of the wire 


and its insulation. It also varies slightly with the size of the 

‘wire. The wire table given on another page shows the variation 

of this quantity for cotton covered wire of the usual sizes. 
For a first approximation we may choose 


R ome —6 
We 738 . 2G 

The value of W, or the watts dissipated per square inch of the 
winding depends of course upon the conditions of the case. 
Under average conditions it may be assumed that 1 watt per 
square inch of the cooling surface will produce a rise of tem- 
perature of 100 deg. cent. If we allow a maximum rise of 
40 deg. cent. we should choose W,=0.40. 
_ Substituting these constants in equation (47) we find the value 
rey aw 

Equation (18) gives the value of W. 

Transposing equation (19) gives 


r= (48) 
and transposing equation (16) gives 


4r 
R= (pe @) L So) 


A 


x 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2038 


From the wire table accompanying this paper we find the 
corresponding size of wire. From the same table we find the 
corresponding number of turns N per square inch of the winding 
section.* 

The total number of turns is of course 


L (D=d) 


n=N 9 


(50) 


The dimensions of the most economical magnet for a given 
duty are thereby determined. 

From the above deductions we can draw some interesting 
conclusions concerning the design of electromagnets of this 
class: 

1. The most economical density is always the one for which 
the corresponding part of the magnetization curve is a parabola 
of the form: 


Be=kK . A 


2. The absolute value of B depends upon the permeability 
of the iron part of the circuit and upon the length of the air gap, 
but is the same whether we design a magnet of minimum volume, 
minimum weight, or minimum cost. 

3. The ratio of core diameter to outside diameter of the 
winding is independent of air gap, flux density and ampere-turns, 
and depends only upon the value of the constant Ke, which in 
its turn is dependent upon whether we wish to design a magnet of 
minimum volume, weight, or cost and upon the relation of the 
volume of the total magnetic circuit to the core inside of the coil. 


*This table gives the values of R and N which correspond to the 
theoretical winding space, obtained by assuming that the space occupied 
by each wire is equal to the square of its outside diameter. For machine 
wound coils it is always possible to meet this figure, but for hand wound 
coils we must allow from 7 to 18 per cent more winding space. The 


I : 
values of R and WN decrease while the value of moo in the same 


proportion. 
For coils of small diameter as used for telephones and instruments the 


increase in winding space amounts to about 7 to 9 per cent while for 
larger coils as used for electromagnetically operated switches, etc., the 
space actually required is about 16 to 18 per cent greater than the one 
theoretically necessary. In either case the excess space required is some- 
what larger for finer wires. 


2034 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


2. INTERMITTENTLY EXCITED MAGNETS FOR EXERTION OF CER- 
TAIN PULL OR PRESSURE 
Magnets of this class are as a rule excited for a few moments 
only and at considerable intervals, allowing the winding to cool 
off after each operation. 

The limiting condition for compact and cheap design of such 
magnets is that the thermal capacity of the winding must be 
sufficient for the absorption of the energy dissipated during the 
operation without overheating. 

If we assume W2 watts to be absorbed per cubic inch of the 
winding, the expression for the total energy, corresponding to 
equation (18), is 


Wie [roe (51) 


This expression must be equal to the right hand side of equa- 
tion (20) and we can write 


D-@ 9600 . P*¥. R. (D?-d*) . L 
Lpradv ade VAG Uke ba Neel i ae 
or, corresponding to equation (22), 
L? (D—d)? d*=K, (53) 


Equations (24) to (33) apply of course to this class of magnets, 
also. 
If we substitute Dé for d in equation (53) we have 
L?2 p2*t2 (1—6)2 ‘ 6’*= K, 
hence 


Ete kets Por eon 2 
Substituting this value in equation (33) we have 


_242 « 


y=K,t . (1=8)-! . 6-* . D9? —«. (14-K36%). Ks (84) 
The most economical saturation will be the one for which 


Yt rt we ls 
2—- 9 a=) 
or 
Li) Sand epee 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2035 


For this class of magnets we should thus work on the part of the 


magnetizing curve for which the induction increases propor- 


tionately to the ampere-turns, or at the point of the magnetiza- 
tion curve for which the tangent goes through the origin. It is 
interesting to note that this point is independent of the air gap 
and can consequently be found from the magnetization curve of 
the iron alone. 

For the iron of which the magnetization curve is shown in 
Fig. 5 the most economical flux density for this kind of magnets 
will be found by tracing the tangent O H which gives us the 
point A, corresponding to a flux density of 50,000 lines per sq. in. 
or about 7,750 gauss (=lines per sq. cm.). 

Knowing the value of B, equation (11) gives us the correspond- 
ing core diameter for any pull required. If we insert the value 
of x=1 in equation (58) it takes the form 


L? (D—d)? @=K, 
or (55) 
_ VK 
- (D—d) d 


L 


If we substitute this value of L in equation (32) it takes the 


form 
K K. Dit ies i 
y 5. VK. (D—d)d 


Differentiating this expression with regard to D we find that 
y becomes a minimum for 


D=d qd HE A/ | -es) 
or 
1 


d 
D 14VI+Ks 
The dotted line in Fig. 5 shows the variation of 6 with regard 
to Ko. , 
From the values of d and 6 we find the corresponding value of 
the outside diameter of the winding: 


p=" (67) 
The required number of ampere-turns is found from equation 


(45) in the same way as for magnets of class No. 1. 


2036 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


From equations (14), (16), (51) and (19) we can deduce the 
following expression for the length of the winding: 
2A | R 1 


LTD sedi i NaN eatemes 


(58) 


The value of s can be found from the wire table. 

The value of W, or the watts to be dissipated per cubic inch 
of the winding depends of course upon the quantity of metal 
contained in one cubic inch of the winding, also upon the ma- 
terial of the wire and the space occupied by the insulation. 

The wire table gives the weight G; of copper contained in 


5 


-h & &© H&B dh & & 


VALUE OF THECONSTANT Ko 


Fic. 5.—Economical ratio of core diameter to outside diameter 
of winding for direct-current plunger magnets 


mw cubic inches of winding for different sizes of cotton covered 
copper wires. 

If we allow a rise of temperature of 100 deg. cent. after 100 
seconds and considering that 1 watt-sec. =0.000527 pound-calor- 
ies and the specific heat of copper = 0.0951 we find the value of 
W; as follows: 


100. .0951 
™W2=Gs - To9. 000527 ~ 180 Gs 52) 
or 
W.=57.5 . Gs; (60) 


Gs varies from 0.352 for No. 35 wire to 0.70 for No. 10 wire. 
For average conditions we can assume G;=0.60 as a first ap- 
proximation. ; 


POTN WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2037 


Equation (51) gives us the value of W. 

Equation (48) gives us the value of 7. 

Equation (49) gives us the value of R. 

Equation (50) gives us the value of x. 

The dimensions of the magnet are thereby determined. 

Summing up the above investigations we can draw the follow- 
ing conclusion concerning the design of magnets of this class. 

1. The most economical density is on the part of the mag- 
netizing curve just below the ‘“ knee”’. 

2. The value of B depends only upon the magnetic properties 
of the iron. 

3. The ratio of core diameter to outside diameter of winding 
depends only upon the value of the constant K2 and is independ- 
ent of air gap, flux density and ampere-turns. 


3. CONTINUOUSLY EXCITED MAGNETS FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF 


A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF WORK 

For magnets of this class it is generally required that the 
product of the initial pull and the stroke of the magnet shall 
correspond to a certain amount of work. 

In order to calculate the initial pull of a magnet we must 
consider the influence of the ‘‘ fringing "’ which takes place as 
soon as the air gap reaches an appreciable value. 

One effect of the fringing is an additional flux outside of the 
cylindrical space between the end surfaces of the magnet core, 
and this flux adds considerably to the pull of the magnet. 

Another effect is that this flux increases the induction in the 
iron core to a value considerably in excess of the flux density in 
the air gap, and this effect produces indirectly a decrease of 
the pull. 

Both these effects vary in different ways with the ampere: 
turns of the magnet, the material of the magnet core, the length 
of the air gap, the diameter of the core and the shape of the 
magnet. To determine analytically the pull of a magnet with 
considerable air gap from the magnetizing curve of the iron 
and the shape of the magnet, with any degree of accuracy, is 
rather complicated. 

Any general formulas which might be derived to express the 
pull as a function of these data would be too complicated for 
the purpose of our present investigation and we have therefore 
resorted to another method. 

For magnets of approximately the same type, the same quality 


of the iron, the same proportion between air gap and plunger 


2038) WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


diameter, and the same number of ampere-turns per inch of the 
air gap, it will be found that the flux density for corresponding 
points is the same for all sizes of magnets. 

If, therefore, we take a magnet of any size and determine by 
test the relation between the pull per square inch of the whole 
surface and the excitation in ampere-turns per inch of air gap for 
different values of the ratio between air gap and pole diameter, 
we will obtain a set of curves which apply to all sizes of magnets 
of the type under consideration. 

Fig. 6 represents a set of curves which has been obtained from 
tests of the magnet shown in Fig. 3. 

In order to find the most economical value of the pull per 
square inch of pole surface we apply the following method, which 


” 
«5 GAP 


SS ee 
} +15 GAP 


Te 1."GAP 
id 

Ay, Aig 1.5 GAP 
” 


ae 
1S) 
za 
ud 
a 
<= 
=] 
meJ 
n 
a 
i) 
8. 
Ww 
a 
d 


00 20 000 
AMPERE TURNS 


Fic. 6.—Pull curves for constant air-gap and variable current 
for plunger type magnets 


is based upon the same principle as the one applied to the mag- 
nets of the classes 1 and 2. 

We express the pull P as a function of the diameter of the 
core d, the ampere-turns per inch of air gap, a, and a quantity Ks 
which may be different for different parts of the curve, but is a 
constant for small variations of P, d and a on any part of the 
curve. are 


P=K,.a* .d@ (61) 
The amount of work which the magnet should perform may be 

expressed as 
Q=P .lor pal (62) 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2039 


From equations (61) and (62) we derive 


Cue. OF ..bh od (63) 
And the number of ampere-turns 
veaime ty Sig OF i ban ee (64) 
Considering that the ratio 5 is constant, we may write 
A=Ky, {a (65) 


From equations (13) and (65) we can deduce 


2A het ioe 


sia daa) 


(66) 


Inserting the value of W from equation (18), the value of 
T from (66) and the value of r from equation (16) in the equation 
(19), we have : 


= 4 ae as KU OL 
L (D+d) Wi= xp Emap ** Mae 13 (67) 
or 
L? (D—d) d*?*=K; (68) 
or, introducing the value 6, 
L? D*1 (1-6) 62 =K; (69) 
or Op ( Se : 5 ay 
Tip kae ee es hg (70) 
This value of L D® substituted in equation (33) gives 
| 2 =3.% 
y=Ko nye (71) 


The quantity y which may express the volume, weight or 
cost of the magnet becomes a minimum when 


5 
REISS tes Az 
5 3 x=0 (72) 


which gives 


5 
x= & Le 


2040 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


and consequently if we substitute this value of xin equation (61) 


6 
P=K,.a° .@ (74) 


The most economical values of the flux density are thus to be 
found on the parts of the curves, Fig. 6, which are parabolas 


‘of the degree z. 


The tangent of any parabola of this degree intersects with the 
axis of the ordinate at a distance from the origin 


40 000 | 


30 000 | — 


20 000 


10 000 | — 


0 Oo” 100 % 
LENGTH OF STROKE IN PER CENT OF PLUNGER DIAMETER 


ECONOMICAL EXCITATION IN AMPERE TURNS PER INCH AIR GAP 


Fic, 7.—Economical excitation per inch of air-gap 
for plunger type magnets 


From the curves, Fig. 6, we find by trying the most economical 
points on the P curve, the points for which the tangents inter- 
sect the negative part of the axis of the ordinates at a distance 
equal to +P. 

We find that this condition is approximately fulfilled by the 
part of the P curves around the points Al, A2, A3, etc., and 
conclude that the function y will be a minimum for the values 


of pull and excitation corresponding to the points A1, A2, A3, 
etc. 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2041 


It is interesting to note that within the range of our test the most 
economical pull per square inch is approximately the same for 


all values of i and in this case about 70 lb. per sq. in. 


d 


The number of ampere-turns per inch of gap, varies, however, 


: oe! eee : 
with the ratio 7s shown in Fig. 7, which represents the value 


of a plotted against _ for the most economical points of the 


various P curves. 

In most practical cases the values of the initial pull P and the 
stroke J are given, and we can find the corresponding value of 
d from the equation 


P=K i ga (76) 
or, in our case, 
2 
P=710 OH 58 a? (77) 
or 
d=0.1385 VP (78) 


From d and / we find the ratio 4 and from the curve Fig. 7 


we find the corresponding number of ampere-turns per inch of 
air gap. a. | 

Substituting the value of x= % in equation (68) it takes the 
form 


L? (D—d) ®=Ki _ (79) 
(Oh 


ee ee es (80) 


Inserting this value of L in equation (32) it takes the form 


D?+K2@ 


y=VKu E V(D—d) @ . 


K; (81) 


2042 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


Differentiating this expression with regard to D we find that y 
becomes a minimum for 


Dade erga (82) 
or 
onl 2 (83) 


ee Nas es a 


This formula is identical with equation (44) and consequently 
the solid line curve, Fig. 5, represents the value of 6 corresponding 
to different values of Ke for this class of magnets as well. 

From the value of D we find 


d 
D= > (84) 

The ampere-turns required are 
A=a .l (64) 


Equation (47) gives us the corresponding value of L. 
Equation (18) gives us the corresponding value of W. 
Equation (48) gives us the corresponding value of 7. 
Equation (49) gives us the corresponding value of R. 
Equation (50) gives us the corresponding value of n. 

The dimensions of the most economical magnet for the given 
pull and stroke are thereby determined. 

In case the value of Z obtained from equation (47) should be 
less than about twice the value of / it is recommended to increase 
L to the said amount and figure the corresponding value of D 
from equation (47), which can be transposed to read 


R A? 


Aira ‘ Lear W, 


+d (85) 


We then find the other dimensions as indicated above. 

If only the product Q=P/ were given it may be of interest 
to see how the values of P and / should be chosen in order to 
obtain the most economical magnet for a given duty. 


—s: 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2043 


Let us assume that for the most favorable ratio of £ the 


ampere-turns per inch of air gap can be expressed as follows: 


2 


ee (=) (86) 


The number of ampere-turns is 
AmsG ieKis gop a0 (87) 


and the corresponding value of I? is found by substituting the 
value of A from equation (87) in equation (14) 


4k 12” 4 pare dae 
N? L? (D—d)? 


r= (88) 


Substituting the value of J? from (88), the value of r from 
(16), and the values of W from (18) in equation (19) we derive 


L(D—d=P a . Kis (89) 
or Set 
TaD i ec (90) 
Substituting this value in equation (33) it can be written 
3 
y=Ky . PO. a : (91) . 
=Ky, (a)! . d-**s (92) 


From equations (62) and (76) we deduce 
Q=Ky . 1a (98) 


or 

Ldt=Q.. Kio (94) 
Substituting the value of /@ from equation (94) in equation 
(92), and considering that Q is constant, we may write 


y=Kig . d-*-** (95) 
y becomes a minimum for 
4+32=0 (96) 
or 
2=—% (97) 


2044 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


This value of z corresponds to a point on the curve a for which 
the tangent intersects the positive side of the axis of the ordinate 
at a distance ; 


=(1-(-4)) a=ta eo 


This part of the curve a lies, however, outside of the range of 
our test. 

Analyzing the part of the curve a represented in Fig. 7 we 
find that the distance of said intersection from origin, in pro- 
portion to the value of a, is approximately 


3 
b= 4 


and consequently 
z=—3 (100) 


which value substituted in-equation (95) gives 
Y=Ky . d (101) 


This means that within the range of our test the volume, 
weight or cost of any magnet of this kind increases approxi- 
mately in proportion to the core diameter, or, which amounts 
to the same, in inverse proportion to the square root of the 
length of the stroke. 

From the above investigations we can draw the following 
conclusions regarding the economical design of this class of 
magnets. ; 

1. In order to obtain an economical magnet the stroke should 
be chosen as long as the conditions of the case permit. 

2. The section of the core should be chosen so as to give a 
certain pull per square inch, in this case about 70 lb. 

3. From the ratio of diameter of core to length of stroke we 
find the necessary ampere-turns per inch of stroke. 

4. The ratio of outside diameter of coil to diameter of core 
depends only upon the value of the constant Ky and is the same 
as for magnets of class No. 1. . 


4. INTERMITTENTLY EXCITED MAGNETS FOR THE PERFORMANCE 
OF A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF WorRK 
For magnets of this class the same method as described in the 


previous chapter can be used in order to find the most economical 
design. 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2045 


Equations (62) to (66) apply to this class as well. 
The equation corresponding to (67) takes the form 


D-@& Ke .d- .(D-@) LR 


IL 4 UE W.= LD (D—d)? - ig (102) 
or 
L? (Dd) d*?= Kg (103) 
or, introducing the value of 6 a 
L? D** Ci —6)? ; 68%2— Ki, (104) 
or 
GD = Kay. «DIS (105) 
This value of L D? inserted in equation (33) gives us 
Vig 2.9 LP (106) 
and y becomes a minimum for 
2-—3x=0 (107) 
or x= 2 
Substituting this value of x in equation (61) we obtain 
3 
Pe e107) 2? (108) 


The most economical values of P are to be found on the parts 
of the curves, Fig. 6, which are parabolas of the degree 3. 
The tangents of same intersect with the axis of the ordinate at a 
distance from origin: 
3 1 
n=(1-5)P=-g? (109) 
From the curves, Fig. 6, we find by trial the most economical 
points on the corresponding P curves. 
These points B, B2, B3, B4, etc., all correspond approxi- 
mately to the value of P equal to 50 Ib. per square inch. 
The number of ampere-turns per inch of air gap for the most 
economical points of the various P curves vary as shown by the 
dotted line in Fig. 7. 


2046 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


If P and / are given we find the corresponding values of d 
from the equation 


P=Ky . @ (110) 
or, in our case, 
2 
P=50 OFA 39.3.0 (111) 
or =e 
d=0.16 VF (112) 


From. d and / we find the ratio of + and from the dotted line 


in Fig. 7 we find the corresponding number of ampere-turns 
per inch of stroke. 

Substituting the value x=? in equation (103) it takes the 
form 


L? (D—d)? @=Ky (113) 
or 
se oh oe 
hei Ee 53 a 


If we substitute this value of L in equation (32) it takes the 
form 


vs 
Y= a (pity (P+ K@) Ki (115) 


Differentiating this expression with regard to D we find that 
y becomes a minimum for 


D=d (1+V1+K3) (116) 
or 
d tel] 
aie g BONER oe (117) 


This formula is identical with equation (56) and consequently 
the dotted line in Fig. 5 will show the relation of 6 to Ke for this 
class of magnets as well. 

Equation (84) gives us the value of D. 

Equation (64) gives us the value of A. 

Equation (59) gives us the value of 7 W2. 

Equation (58) gives us the value of L. 


—v 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2047 


Equation (51) gives us the value of W. 

Equation (48) gives us the value of r. 

Equation (49) gives us the value of R. 

Equation (50) gives us the value of 7. 

The dimensions of the magnet are thereby determined. 

In case the value of L which we obtain from equation (58) 
should be less than about twice the value of / it is recommended 
to increase L to the said amounts and figure the corresponding 
value of D from the following equation, which can be derived 
from equation (58): 


a amas 
Da A aa eq te (118) 


We then find the other dimensions as indicated above. 

If only the product Q=P./ were given it may be of interest 
to see how the values of P and / should be chosen so as to obtain 
the most economical magnet for a given duty. 

We may express the values of a, A and J? as in equations 
(86), (87) and (88). 

Substituting the values of J” from (88), r from (16) and W 
from (51) in equation (19) we derive 


2 (D—d)t=" dd Kir (119) 

i LD?=Ki.."'d* (120) 
Inserting this value of L D? in equation (33) it can be written: 
Tic Gen Ue han alae a (121) 

: y=Ki a) .dt™ (122) 
Substituting the value of / d* from equation (94) in (122) gives 

yee Koo.d 7” (123) 


Substituting the value of 2 from equation (100), which approx- 
imately applies to the dotted curve as well (see Fig. 7), gives 


au 
y=Kxo.d" (124) 


This equation shows that for magnets of this class, and 
within the range of our tests, the weight, cost or volume in- 
creases as the square root of the diameter. 


[June 30 


ELECTROMAGWNETS 


. 
. 


WIKANDER 


2048 


O° OF9G 6ce 0 cé6°L 0° OO80T 0€6 | £Z60000 0 £19600 0 
O'STLT ¢l1e"0 GL 0’ 0€¢6 0° €F9 9010000 cOEOlo' O 
O'STIL F6E°0 99°9 0° O€18 °° 6&7 €G1000 0 SOLIO°O 
OVALE SIF CG 619 0° 000L 8° 666 €F 10000 S6I10°O 
0 19F l¥¥'0 19°¢ 0° 0009 ¢°€06 291000°0O 8Z6610°O 
CS’ F66 FOF O 62°¢S 0 O80¢ 8° 9€T 261000 °0 €0F10' 0 
S061 Z8F O 16°F 0 O0FS 8°16 €€6000 0 9ZS10°0 
0 0@T ors 0 OL'F 0° 0Z9E 619 22460000 F99TO O 
GOL oes 0 ct FP OL0e ¢’ OF ZEEOOO 0 68100 
co’ SP #o¢ 0 GE F 0° 069% 98° 9G 46€000 0 F6610 0 
21M P2JeAOd UO}409 2]BUIG 6°08 6L¢'0 90°F 0 ' 0602 99° LT 62LF000 0 61Z0°0 
¢9' 6I 6¢°0 L8°¢€ O' FELT 9c IT 08000 0 1#Z0'°0 
SPST 909 0 PLE 0° OGFT gc’L £04000 '°0 4¢9¢0°0 
L8°2 Go9 0 69° 0° O9TT C68 °F 298000 0 S€6Z0 0 
16°F #90 os’€ 0° €96 8l'€ €CO100 0 9FZEO 0 
ST's c9'°0 Iv € O'E€LL COG £66100 '°O 96°00 
cI6'T ols 0 £0°F 0° 0G¢ £260 1 £Z6100' 0 68EF0 0 
€1é 1 8s¢‘0O 88° O 8éF StLeO SEEzZOO O O€8F0 0 
89L°0 809°0 €L°¢ O'S L9F'O CE8z00 0 92€S0 0 
S88F'0 1290 coe 0 684 €0€ 0 9F£00 0 68890 0 
cs0e'O 8€9°0 ec 0° 9€% S961 °0 €éF00 0 20690 0 
C6L'0O 1¢9'0 cre €° 61 L610 é200 0 80620 °0 
£610 ¢99'0 9e°¢ 0° 9ST 8180 °0 #9000 96640 °0 
‘O1IM peJaAo0d 03309 sTqnod LLL0°0 ¢19'0 92° € 0° LET 4z20'0 88200 °0 T8880 °0 
6F0'0 6890 (aes 2°GOL SLEEO'O ¢1600°0 #1860 °0 
8060 °0 46 LTS L838 c¢tzo'0 Té10'°0 66010 
aqON suryo *q] ur &9 g-OT N suryo ul y saqour soyout 
ul *Iyey ‘SUIpUIM 04 uol}0aS “Iqe] “Bap gg aienbs ut 
“Bap gg jo sayour z SuIpurm qe SuIpuIm Ur dJIM orlM 
BUIpUIM oIqns + ul a ‘ut ‘bs sad yO sayoutr peyelnsut peve[nsur 
jo ‘q] sed iJeddoo jo oney suin} jo oIqnd x JO | jo JazeurTeIp jo 
i BOUeYSISOY 74810 MW Jequin NI Bou ISISAY jo arenbs | JezomeIg 


¢T9¢00'°0 
¢0€900 0 
80400°0 
£6400 '0 
826800 0 
£0010 °O 
9z110°0 
F9GI0'0 

F100 
F6S10 9 

6L10 0 

10600 
42660 0 
¢cEes0 0 
9F860 0 
96TE0'O 


68¢€0 0 
O0€0F0 0 
92°40 0 
G80¢0 0 
LOL¢0°0 
80790 0 
96140°0 
T8080 0 
¥1060 0 
61010 


sayoutr 
ur 
Ebeay 
aieq 
jo. 
ioqoureIq 


IT 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2049 


We can sum up the results of these investigations of this 
class of magnets as follows: 

1. If the stroke is not given it should be chosen as long as the 
conditions permit. 

2. The section of the core should be chosen so as to give a 
certain pull, in the present case about 50 lb. per sq. in. of plunger 
section. 

3. The required number of ampere-turns per square inch 
depends upon the ratio of diameter of core to length of stroke. 

4. The ratio of outside diameter of the winding to the core 
diameter depends only upon the value of the constant Ke and 
is the same as for magnets of class No. 2. 


le 1016 


Fic. 8 Fic. 9 


REMARKS CONCERNING THE APPLICATION OF THE PRECEDING 
THEORY 


When we apply the preceding theory to practical cases we 
should bear in mind that it is based upon several approximations, 
which must be considered by the designer. 

1. The core diameter is supposed to be equal to the inside 
diameter of the winding. The latter must, however, be some- 
what bigger in order to allow for the necessary space for insula- 
tion and the outside diameter should be increased in the same 
proportion. 

2. The length of the core is supposed to be equal to the length 
of the winding, but the latter must be somewhat shorter for the 


same reason. 


2050 WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


3. The ratio of the volume of the total magnetic circuit to the 
volume of the core inside of the winding is supposed to be‘con- 
stant, but varies always somewhat with the ratio of diameter 
to length of winding, and considerably so for freakish designs 
as represented by Figs. 10 and 11. 

4. For hand-wound coils the extra space required by the 
winding should be taken into consideration. Figs. 8, 9, 10 and 11 


Fic. 10 


represent magnets with such coils figured on the basis of 16 per 
cent extra winding space. 

5. The accompanying table gives the resistance of copper wires 
at 20 deg. cent., but the magnets should of course be figured so as 
to give the required pull or do the work at the maximum tem- 
perature for which they are designed. 

6. The theory of the magnets for performance of a certain 
amount of work is based upon tests on a plunger type magnet of 
the most usual form and with comparatively limited stroke. 


exe > _ 1434 ” 7 = ‘ 
\< : 586” ere 
: | 

| 


For very different types this theory should be applied with 
discretion and for comparatively long strokes it will be preferable 
to reduce the pull per square inch of core section. 

Figs. 8 and 9 represent the cheapest and the most compact 
magnets of the first class for a final pull of 1000 Ib. and a maxi- 
mum temperature rise of 50 deg. cent. for continuous excitation. 

Figs. 10 and 11 represent the corresponding magnets of the 
second class for a final pull of 1000 Ib. and a temperature rise 
of 100 deg. cent. in 100 seconds. The figures show the freak 


1911] WIKANDER: ELECTROMAGNETS 2051 


designs which we would obtain if we did not take the point 3 
into consideration. 
The preceding magnets were designed for hand wound coils 
while the following are supposed to have machine wound coils. 
Figs. 12 and 13 represent the cheapest and the most compact 
magnets for the performance of 1000 lb.-inches at 14” stroke, 
continuous excitation and 50 deg. cent. maximum temperature 


ow 


SSSssssssst 


SS hy — 


SSS SSS SS 


SSSSSSSSSSS SSS SSSSESNY 


4 
4 
4 
AY 
Ap 
44 
40 
Hy 
4 Aa 
4 AVA 
i A 
ale AY 
eee an) aH 
A wal AA 
WH AY 
ay ae | 
ais AW 
AH HAs | 
ait 1 
4 HA 
at HA ~ 
elt AY Pal 
ai AY 
Ai AY 
Ay AV 
cS Wi) 1A 
e da) 1H 
% Aa AY 
Ay AV 
An AYA 
An AY 
41 19 
Hal AH 
An) Hy 
ait HG 
Hal A 
| on | 
i | 
Ad Wa 
Ad) Ay 
zat a} jd.--V- 
> 3%” 
Fie. 12.— The, .Fitc. 13:--The 
most compact cheapest 
magnet magnet Fie. 14 Fic. 15 


rise. The designer would probably prefer shorter and less 
economical magnets or would choose a different type. 

Figs. 14 and 15 represent the corresponding magnets for the 
performance of the same amount of ‘work at 34” stroke, with 
intermittent excitation and 100 deg. cent. temperature rise in 
100 seconds. The designer would probably always choose the 
more compact of these two magnets, which weighs about 40 per 
cent less than the cheapest and costs only 9 per cent more. 


2052 ELECTROMAGNETS : [June 30 


DISCUSSION ON ‘‘ THE ECONOMICAL DESIGN OF DIRECT-CURRENT 
ELECTROMAGNETS.”’ CHICAGO, JUNE 30, 1911. 


Frank F. Fowle: Mr. Wikander’s paper is a very compre- 
hensive discussion of the design of direct-current electromagnets, 
limited to the types for comparatively heavy duty. Electro- 
magnets for light duty, mainly in closing one or more local con- 
tacts, are used in tremendous numbers in telephony, telegraphy 
and signaling. Their design is probably as important com- 
mercially as that of the heavy duty type. 

The problem broadly stated is to design magnets for minimum 
annual cost—or minimum interest, depreciation, taxes, main- 
tenance and cost of operating energy. In the case of constant- 
current circuits, or in circuits with an intermittent current of 
constant maximum value, the least energy is consumed when 
the resistance is a minimum. Again in the case of direct-current 
telegraphy the question of resistance becomes doubly important, 
because it affects the efficiency and cost of transmission, as shown 
in the writer’s paper* on ‘‘ Telegraph Transmission ”’ presented 
at this Convention. 

Mr. Wikander’s expression (7) is identical with the writer’s 
expression (134) in the paper just referred to above, or 


a 
AT gs) () 


In the case of ordinary electromagnets such as those em- 
ployed in telegraph relays and generally similar apparatus 
(numerous examples in telephone and signaling practise), the 
magnetic circuit is nearly closed and the air gap is normally 
short in comparison with its breadth. The poles are usually 
extensions of the cores and the armature is a flat piece of equal 
breadth, spanning from pole to pole in the familiar manner. 

In such cases the reluctance of the whole magnetic circuit is 
ordinarily composed in great part—over 90 per cent—of the air- 
gap reluctance. By neglecting the relatively small iron re- 
luctance the writer shows that expression (1) can be put in the 


form 
l6rn?l?\ _ ‘ 
ei = (“ang )s (2) 


when n J represents the ampere-turns and | the length of air gap. 
This shows that for a constant value of ampere-turns the pull 
increases proportionately with the cross-section of the air gap 
or with the area of the poles. 

This is easily seen from expression (1): doubling the pole area 
halves the reluctance and doubles the total flux, while the flux 
density remains constant; thus B? is the same as before, but S 
has been doubled and therefore the pull P has been doubled also. 
ee 


*Part Ii; p, 1683: 


—_—eTs i 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2053 


This result is not capable of being extended indefinitely, for 
when the pole area has been increased roughly ten times, the air- 
gap reluctance is probably no longer the principal part of the 
total reluctance and then further increase of area has a rapidly 
diminishing value. 

It is essential to observe that the enlargement of one pole, 
but not both, is of little or no value in case the one not enlarged 
is of controlling importance in its relation to the total reluctance. 
Thus the introduction of a third air gap may destroy the whole 
principle here described. 

In order to determine whether polar enlargement will be gen- 
erally useful, the criterion is as follows. Calculate the reluc- 
tances of those gaps across which the working attractive force 
ig made use of, and then calculate the reluctance of the re- 
mainder of the magnetic circuit; if the former is several or many 
times the latter, then polar enlargements will increase the’ pull 
materially. 


Fic. 1 Fic, 2 
Expression (2) can be written as follows: 


us 
St Zs 3) 
P te: 3) (n D2 S 
which shows that for a constant value of P, with increasing S, 
the ampere-turns may be diminished in the ratio of the square 
root of the increase in S. That is, if Sis quadrupled, the ampere- 


turns may be halved. 
Figs. 10 and 11 of the writer’s paper illustrate two methods 


-of enlarging the pole areas, with telegraph relays. The enlarge- 


ment, it may be noted, is relative and refers to the area of the 
pole with respect to the cross-section of the core. In the type 
of plunger magnets considered by Mr. Wikander there are 
several ways of securing polar enlargements. Two of these 
methods are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 herewith. 
Charles R. Moore: This paper certainly marks a distinct 
step in advance along the lines of electrical design. Many 
electromagnets have been designed and their performance ac- 
curately predetermined, but the designer seldom’ knew without 


2054 ELECTROMAGNETS [June 30 


carrying out several designs whether the one in hand was the 
best one for the purpose. The work oftentimes stopped without 
being carried to the point where there was little doubt about a 
given design being the most economical for the work intended. 

Increased attention is now being paid to the design of traction 
electromagnets on account of their usefulness in control appara- 
tus. In order to make this kind of apparatus satisfactory, such 
considerations as efficiency, first cost, and space required must 
receive the careful attention of the designer. 

Mr. Wikander, by carefully analyzing the form of the equa- 
tions resulting from the mathematical statement of the above 
considerations, has been able to derive formulas giving at once 
the best and most economical dimensions, for a given design to 
fulfil a certain set of requirements. As one would naturally 
expect, the cheapest magnet is not the most economical in the 
use of energy. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Con- 
vention of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers,Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION IN REINFORCED 
CONCRETE 


BY C. EDWARD MAGNUSSON AND G. H. SMITH 


While reinforced concrete was coming into general use as a 
structural material much space in the technical press was given 
to discussions and reports on the durability of the encased iron. 
The results from a large number of experiments gave fairly con- 
clusive evidence that under ordinary conditions the iron is 
protected, and that even if it was rusty when placed in the con- 
crete, it will be free from the oxide after remaining in the 
concrete for some time. The time test on the durability of prac- 
tical structures is, of course, the final arbiter, and for each year 
the increasing data bear out the assumption that properly con- 
structed concrete-steel structures will stand indefinitely. 

With so much evidence tending to prove that iron encased in 
concrete will remain in good condition for any length of time, 
it was quite natural to infer that when failures did occur, the 
crack in the concrete preceded the corrosion of the iron, and that 
the presence of the iron in no way entered as a factor in causing 
the failure of the concrete. The complex chemical changes 
taking place for a considerable time in the hardening process of 
cement makes it difficult to secure any chemical basis on which 
this inference might be refuted. According to Le Chatelier the 
hardening process consists in a slow hydration and hydrolysis of 
the compounds formed by the fusion of the cement materials. 
The process being a change from the tri-calcium silicate 
(3CaO.SiOz), by adding water, to a lower hydrated silicate, 
(CaO .Si02+2.5 H.O) and calcium hydroxide (2Ca(OH)2), or 
2(3CaO . SiOz) +3H.0 =2(2CaO SiO2) H2O+2Ca (OH):, and the 
hydration of the tri-calcium-aluminate, (CaO _Al,O3+Aq. 

2055 


2056 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


= (CaO .A1,0;.12H2O). On the solid solution theory Richard- 
son gives the formation as a tri-calcium-aluminate, (3CaO .A1.03) 
dissolved in tri-calcium-silicate, (3CaO.SiO2) in solution with 
an accessory compound consisting of di-calcium-aluminate, 
(2CaO.Al,03) dissolved in di-calcium-silicate, (2CaO.SiO2). 
In a recent paper! Dr. O. Schott reports on an investigation of 
the several compounds comprising Portland cement and in his 
conclusions he holds that ‘ tri-calcium-silicate cannot be 
present in Portland cement ’’, and further, that it “‘ represents 
merely a fused mixture in the molecular proportions 3CaO 
and 1SiO2 which contains free lime in addition to a chemical 
compound’. From the above it is evident that chemical 
analysis does not offer a simple basis for determining changes in 
the properties of cement. 

Besides the complexity of the chemical changes, many varia- 
bles of poorly defined range enter into the making of concrete, 
both in quality of material and manner of construction, so it 
becomes very difficult to prove that any portion of a structure 
where failure develops was constructed in a proper manner and 
from good material. Under these conditions it has become quite 
customary to assume that a crack in the concrete is in itself 
evidence of poor cement, careless construction, faulty design 
or some other similar factor. 

Outside causes like vibrations from periodic impulses have 
been investigated in special cases, and for the past four years 
or more some attention has been given to the possible effects 
of electric currents. In the discussion? of Knudsen’s paper 
a marked difference of opinion was manifest and it appeared that 
more experimental data would be necessary to determine the 
true nature of the phenomena. Accordingly, a series of experi- 
ments was begun in September, 1907, in the Electrical Engineer- 
ing Laboratory of the University of Washington, for the purpose 
of studying the electrolytic effects on iron in reinforced concrete. 
The work may be grouped under three heads. 


I. To determine if failure in reinforced concrete can be 
produced by the electric current. 
II. To analyze the process involved. 


1. Cement and Engineering News, Vol. XX, Nov. and Dec., 1910, page 


2. TRANSACTIONS A. I. E. E., XXVI, 265. 
3. TRANsactions A, I. E. E., XXVI, 231. 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2057 


It may be noted that these experiments take a long time; the 
mere preparation of a block before any observations are taken 
requires from thirty to eighty days, while the readings with a 
single block in circuit may continue for a few days or months, 
or even a year. The work is still incomplete but it seemed wise 
to make a progress report at this time in the hope that the data 
may prove helpful to others. Unless exception is noted, the 
following points will apply in these experiments: 

(a) The cement used was of the “ Washington ’’ brand made 
at Concrete, Washington. This brand is of good commercial 


quality and is used extensively in the Puget Sound region. For 


lack of time only a few tensile strength tests were made, but 
these gave results well within the specifications for a standard 
Portland cement as given by the American Society for Testing 
Materials. 7 

Table I gives data from one test of tensile strength. 


TABLE I 
pe en 
Time Samples Average 

1 2 3 
DA MOUTS tame tanks behais 105 103 115 108 lb. per sq. in. 
TARY Sues cto isiirrelens 447 495 555 4995 4" 5% ya 
DS Sutnete tos 730 726 695 Tite tare Sra 
Specific gravity ...-- 3.09 3.19 3.11 3.13 


{2 J eee oon ace ree ane 


(b) The iron was cut into eight-inch (20.3-cm.) lengths from 
commercial stock of 2 in. (19 mm.) Johnson steel bar. A copper 
wire was soldered to one end for making electrical contact. 

(c) The ratio of cement to sand was one to three for the con- 


-erete. The sand was of good commercial quality. 


(d) Cylindrical blocks nine inches high and six inches in 
diameter were formed in moulds. The iron bar was placed along 
the axis and extended to within two and one-half inches of the 
lower end, thus leaving a layer of about two and one-half inches 
of concrete between the water in the tank and the iron bar. 
Each block was kept in a moist condition for at least thirty days 
before the electromotive force was applied. Three blocks were 
made at a time, two were used in the circuit and the third kept as 


a check. 


2058 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


I. WILL THE ELECTRIC CURRENT CAUSE FAILURE IN REIN- 
FORCED CONCRETE? 


This has been investigated and papers published* by Knudsen, 
Toch, Crim, Langsdorf, Nicholas and others and all come to an 
affirmative conclusion. A number of experiments, similar to 
those referred to above, were made and with like results. Modi- 


TABLE II 
BLOCKS NO. 27 AND 31 IN SERIES ON 90 VOLTS, DIRECT CURRENT. 
UNPAINTED IRON BARS IN CONCRETE BLOCKS, IMMERSED IN FRESH 


WATER 
Time from Amperes Volts Remarks 
Start 

tarts. eeeser 0.105 86.5 

30) sec. ....... 0.105 86.5 

Ts min cas tec 0.105 86.5 

gy Saeaanips 0.106 86.0 

BS s Sake 0.107 86.0 

OO We Ago Oes 0.110 85.6 

1B se Sion cue 0.114 85.6 

OO MASE ose 0.116 85.6 

Lathan hse tare 0.116 85.7 

eae eee rete 0.112 86.5 

BHT ie caiictote 0.118 99.0 

1 fe RC eC 0.118 95.0 

Uday vents ss 0.091 101.0 Noticed three small cracks from iron 
al ne 0.058 92.5 to circumference of block No. 31, 
Beh 3 scoversblpile 0.043 89.0 19 hours. Cracks widened in No. 31. 
Liney GE Renneee 0.045 89.0 

Lie ea AS cae as 0.078 91.5 

Oi iSenataec 0.079 93.0 

ie Been 0.070 96.0 

aia renee, an 0.072 91.2 

CTO cs a eae: 0.069 90.0 

1 eee corel ert tie 0.081 92.3 

cle deere Ariens 0.093 92.0 

0 Gone 0.097 87.6 

Ds oe ee an ters ae 0.088 81.6 Wide crack in No. 31. 
LA ea FO so 0.064 89.5 

16 PS Set ry 0.066 92.1 

1 tet aghast 5 0.070 91.8 

iy ASS eess 0.061 92.6 

1D 9S ratte: | 0.053 90.8 
7 I ah Nae a 0.042 90.6 

Zo cc: 0.030 104.5 

26 rae Berea ass 0.026 84.0 
ZR Pee terete a ie Experiment stopped. 


fications in applied voltage, current density, and kinds of 
aqueous solutions did not alter the general result. 


No. 27 was not affected while No. 31 was readily pried apart 
with a screwdriver. 


4. See appended bibliography. 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2059 


In Curve I and Table II is given a typical set of data, and Fig. 1 
and Fig. 2 show the arrangement of the material under test, 
while Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the appearance of blocks at the end 
of the experiments. In most cases the e.m.f. was applied be- 
tween the tank and the iron bar in the block. When two blocks 
were in series, with the positive to one of the iron bars and the 
negative to the other, wooden tanks were used. 

To add more data on this point would be useless repetition, 
for in the papers already referred to it has been shown that an 
electric current passing from the iron through the concrete will 
cause corrosion where it leaves the iron, and, if the process be 
continued for a sufficient length of time, the surrounding concrete 
will crack. 


AMPERES 
0,12 


2 4 6 § 10°12 14° 16 “18-20 (22 24 26 28 30 
DAYS 


CuRVE I 


II. ANALYSIS OF THE PROCESSES INVOLVED 
This fact being established, it becomes important to determine 
the processes involved by which the current causes a failure in 
the concrete. 

The following suggestions will be discussed : 

(a) Temperature rise due to R I’ losses. 

(6) Hydrostatic pressure at the anode due to the current 
and to changes in solution density. 

(c) Pressure caused by the generated gases. 

(d) A chemical change in the cement, due to the current 
directly, destroying the cohesive strength of the con- 
crete. 

(e) During corrosion, the iron changes to an oxide or a salt; 
this involves an increase in volume, the compound 
taking more space than the iron from which it is formed. 
As the process continues the point may be reached 
when the stress becomes sufficient to rupture the sur- 
rounding concrete. 


2060 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


(a) In cases where the current is comparatively large and 
more heat is generated than can be dissipated without a great 
rise in temperature, this factor may be the cause of the failure. 
With sufficient heat generated to cause the water to change into 
steam, failure of the concrete will quickly follow. For example, 
in Table XII, No. 9, steam was given off and the block cracked 
in five hours. Such cases are, however, rare and readily noticed, 
and the flow of the current stopped. The large majority of cases 
deal with small currents, a few hundredths of an ampere, and the 
rise in temperature is slight. Hence, except in a few very special 
cases, the heat will readily be dissipated and the concrete will not 
be affected by this factor. 

(b) While the hydrostatic pressure at the anode is sufficient 


Fic. 1 


to force a few drops of discolored water up around the edges of 
the iron on top of the block, the porous nature of the blocks 
makes it improbable that any considerable stress should come 
from this source. Whether the pressure is caused by the flow 
of the current radially from the iron, or by the increase in solution 
density through the formation of salts near the iron, it seems 
obvious that the liquid should readily escape through the pores 
of the concrete upwards along the iron bar. The drops of dis- 
colored water that appear on top of the block when action is in 
progress, show that this path is open. The water will rise to the 
top before, as well as long after, the crack appears. With the 
form of block used, the water was raised only a few inches and 
the pressure under these conditions should be negligible. 


‘i. ie 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2061 


(c) From the porous nature of the surrounding material it 
seems quite impossible that any large force should come from 
this source. Moreover, when two blocks are connected in series 
(Table II) the volume of hydrogen gas will be twice that of the 
oxygen, still no action was observed where the hydrogen was 
liberated, while the block receiving the oxygen cracked in 
nineteen hours. 

(d) In order to determine what action, if any, was produced 
directly on the concrete by the electric current the resistance of 
cement and concrete was first measured under specified conditions: 
Only limited data were available on the resistance of cement 
and concrete. A conclusion from very limited experimental 
data, that® ‘‘in no sense can concrete be considered an in- 


shee 


Fic. 2 


sulator, and as shown, it is from all appearances just as good an 
electrolyte as any of the soils of the earth ’’, can hardly be con- 
sidered final. 

In connection with Creighton’s®’ work in lightning arresters 
the resistance of concrete and cement was investigated by Marvin. 
The observations deal particularly with the effect of high tem- 
peratures. 

The tests’? ‘tend to show the following conclusions: ‘ At 
moderate temperatures, the resistance depends simply. on the 
LENOIR Dae hd Neo See Aaa RPE ae I SE rae 

5. Transactions A. I. E. E., 1907, XXVI, I, 245. 


6. Transactions A. I. E. E., 1908, OV Ll O69: 
7. Transactions A. I. E. E., 1908, X XVII, I, 782. 


2062 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


amount of moisture’ in the cement and becomes extremely high if 
the moisture is removed, either by long drying or by artificial 
heating. The addition of sand increases the resistance, acting 
apparently as an insulator distributed through it. When ce- 


Fic. 3 


ment is heated, it at first increases enormously in resistance as 
the moisture is driven off, but at a red heat it again becomes as 
good a conductor as when cool and damp. With the same volt- 


age per unit of length, a moderate voltage such as 600 volts will 
not heat the material above 100 deg. cent. so as to pass the 
interval of high resistance; but a higher voltage such as 8,000 volts 
can pass the interval and heat the resistance to incandescence.’ ”’ 


“ 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2063 


Since conductivity measurements could not readily be made 
with the cylindrical blocks containing the iron bars, as used 
in the other experiments, eight sets of cubical blocks were made, 
using standard brass moulds from the cement laboratory. Each 
set consists of 24 cubes. Of these, 12 were of neat cement and 
the other 12 of concrete. Twelve moulds were available and 
12 cubes were made at a time; three three-inch (7.6-cm.) 
cubes, six two-inch (5-cm.) cubes and three one-inch (2.5 cm.) 
cubes. In making the cubes, care was taken to secure uniform 
conditions. The consistency was adjusted to give, when tested 
by the Vicat needle, a reading of 10 on the scale. Numerous air 
bubbles appeared in the cement cubes, and probably expert 
moulders would have secured better results. After removing 
the cubes from the moulds they were kept in a moist condition 


COPPER PLATE 


FIBER PLATE—-g CONCRETE CUBE 


Fic. 5 


for over twenty days, and then under water for ten days longer. 
After that, sets No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 8 were placed on a shelf in a 
steam heated room and sets No. 5 and 6 were placed on top of the 
steam radiators in the same room. This drying period extended 
over 40 days. The cubes were weighed before and after drying; 
and the two-inch (5-cm.) cubes from sets No. 5 and 6 showed a 
loss in weight of about 9 per cent for cement and 13.6 per cent 
for the concrete. The other cubes gave a slightly smaller loss, 
indicating that in the shelf-dried sets some moisture stillremained. 

The twenty-four two-inch (5-cm.) cubes from sets No. 5 and 
6 were then tested for their electrical conductivity by means of 
a deflection galvanometer, with the circuits arranged as shown 
in Fig. 5. | 

The galvanometer constant for the part of the scale used was 


2064 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


19.5 . 10° amperes for one millimeter deflection on the scale. 
The cube was placed between two copper plates, these in turn 
between two fibre boards for insulation. Outside of the fibre, 
blocks of wood were placed, and the whole put under pressure 
by means of a clamp, thus securing fairly good contact between 
the copper plates and the cube. In series with the cube by means 
of the copper plates the galvanometer was connected to three 
storage cells giving 7.51 volts. The deflection on the gal- 
vanometer when the cubes of set No. 4 were tested showed con- 
siderable variations; for the cement the specific resistance for 
set No. 4 varied from 0.8108 ohms to 6108 ohms, and for 
the concrete from 1.8 108 to 3.5108 ohms per cu. cm. As 
the loss in weight had indicated that the drying process was not 
complete, this variation was expected. For set No. 5 (dried over 


TABLE III 
Specific resistance (1 cu. cm.) 
For coment..tsatts. ovine de sb asia vis aly eaters Cabalcn eater eee eros coer arame 12.7 X108 ohms 
Por ‘COnGretes .wisdc side icicarges eee elon soseiersia tae dde ee meatier wintaier cae erate 10.6108“ 
TABLE IV 
Specific resistance (cu. cm.) 
Wet cement’ (Cedar’ River: water), cians since tice er) ou eaaiae eaic.ep enlace 8700 ohms 
= Le (Lake Washington, water)).¢ << cemasiiwaleisc actinic cecne ce kelee 7000 “ 
£ = (Fifth normal =NeC) solution) s...caet teers ae «5's e eee eaeiaett 5500 * 
& ie (Half * “ Sm Io > Sic ORA Serr ore 3850 “ 
Wet concrete (Cedar: River water). conc ctanai eth ei eiete cas earceia ate cee 7400 “ 
I * (Lake, Washington. ‘water)..scclosiioes bio k ce atces enone oe 6700 “ 
Ls “ Ghifth normal NaCl solution) sa. cei cise sins nix oles clo ere 4500 “ 
* be! (Half normal NaCl solution)......... Biisha'g: os Semler tint caters ise 2900 “ 


the steam radiator) the readings were fairly uniform and gave 
the specific resistances for dry cement and concrete given 
in Table III. The galvanometer showed some “ creeping,”’ 
coming up to a maximum deflection and then decreasing during 
a few seconds. The readings used in the calculation were taken 
when this movement had practically ceased, about ten or fifteen 
seconds after the contact was made. 

The cubes were then placed in the following solutions: 

Set No. 5 in Cedar River water. 

Sets No. 4 and No. 7 in Lake Washington water. 

Sets No. 1 and No. 3 in 1/5 normal NaCl solution. 

Sets No. 2 and No. 8 in 1/2 normal NaCl solution. 

They were left in these solutions over two weeks so as to allow 
the water to penetrate to all parts, and then tested for the 
specific resistance by the volt-ammeter method. Readings 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2065 


were taken at three pressures, 46.8, 66.8 and 86.7 volts, with a 
milliammeter. While some difficulty was found in keeping 
the cubes at the same dampness, the results were fairly 
uniform. In Table IV the average values in round numbers are 
given for the 2-in. (5-cm.) cubes and at about 20 deg. cent. tem- 
perature. 

It may be of interest to note the specific resistances of the 
several solutions, although these would be modified when used 
with the cubes, as the sulphate and other parts from the cement 
would go into solution and change the conductivity. 


TABLE V 
20 deg. cent. 30 deg. cent. (1 cu. cm.) 
Gedar Raver Wabersci.iierslelels alee ors: 9 lnisccrenans!s ef als 20,100 ohms 15,600 ohms 
Lake Washington water.......-eeeeeeweeeee 15,400 s 12,100 ® 
Fifth normal NaCl solution...........-.+++. 54.4 * 25RD 
Half normal & csr HAO A OR IOS 24.2 <8 19.6 — * 


Fic. 6 


In order to secure direct evidence of what action, if any, the 
electric current will produce on the cohesive property of the 
concrete, experiments were made using the arrangement shown 
in Fig. 6 and with the circuits as shown in Fig. 7. 

Four 2-in. (5-cm.) cubes were placed in a row ona glass plate. 
At each end was placed a plate of iron extending a little beyond 
the surface and having a copper wire soldered to one edge for 
electrical corinection. Glass plates were placed outside of the 
iron for insulation and all put in a wooden clamp, by which 
pressure could be applied so as to give a fairly good contact 
between the iron plates and the cubes as well as to bring the 
four cubes into close contact in a series. Glass strips were cut 


2066 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


2 by 8 in. (5 by 20.3 cm.) so as to fit the sides of the four cubes 
placed in a row and then held in place by a steel clip. Another 
glass plate was placed on top and in this two small holes had 
been drilled about five inches (12.7 cm.) apart. By means of 
bottles and tubes as shown in Fig. 6, a salt solution was con- 
tinually supplied through the holes in the cover glass and the 
cubes kept wet. The flow was adjusted by small clamps on the 
tubes and satisfactory results were obtained in this manner. 
The cubes were kept in a fairly uniform state of dampness with 
a minimum by-path for the current outside of the cubes between 
the iron plates. A storage battery was connected in series with 
the four cubes, letting the current pass between the iron plates 
and then through an adjustable outside resistance. The elec- 
tromotive force was kept on continuously for 25 days for one set, 


feos 
60 CELLS 


GLASS PLATES 
IRON PLATE 


HOLES FOR MOISTURE 


Fic. 7 


and 30 days for the second set. At the anode, the iron corroded 
and the two cubes nearest this end became covered with the oxide. 
At the cathode no rust appeared. In Table VI are given the 
data of the e.m.f. applied, the current passing between the 
iron plates, and the time in days for one set of cement cubes. 
These data are typical for all the cubes and show variations 
of resistance similar to those recorded in Table II, relating to the 
cylindrical blocks. In all 32 cubes were treated in this manner. 
These cubes were next tested for their compressive strength, 
using an Olsen 30,000-lb. (13,607-kg.) testing machine for the 
concrete and a Riehle 100,000-lb. (45,359-kg.) machine for the 
cement. Check cubes from the same set were also tested and 
the results are tabulated in Table VII. In the same table are 
recorded the average e.m.f. applied, the average current passing 
between the iron plates, and the total number of days the cubes 


ety, 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2067 


were kept in circuit. The cubes are numbered in the following 
order; No. 1 was nearest the cathode, then No. 2and 3and No. 4 
nearest the anode. Nos. 5 and 6 are check cubes not acted upon 
by the current. The iron plate next to No. 4 showed much 
corrosion; cube No. 4 was covered with the oxide and the others 
were somewhat discolored. No. 4 gave off a strong odor of 
chlorine when taken from the circuit. 

From data given in Table VII it is readily seen that an electric 
current of low density passing through the cement and concrete 


TABLE VI 
CUBES EXPOSED TO ACTION OF CURRENT 30 DAYS. (SEE FIG. 6 AND 
FIG. 7) , 
Time Cement cubes, set No. 2 Concrete cubes, set No. 2 
days 
from Current Voltage Current Voltage 
start amperes amperes 
0 0.040 114.0 0.061 99.2 
1 0.050 99.0 0.043 102.0 
4 0.020 110.3 0.017 110.0 
6 0.037 103.8 0.023 108.3 
if 0.041 100.0 0.029 103.0 
8 0.033 102.3 0.030 102.3 
9 0.061 89.0 0.036 100.0 
10 0.070 86.5 0.055 90.1 
13 0.031 105.0 0.031 102.0 
14 0.019 108.0 0.035 100.0 
15 0.027 104.0 0.026 104.1 
17 0.028 106.7 0.030 104.3 
19 0.036 102.5 0.041 102.5 
21 0.030 104.0 0.030 103.9 
22 0.031 104.0 0.018 109.0 
23 0.044 98.6 0.035 103.1 
26 0.045 99.1 0.032 104.0 
28 0.060 92.0 0.024 104.0 
30 0.054 98.0 0.025 104.0 


does not reduce the compressive strength of the cubes. The 
current was sufficient to produce chlorine gas at the cathode 
and was of about the density used in many of the experiments 
causing failure in a few days. While experiments of a wider 
range will be required to determine the limits within which the 
current produces no effect, the results are deemed sufficient to 
show that the deterioration of the cement was not the chief factor 
causing the failures in the other experiments recorded in this 


paper. 


2068 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


TABLE VII 


Maximum 


crushing strength 


Cube pounds kg. 
No. per sq. in. |per sq. cm. 

Concrete 1 2325 163 
Set No. I 2 2237 157 
3 2075 146 

4 1950 137 

5 paasiien — 

6 1975 139 

Concrete 1 1825 128 
Set No. II 2 1712 120 
3 1725 121 

4 1912 134 

5 1800 126 

6 1775 125 

Concrete al 2776 195 
Set No. III 2 2825 199 
3 2975 209 

4 3125 220 

5 3025 213 

6 2875 202 

Concrete 1 2700 189 
Set No. VIII 2 2725 192 
e 2225 156 

4 2787 196 

5 2425 170 

6 2825 199 

Cement l 7625 537 
Set No. I 2 6385 449 
3 8200 575 

4 8425 593 

5 7625 537 

6 7125 502 

Cement 1 9675 681 
Set No. II 2 8450 955 
3 6625 466 

4 9325 656 

5 6600 464 

6 6000 422 

Cement 1 8250 580 
Set No. III 2 10725 755 
3 7625 537 

4 7650 539 

5 7375 519 

6 7775 547 

Cement 1 6750 475 
Set No VIII 2 9025 635 
3 8750 616 

4 10550 742 

5 7850 553 

6 7625 536 


Average e.m.f. 113.3 volts. 
Average current 0.061 amperes. 
Time in circuit 25 days. 


Average e.m.f. 101.8 volts. 
Average current 0.031 amperes. 
Time in circuit 30 days. 


Average e.m.f. 116.6 volts. 
Average current 0.059 amperes 
Time in circuit 25 days. 


Average e.m.f. 103.0 volts. 
Average current 0,027 amperes. 
Time in circuit 30 days. 


Average e.m.f. 116.5 volts. 
Average current 0.057 amperes. 
Time in circuit 25 days. 


Average e.m.f. 100.7 volts. 
Average current 0.040 amperes. 
Time in circuit 30 days. 


Average e.m.f 118.8 volts. 
Average current 0.042 amperes 
Time in circuit 25 days, 


Average e.m.f. 91.3 volts. 
Average current 0.062 amperes 
Time in circuit 30 days. 


oe 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2069 


The following summary may be made: 

1. Concrete and cement, when dry, are good insulators, 
their specific resistances being of the order of 1,000 megohms 
per cubic centimeter. 

2. The conductivity of concrete and cement depends upon the 
porosity of the material and the nature of the solution in the 
pores. When the pores are full with an aqueous sodium chloride 
solution both cement and concrete are fairly good conductors 
of electricity. 

3. The current flowing through the concrete probably follows 
the ordinary laws of electrolysis, with the liquid in the porous 
spaces of the concrete mass as the conductor. 

4. An electric current of low density passing through cement 
or concrete does not affect the compressive strength of the 
cement or concrete. 

(e) When the current leaves the iron through an aqueous 
solution, oxygen, and under some conditions, chlorine, will be 
liberated at the iron surface. An iron oxide or a salt will be 
formed and these chemical changes are accompanied by an in- 
crease in volume. When iron is changed to ferric oxide, (Fe20s), 
the volume is increased in the ratio 1 to 2.2 and a similar increase 
occurs when the other compounds are formed. No attempt 
was made to determine the magnitude of the stress that may be 
developed in this manner but it is known that enormous forces 
are required to prevent chemical action by mechanical pressure. 
Without doubt the forces produced by chemical action are 
ample to break the concrete, and all the observed facts can readily 
be explained on this basis. The observed data give evidence 
that the corrosion of the iron, caused by the electric current, 
precedes the crack in the concrete; that the increase in volume 
when the iron changes into an oxide or a salt is the direct cause 
of the failure of the concrete. 


‘ 


III. MEANS AND METHODS FOR PROTECTING THE CONCRETE 
FROM THE ACTION OF THE ELECTRIC CURRENTS 

Granting that the current produces no direct effect on the 

strength of the cement, that the current through the concrete 

follows the usual laws of electrolysis, and that the failure of the 

concrete is caused by the increase in volume which accompanies 

the changing of the iron into an oxide or a salt, then it becomes 

a problem of how the corrosion of the iron may be prevented. 
Five methods will be discussed in order: 


2070 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


(a) By keeping the iron negative to the surrounding concrete 
so the current will flow to the iron in all cases. 


(6) By using alternating currents. 

(c) By filling the pores of the surrounding concrete with some 
non-conducting material. 

-(d) By coating the iron with a metal so that the conduction 
will be metallic instead of electrolytic when the current reaches 
the iron. 

(e) By coating the iron with some insulating material before 
it is placed in the concrete. 

(a) When the current flows toward the iron in an aqueous 
solution, hydrogen is given off at the iron surface and escapes as 
a gas, producing no reaction on the iron or the concrete. Ob- 
servations were made in a number of experiments which showed 
no action at the cathode, but this point has been amply covered 
in articles already published. It is also evident that while this 
condition can readily be obtained in the laboratory, it is seldom 
possible or practicable on outside structures and hence can find 
little or no commercial application. 


(b) That alternating currents will greatly reduce if not en- 
tirely eliminate electrolytic action is well known. Theoretically, 
the electrolytic effect should be nil if the currents flowing in both 
directions are exactly equal. To observe the action when ap- 
plied to reinforced concrete the following experiment was made 
with 60-cycle current. Two blocks, Nos. 416 and 417, were 
connected in series and placed in a 3 per cent sodium chloride 
solution. A similar pair, Nos. 419 and 420, were placed in the 
same tank and the two pairs connected in parallel In series with 
both pairs an adjustable resistance was placed, reducing the 110- 
volt pressure at the mains to about 43 volts across the blocks. 
The current was kept on continually for 258 days and readings 
were taken on an average every other day. As the current and 
e.m.f. stayed almost constant for the whole period, the average 
values only are given in Table XII, No. 24. 

After the blocks had been in circuit for 125 days, a small hole, 
four inches (10.16 cm.) deep, was drilled from the top of block 
No. 417 and parallel to the iron bar, in which a thermometer 
was inserted. The temperature inside the block was found to be 
3.8 deg. cent. higher than the water in the tank. At the close 
of the experiment all the blocks appeared in perfect condition. 
An account of failure caused by heat due to a larger alternating 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2071 


current has been published.2 These results are in accord 
with principles already established for the electrolytic action of 
alternating currents and give evidence that unless the currents 
are large enough to produce excessive heating, no deteriorating 
effect will come to the reinforced concrete from alternating cur- 
rents of equal positive and negative wave forms. 

(c) If the current is conducted electrolytically through the 
pores of the concrete, it seems likely that if these spaces were 
filled with a non-conducting material, no current would flow. 
In a laboratory experiment this end is readily gained. That 
blocks like those used in the experiments can first be dried and 
then covered by an insulating paint is obvious, and as long as 
the coating continues in good condition no current can flow and 


TABLE VIII 

Days from start Amperes Volts 
0 0.238 33.8 
3 0.335 40.0 
1 0.202 28.5 
2 0.099 28.3 
3 0.108 30.4 
5 0.092 30.3 
6 0.093 30.2 
ae 0.086 30.5 
10 0.082 30.2 
13 0.102 30.2 
14 0.108 27.5 
21 0.184 32.6 

22 Taken out of circuit, cracked. 


hence no corrosion can take place. It is also evident that such 
methods are impracticable for any commercial structure. 

Much work has been done in connection with water reservoirs 
to reduce the porosity of concrete and cement. The problem 
of making.cement a retainer of water is, however, much simpler 
than to exclude the moisture so as to make concrete a non- 
conductor. In order to note what difference would be indi- 
cated, a set of blocks was treated by Sylvester's process. The 
proportions used were the same as those employed by the 
United States Army engineers: one part of soap to one hundred 
of water, and one part of finely powdered alum to one hundred 
parts of cement. The blocks were then placed in a circuit and 
observations made as shown in Table VIII. 


8Nicholas, Engineering News, Dec. 1, 1910, page 259. 


2072 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


TABLE IX 
Time from instant 
of closing circuit Amperes Volts 
0.292 50.5 
LO\ eC Be wiets tote sop eaves, dave 0.102 50.5 
DO iia earache wianccsieetoes 3 cele ere cbere 0.062 50.5 
BOT ete ciccecieievelahels sarereleterets 0.044 50.5 
AQ! SOA hos six va bid stale steaata ee 0.037 50.5 
HO tees hos eitevaicatsvarspahenals 0.031 50.5 
LPININ, (ere vars 'c esie aisieisteisisrstets 0.026 50.5 
DPIC Ae ODIO CEI IOS OF 0.018 50.5 
Sia woh alaiesciace tals crete oer ea 0.012 50.4 
Ane Fate acct io rcetnartieieret siete 0.011 50.4 
Braids, ik camanesaalat keraee tears 0.010 50.4 
TO Sere i aceletiots aerate we 0.006 50.3 
1 Esa Aabersarst arg cat adactt a toga. 0.004 50.3 
ZO Faas sine taunts estan 3s 0.003 50.3 
2B Bi a ce wiamieatver emia utara + 0.003 50.3 
SOME 8 hee Deni cas BN ans 0.002 50.2 
BG eee aeinte Cage ste ststee teas 0.002 50.0 
OO rac cine sean odes Wininies bis eutia 0.002 50.0 
Circuit opened, left open two days 
0.272 57.0 
TORR CO ie cote cia ie se ree os 0.077 57.0 
1) IGA ees attra EIT 0.037 57.0 
BOG orateis tee rete Matte ie’ dca texe 0.030 57.0 
BO ee a tayo. sisie eheuspsiahtha,> cine 0.022 57.0 
LF Oi ls Bites te wares finite eh hinds Pia fxr 0.019 57.0 
TRITARTL, ott ate ented ite a's latent rien 0.017 57.0 
Ufo CE A Br Aer On Rt 0.011 57.0 
Me NAR Ses mes circ ett 0.008 57.0 
Qe UIT Keiilgrere ate enim wate e 0.007 57.0 
Piles ctrahi cart cid hiv cnretnotiasces 0.006 57.0 
10) 4 peach ave sauk Wale extiy Rasta ae 0.004 57.2 
Circuit opened, left open three days. 
0.312 60.5 
LO SeGi wale coh tain enbaree eee 0.092 60.5 
DOF dais iscssinttotra tratals gwhs ereneved 0.042 60.5 
BO ceded: scabusiodcins ends, 6 Guckales 0.031 60.5 
BOO saeatettare te wie nveiatete waht aie vie 0.024 60.5 
BO eta c hee o uch oerek 0.020 60.7 
SANS fae sueanve epaua teasers ohale) SPA: dak 0.016 60.7 
Die) POS rents si eiemea iat cueheie'* DNS 0.011 60.7 
pe a eS Anos SEN A ry 4 ae 0.009 60.7 
0 Ae Sane aia ah sa te Mate. ei ceater or 0.007 60.7 
Di PTL prety lahore mitts ihe. ate htere one 0.005 60.7 
LOIS ASAP AS Me atathat tbe hte 0.003 60.8 


~~ 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2073 


The blocks cracked after 22 days in circuit and the results 
indicate that little or nothing was gained by the treatment. 
Other methods used in waterproofing cement may be more effec- 
tive. Still, it is not likely that any combination can be found 
which will so fill the pores that the moisture will be excluded 
and the concrete become a non-conductor of electricity. 

(d) If the current should leave the iron through some other 
metal so that the oxygen ions could not come in contact with the 
iron, the corrosion would be prevented. Naturally the metallic 
covering should be so selected that the evil would not be 
transferred instead of eliminated. Coating the iron with zinc 
proved useless, as seen in Table XII, No. 9. Bearing in mind the 
electrolytic properties of aluminum, which have become so 
generally known through the electrolytic lightning arrester, it 
was thought that this material would automatically produce an 


AMPERES 
0.30 


20 


D 6 DAYS 


i 
OPENE 


' 
i} 


CIRCUIT OPENED 2 DAYS 
CIRCUIT OPENED 3 DAYS 


| circUIT 


0 70 20 30 40 50 60 O Oe 
MINUTES 


Curve II 


insulating layer which would effectively prevent the flow of the 
current. To test this directly on the aluminum, blocks were 
made using aluminum wire instead of the iron bars. In Table 
TX and Curve II data are recorded indicating the action of the 
aluminum in a fresh water solution, and showing the recovery of 
the conductivity when the circuit was broken. 

The characteristic drop in current occurring during the first 
few minutes when in circuit should be noted. After a short time 
the current has become almost negligible. 

Using a 3 per cent salt solution the results were similar. The 
data are given for two voltages in Tables X and XI. 

For Table X readings were continued for 153 days and the cur- 
rent remained at 0.001 ampere with the pressure about 44 volts. 
_ For Table XI readings were continued for 127 days with an 
impressed voltage of about 110 volts and a current of ap- 
proximately 0.001 amperes. The concrete remained unchanged, 


2074 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


Since the same increase in resistance, and recovery on open 
circuit, was obtained with the sodium chloride solution as 
with the fresh water, it is inferred that the same chemical change 
took place on the surface of the aluminum. Bare aluminum 
placed in a 8 per cent sodium chloride solution will not 
become covered by an insulating coating if the action is 
fairly rapid, as will be the case with even a few volts pressure. 
The escaping gas, the convection currents in the water, and other 
factors prevent the formation of a layer giving high resistance. 
Inside the concrete the conditions are different and the 
observations tend to prove that an insulating layer will also be 


TABLE X 
Aluminum wire in concrete, salt water 
Time from start Amperes Volts 
0.180 36.0 
DO 8OG..5 sidan eenersiee™ seme fee 0.155 36.0 
20S * Snes Sataie te cere we ates 0.140 36.0 | 
CLUE oer Car isrier ea er) ta 0.120 36.0 
rd ate AAS Olen aeeRS Git Scho) atte i: 0.105 36.0 
HOS ode rerctave apart tier aeatendiede cant 0.095 36.0 
BA oo oe AE RE ee, cpt arene. 0.085 36.0 
eS Which cose Sekar co: 0.060 36.0 
AEF EEN CAE covert, MRE 0.044 36.0 
Be sc ctpy sie ies. CNS oe os ane Ode 0.035 36.0 
SS, Sie Sie weir aerate thie «hanes 0.030 36.0 
LO) eo ieea nstem crtateinetee oan 0.015 36.0 
Mat” ihn cota e wttice ieiaeetatere oie eas 0.007 37.0 
Sadays anys a tne emo mans 0.001 42.6 
Lie SA eee Rb rics AG RRO 0.001 44.1 
153.) (continued) coos en... Ave. 0.001 Ave. 44.0 


formed with the salt solution as electrolyte. Further tests will 
be made on this point. 

To transfer these conditions to the iron, the bars were covered 
with two or three coats of aluminum paint, using banana oil 
(amyl acetate) as a binder. 

With aluminum paint, the characteristic drop in current— 
that is, the rapid rise in resistance due to the formation of alum- 
inum oxide—is similar to the results shown for the aluminum 
wire. The current is reduced to a small amount in a short time, 
and if the circuit is broken, recovery occurs with the paint 
similarly to that noted under the aluminum bars. With higher 
pressures, the coating is seemingly broken through quite rapidly 
and the resistance does not increase as much as for solid alum- 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2075 


inum. Although the current for voltages like those in Table XII, 
No. 13, is reduced to a small quantity, the paint with the amyl 
acetate as a binder does not protect the iron from corrosion. 
The time element before failure of the concrete occurred was 
considerably increased, but the blocks cracked as in the case of 
bare iron. Two explanations are suggested. First, in salt water 
solution, the chlorine given off at the cathode attacks the alum- 
inum and thus destroys the protective qualities of the oxide 
film, and when the aluminum has all been changed to a salt, 
the current can attack the iron. Second, the oxygen ions pass 


TABLE XI 
| 
Aluminum wire in concrete, salt water 

Time from start Amperes Volts 
0.80 82.0 
HU RSEC ere reietasie lore eves naam 0.64 83.0 
| PA. Cie, Wenanen Oo Op Criioase e 0.56 85.0 
CU Oty ae OID OD Dae aUIOk 0.49: 87.0 
GWOT Aan t, Srho RCO ARO 0.44 89.0 
PSL MOE aclecemateea eer eiecehean areP ee ohn 0.41 91.0 
| Meret iterne c emolae 0 oto DOM 0.38 93.0 
ene as Pitcakcictsiayaiessa s sickese 01 0.26 99.0 
CU ORE Roper Gee oO ene 0.20 102.0 
ity ACES. | eee aise wa Omron oS 0.16 104.0 
SED Wott or te ke ctanecstter ouevers! p's, 5 gh 0.13 106.0 
TC Gs Ses Ricecn ran Boren 0.065 110.0 
OY es Und Oa toro OD URkoD 0.032 112.5 
CY} ater aoa a regan 0.022 113.5 
TEAS NO OO ab oa) DO UDR RODE 0.011 114.5 
eae sy wat Si dralroby. Miotelre ofeuaii teins 0.007 115.8 
AGS eae arie. usher hars. spon iatacereye 0.003 116.0 
Gt ave Noe acaeyard se ¥ie et aa 0.003 116.0 
Lanclayayuetecunerer repel emeterareiote conuxens 0.001 108.0 
Dd avysiinaic sreieyaroetenreinieisinres a1 0.001 110.0 
127 (continued) a nd Ota Ave. 0.001 Ave. 110.0 


Pee ee re eee 


between the layers of aluminum flakes and thus reach the iron. 
The latter process seems to be the most probable. By using 
other binders, it was hoped that better results would be obtained. 
Bars were coated with aluminum mixed in varnish and several 
of these were tested. In Table XII, No. 14, the results from 
one block are given. By using the varnish alone similar results 
were obtained, as may be noted in Table XII, No. 15. Evi- 
dently, the insulating properties are due to the varnish more than 
to the aluminum, and the permanency of the protection would 
depend on the stability of the varnish. 


2076 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 
TABLE XII 
| 
Ampere- | 
Elec- Time hr. 
tro- in Volts | Amperes| approxi- 
lyte circuit | average | average mate Results | 
1. Bare iron..| Fresh 26 da 92.0 0.071 44.3 |Block cracked in 29 
water hours. Block fin- 
ally split into four 
pieces and iron 
bar deeply cor- 
roded. 
2, Bare iron.. Salt 35 da. 8.0 0.04 33.6 Block cracked in 7 
water days. Block fin- 
ally split into two. 
pieces. Iron cor- 
roded. ; 
3. Bare iron.. Salt 5da 29.0 0.25 30.0 Block cracked. Tron 
water corroded. | 
4, Bare iron Salt 21 da. 30.2 0.128 64.5 Block cracked. Iron 
Concrete mixed| water corroded. 
with soap and 
BINS ci a1 cpa rard 
5. Red lead in Salt 47 da. 30.0 0.076 85.7 Block cracked, iron 
linseed oil..... water corroded, paint 
decomposed. 
6. Red lead in} Salt 7da.| 31.0 0.145 24.4 Block cracked down 
linseed oil..... water side and across, 
top. Iron bar 
slightly corroded, 
paint film decom- 
posed. 
7. Graphite Salt Q9da.| 31.0 0.205 44.3 Block crackedacross 
DAiINGi sates water top and down side.| 
Iron deeply cor-| 
roded. 
9. Zinc coated Salt 4$hr. | 101.0 1.65 7.4 Block cracked. 
IFON PATi« cas -.| water Chlorine and steam 
given off next to 
iron bar, 
10. One coat of| Fresh 38da.| 42.0 0.123 } 112.0 Block cracked. 
aluminum in| water Iron deeply cor- 
amyl acetate... roded. 
11. Two coats Sea 14 da. 43.5 0.040 13.4 Block cracked, iron 
of aluminum in| water corroded. 
amyl acetate... 
12. Three coats| Fresh 26 da. 92.0 0.019 pBES:) Block cracked, iron 
of aluminum in| water corroded. 
amyl acetate... ; 
13. Three coats Sea 37 da. | 103.7 0.019 16.9 Block cracked, iron, 
of aluminum in| water corroded. 
amyl acetate... 
14. Three coats Sea 257 da. | 100.0 0.001 6.1 Rusty water at top, 
of aluminum in] water of block in 16) 
Florette varnish days. No further 
evidence of action. 
15.One coat] Salt 179 da. | 42.0 0.007 30.1 Block cracked, iron 
Florette varnish | water corroded, 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2077 


TABLE XII—Continued 


Ampere- 
Elec- Time hr. 
tro- in Volts | Amperes| approxi- 
lyte ‘| circuit | average | average mate Results 
16. Two coats Salt 73 da. | 100.0 0.007 12.3 Block cracked, iron 
marineTockolith | water corroded. 
17. Two coats Salt 312 da. 40.0 0.003 22.5 No evidence of cor- 
P.&B. paint....| water rosion. 
18. Two coats} Salt 198 da. 39.2 0.004 19.0 No action observed 
P.&B. paint....| water for four months. 
Block finally 
cracked, iron cor- 
roded. 
19. Two coats Salt 258 da, | 104.0 0.001 6.2 No evidence of cor- 
asphalt paint,| water rosion. 
fhe (CAC Rae 
21. Two coats Salt 41 da. joj be(8) 0.005 4.9 Block cracked, iron 
R.I. W. No.110| water corroded. 
MSUIAL. cup is misie cant 
22. Two coats Salt 184 da. | 107.0 0.000 0.0 No evidence of cor- 
of Tockolith and| water rosion. 
one coat of R. I. 
W. No. 110...< 
24. Bare iron Salt 258 da. 40.2 0.445 | 2760. No evidence of cor- 
alternating cur-| water (Two blocks rosion. 
Gent aviiaereaites in series) 


With the iron coated by a continuous layer of aluminum so as 
to eliminate the passageway for the oxygen ions to the iron, the 
desired results might be achieved. Iron bars plated with alum- 
inum were not available but it seems likely that the automatic 
increase in resistance would follow in a manner similar to the 
experiments on aluminum wire. With a practical method of 
coating the iron with aluminum, the problem of protecting the 
reinforcing bars in concrete from electrolytic action may be 
solved. 

(e) If the iron bar be coated with an insulating compound 
before being placed in the concrete, thus preventing the flow of 
electricity, it is evident that there will be no corrosion of the 
iron. To find a material with which such an insulating coating 
can readily be placed on the iron so as to produce commercially 
practical results is no easy task. Work has been done on this 
problem by Dr. Maximilian Toch, who has prepared a special 
paint for which he claims protective properties. This and a 
number of other commercial paints were tested and a summary 
of the observations is given in Table XII. In all cases the paint 
was thoroughly dried before the block was made; and,a period of 


2078 MAGNUSSON AND SMITH: [June 30 


at least thirty days was given for the concrete to set before the 
block was placed in the circuit. The density of the salt water 
electrolyte was approximately 1.026. In the first column is 
noted the material with which the iron was coated before being 
placed in the concrete. Current was supplied by a storage 
battery and the e.m.f. was subject to changes similar to those 
recorded in Table II. 

The results indicate that the time element is an important 
factor in determining the protective 
qualities of a paint. The deteriora- 
tion of the insulating power of the 
paint is probably due to a slow ab- 
sorption of moisture. No. 18 gaveno 
indication of corrosion during the first 
four months, while complete failure 
followed by continuing the process 
two months longer. No. 17, prepared 
in the same manner as No. 18, 
showed no signs of corrosion or failure 
although the e.m.f. was applied for 
over ten months. Similarly, the 
time required to produce failure in 
No. 5 was over six times as long as for 
No. 6. The data recorded in Table 
XII, excepting for Nos. 5 and 7, are 
for the block in each group which RR es | 
failed in the shortest time. The time Lonel acl 
for producing failure varied consider- Se 
ably for the several blocks in a 


KG, FER 8Q, CM. 


SHEARING STRESS, 


14]5,6,7, IRO 
- & B,’'PAIN 


0 1 0,2 0.3 
_ group. The sets of blocks represented OSES shy CERT STEM 
by Nos. 17, 19 and 22 gave no evi- Gunes FI? 


dence of corrosion, but whether the 

concrete will be protected indefinitely or failure will follow by 
continuing the process for a few more months remains to be 
seen. Since the insulating power of any material is greatly 
affected by changes in the moisture content, it seems evident 
that the covering which will give permanent protection must 
not absorb any water. 

If a paint be found that will permanently protect the iron from 
corrosion it becomes necessary to determine what effect the layer 
of paint will have on the reinforcing power of the iron. For a 
preliminary test ten blocks were made using smooth 3-in. 
(19-mm.) iron bars that had previously been covered with two 


- 


Pee NT 
ae 


1911] ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION 2079 


coats of ‘‘ P. & B.” paint. For every two blocks with painted 
bars a third was made with bare iron. The bars were let down 
to the bottom of the moulds so as to give uniform conditions. 
For testing, the iron bar was moved relative to the concrete by 
means of an Olsen 30,000-lb. (13,607-kg.) testing machine. 
The stress applied was read in pounds directly on the scale of the 
machine, while the displacement of the iron relative to the con- 
crete was measured by means of a scale, telescope and mirror. 
The mirror was mounted on a small tripod, which rested with two 
points on the concrete block and a third point on a small clamp 
screwed to the iron bar. The contact surface between the iron 
and the concrete was 25.5 sq. in. (166 sq. cm.). The relations 
between the stresses applied and the corresponding displacements 
are givenin Curve III. Itis readily seen that the presence of the 
paint greatly reduced the maximum shearing force. The data 
given in Curve III are for smooth bars. It is quite likely the 
effect would be less marked when using the Johnson or other 


~ commercial form of reinforcing bar, but the reduction factor 


should be determined. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
June, 1906. 
“ The Electrolytic Corrosion of Structural Steel ” by Maximilian 
Toch, Journal of the American Electro-Chemical Society, IX, 77. 
March, 1907. 
‘ Blectrolytic Corrosion of Iron and Steel in Concrete ’’ by A. A. 
Knudsen, Transactions A. I. E. yey eV, 2o0: 
June, 1908. 
‘ Blectrolytic Corrosion of Iron”’ by L. P. Crim, Thesis, University 
of Washington. 
December, 1908. 
“ Tests of the Effect of Electric Currents on Concrete,” by N. J. 
Nicholas, Engineering News, LX, 710. 
February, 1909. 
“ Blectrolysis of Reinforced Concrete ” by A. S. Langsdorf, Journal 
of the Association of Engineering Societies, XLII, 69. 
May, 1910. 
“ Paint, Concrete and Corrosion” by Maximilian Toch, The Iron 
Trade Review, XLVI, 1007. 
July, 1910. 
“Corrosion of Iron Imbedded in Concrete’’, by G. B. Shaffer, 
Engineering Record, LXII, 132. 


December, 1910. 
““Purther Tests on the Effect of Electric Current upon Concrete 


and Steel’, by N. J. Nicholas, Engineering News, LXIV, 590. 

January, 1911. ; 
“The Effect of Electrolysis on Metal Imbedded in Conc:ete,’’ by 
C. M. Chapman, Engineering Contracting, XXXV, 99. 


2080 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


DIscUSSION ON ‘“‘ ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION IN REINFORCED 
ConcrRETE.”’ Curicaco, JUNE 30, 1911. 


Burton McCollum: The paper by Professors Magnusson and 
Smith is an interesting and important one since it deals with a 
subject that has recently sprung into considerable prominence. 
A number of investigators have published papers on this sub- 
ject during the last four or five years and much information has 
been brought to light. This paper carries our knowledge a step 
farther in several directions, but much still remains to be done, 
and it is encouraging to note that the authors are continuing this 
work. 

The conclusion reached by recent investigators and which 
appears to be concurred in by the authors of this paper is that 
the failure of the concrete is due not directly to the passage of 
the current through the concrete, but indirectly to the corrosion 
of the imbedded metal and has therefore been described as an 
anode effect, since the cathode does not corrode. It cannot be 
doubted that the most conspicuous effect occurs at the anode 
and the cracking of the concrete is no doubt due entirely to this 
cause. The Bureau of Standards has been carrying out in- 
vestigations on this subject during the past year and among 
other things these investigations have brought out the fact 
that there is a cathode effect quite independent of the effect at 
the anode. The specimens in which this effect has been ob- 
served were of a size and form very similar to that adopted by 
Professors Magnusson and Smith, being cylinders with metal 
rods imbedded at the center. When these specimens have been 
placed in circuit with 15 volts pressure with the imbedded metal 
as cathode a distinct softening of the concrete near the cathode 
has been observed. The softening is confined to the region 
near the cathode, extending in some cases to about half an inch 
therefrom. No cracks, however, developed at the cathode. The 
cause of this softening has not yet been definitely determined, 
but the matter is now the subject of investigation. 

The effect of various voltages on reinforced concrete has also 
been studied and it appears that the time required for cracking 
of the concrete around the anode decreases much more rapidly 
than the current increases. The variation between individual 
specimens under the same treatment is so great that no definite 
law has been determined, but it is safe in general to say that the 
number of ampere-hours required to crack a given specimen is 
much greater in case a low voltage is used than when a high 
voltage is applied, and this is true even when the voltages do not 
reach a value sufficient to produce serious heating. 

A number of different brands of Portland cement have been 
tested. The specimens used in this test were 1:24 :4 of Portland 
cement, coarse sand, and crushed trap. Specimens were made 
of each of the following brands of cement: Atlas, Dragon, Alpha, 
Lehigh, Pennsylvania, Giant. All contained imbedded elec- 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2081 


trodes of 1-in. pipe cleaned and weighed, except the specimens 
of Giant cement, which contained #?-in. solid iron rods. Six 
specimens of each brand were used, but while the results differ 
considerably in some cases, this difference is but little greater 
than is to be found in different specimens of the same kind of 
cement made at different times, so that it is not to be expected 
that any one cement will prove materially more resistant to the 
effects of electrolysis than the others. 

Several series of experiments were carried out using brass, 
carbon, copper and other electrodes. In the first series a pair 
of each were put in parallel on 15 volts direct current, one of the 
pairs being anode and the other cathode (the other electrodes 
were sheet iron surrounding the cylinders in tap water). 

All specimens are still uncracked after seven months’ run. 
After a month or two the cathode carbon specimen began to dis- 
charge a thick tarry substance at the top end of the carbon, ap- 
parently forced up through the core by pressure from below. 

On the top of all the cathode specimens, the mortar had ap- 
parently disintegrated for about 1 inch around the cathode. 
To see whether this extended downward into the concrete, the 
carbon specimens were broken open. It was found that there 
was a softening around the core for about 75 in. only, the soften- 
ing at the top being confined to the surface layers. 

The surface of the anode carbon had disintegrated for about 
gz in. No other effect was apparent. There was no certain 
evidence of loss of strength in either anode or cathode specimens. 

An interesting comparison may be made by computing the 
number of ampere-hours passed per sq. in. of anode surface. 
Cracking has occurred in the iron anode specimens when this 
quantity has amounted to a value ranging from 0.8 to 3.0. That 
for the carbon is 3.0 with no cracking. 

In the second series, two pairs of specimens, having brass and 
copper electrodes, were arranged so that 1 copper and 1 brass 
specimen were put in series across 115-volt direct current, both 
being anode, and 1 copper and 1 brass in series as cathodes on 
115 volts. 

No cracking of any specimen occurred during seven months’ 
run. At the end of this time all four were broken open, and the 
following points were noted: 

The anode specimens were sound and hard, with no evidences 
of deterioration. Both anodes were considerably pitted, the 
losses being about 10 grams apiece, rather more for the brass 
than the copper. Greenish products of copper had penetrated 
1 in. to $ in. into the concrete from the electrodes. Ampere- 
hr. per sq. in., 10.1. 

' The cathode specimens showed evidence of deterioration as 
described in the first series. The surfaces of the cathodes had 
the appearance of weathered copper, and a distinctly dark layer 
of disintegrated mortar extended for about 1 in. to $in. all around 
the metal. Ampere-hr. per sq. in., 36.8. A peculiar feature was 


2082 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


noticeable in that the final resistance of the copper anode speci- 
men is about 1/10 that of the brass anode specimen, while the 
reverse was the case in the cathode specimens. 

Much work has been done with a view to throwing light on 
possible methods of protecting concrete from electrolysis. 
Since the most destructive effect is the cracking of the concrete 
due to corrosion of the anode it follows that if the anode can be 
protected from corrosion this trouble will be eliminated. The 
authors suggest doing this by preventing the current flow. Their 
observations on the effect of insulating materials on the bond 
between iron and concrete are confirmed by our experiments, 
although even greater reductions in the shearing stress have been 
noted. In one case, in which the rod had a rather heavy coating 
of pitch, it was forced out of the concrete by pressure which 
gradually developed from within. This would seem to indicate 
that the method of insulation should be resorted to with great 
caution if at all. 

The suggestion made by the authors that iron might be coated 
with aluminum to protect it from corrosion is novel and worthy 
of serious consideration. It appears to have been established 
that if iron can be successfully coated with aluminum com- 
mercially this method could be used to protect the concrete from 
cracking. Perhaps the most obvious method of attacking this 
problem, however, would be to take advantage of the insulating 
properties of dry concrete. Concrete, when dry, is a fairly good 
insulator, good enough in fact to prevent any appreciable corro- 
sion under any conditions that might arise. We have therefore 
done a great deal of work on the subject of water-proofing con- 
crete. A large number of waterproofing agents now on the 
market have been tried, but with indifferent success. These 
tests have included those waterproofing agents that are to be 
mixed with the cement and also those that are to be applied 
to the surface of the concrete, as a paint. Not one of these 
agents, however, has shown sufficient tendency to reduce the 
damage or prolong the life of the cement, to justify its use in 
practise. Experiments now under way using treated papers, 
felts, etc., give promise of much better success. The success 
of these coatings, however, depends mainly on the insulating 
properties of the coatings themselves, so that it is immaterial 
whether the concrete is wet or dry. This is obviously im- 
portant since it is difficult to secure dry concrete under practical 
conditions. 

Another method of reducing damage due to electric currents 
is to employ some means of reducing the efficiency of corrosion, 
and a great deal of work has been done along this line at the 
Bureau of Standards. It has been found that in ordinary 
concrete the efficiency of corrosion is quite low, the actual 
amount of corrosion caused by the passage of a given number 
of ampere-hours being of the order of from eight to 15 per cent 
of the theoretical maximum. This is due mainly to the presence 


le 4 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2083 


of a large amount of calcium hydroxid in all Portland cements. 
Attempts have been made to reduce the efficiency of corrosion 
stall further by increasing the amount of calcium hydroxid and 
it has been found that this does reduce the corrosion to a con- 
siderable extent and its addition does not injure the cement, but 
on the contrary increases its strength somewhat and renders it 
somewhat less porous. The difference, however, even when 20 per 
cent by weight of calcium hydroxid was added to the cement, was 
not great enough to warrant the use of this method in practise, since 
at best it could but delay the trouble for a little while. Other 
and more soluble hydroxids will doubtless give better results, 
but it is not clear as yet what effect these may have on the 
properties of the concrete. Barium hydroxid has been shown 
to reduce the efficiency of corrosion very greatly. This is 
probably due to its reduction of the calcium sulphate present. 
All Portland cements contain a certain amount of calcium sul- 
phate, the amount being in most cases of the order of 3 per cent 
by weight of the cement. This is added just before grinding the 
clinker and serves the purpose of retarding the setting of the 
cement. Experiments carried out at the Bureau of Standards 
have shown that the greater part of the electrolysis is due to 
the presence of this added calcium sulphate. When barium 
hydroxid is added to the cement the sulphate is precipitated out 
as the insoluble barium sulphate and in this way the efficiency of 
corrosion has been reduced to a fraction of one per cent. Other 
experiments have been made using specially ground clinker to 
which no calcium sulphate has been added. This, however, was 
not entirely free from sulphate, there being a residuum of about 
3/10 per cent present in the ordinary course of manufacture, or 
about 1/10 the amount present in ordinary commercial cements. 
Specimens made up with this cement showed a corrosion effi- 
ciency of but a small fraction of 1 percent. The great difficulty 
in using this lies in the difficulty of making sound concrete when 
the calcium sulphate is absent, owing to the very rapid setting 
of the cement. This is very troublesome even in the laboratory 
and in practise it would no doubt be prohibitive unless some 
means other than the use of calcium sulphate can be used to 
retard the setting of the cement. In making laboratory speci- 
mens this trouble may be largely overcome by using ice water 
in mixing the cement, and it is possible that this might also be 
accomplished in practise. Much additional work remains to be 
done, however, before the practical value of this method of pro- 
cedure can be demonstrated. 

The importance of this and similar papers mainly lies, of 
course, in the fact that they demonstrate the possibility of 
damage to reinforced concrete structures such as buildings, 
bridges, etc., due to stray currents from railways or from other 
sources, That such possibility exists has been amply proved 
by laboratory experiments and it becomes a matter of im- 
portance to determine whether or not such damage is likely to 


2084 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


occur in practise, and if so, to seek the most suitable remedy. 
Numerous cases of damage to reinforced concrete buildings and 
bridges have been reported during the last few years, in which the 
damage has been attributed to electrolysis. We have had 
occasion to examine a number of such cases and in every case 
thus far investigated there has been evidence that stray currents 
had little if anything to do with the deterioration of the concrete. 
That the damage is in some cases due to corrosion of the rein- 
forcing material by local galvanic currents there can be no 
question, and in a sense therefore it may be said to be due to 
electrolysis, but in each case a careful examination has con- 
vinced us that stray currents from railways or other power 
circuits could not be held responsible for the trouble. 

It should not be inferred, however, that cases of damage due 
to stray currents do not exist or may not occur. The laboratory 
experiments of nymerous investigators have shown that such 
damage may result if conditions are favorable, and thorough 
investigations should be made to determine whether or not such 
conditions often arise under actual conditions. But until such 
cases are found and it can be shown beyond doubt that stray 
currents are responsible for the damage it is best that we be 
cautious about drawing conclusions based solely on laboratory 
experiments, lest we create unnecessary alarm among builders 
and property owners and work an injustice to electrical in- 
terests already somewhat overburdened with troubles arising 
from electrolysis. The work has reached a stage which calls 
for extensive investigations in the field to determine precisely the 
magnitude of the danger. Such investigations are now being 
carried out by the Bureau of Standards. 

E. W. Stevenson: I would like to ask the last speaker, if 
he saw a recent report in the Engineering News which described 
the effects of electrolysis on a whole building, including the 
foundations, ceilings and every story, where the stray currents 
were being dissipated. The building is a new one, the business 
is that of a cold storage packing house, and it is situated within 
about 300 ft., I think, from the power house of a traction com- 
pany. Several investigations have been made by different com- 
panies, but this was the first public report as to the actual results 
of this electrolysis. 

Of course it was presumed that it was the traction company’s 
current doing all the damage. An engineer was called in by the 
traction company, and he proved, apparently to the satisfaction 
of both parties, that the current used by the traction company 
had nothing to do with it and the destruction was due to the cold 
storage company’s own electric light plant. The engineer’s 
proofs appear to have been very simple, for he merely connected 
two voltmeters with the steel structure of the building, connecting 
the other sides, in one case to the track of the trolley company, 
and in the other case to the mains of the company’s own 
electric light plant. Then by manipulating switches in each 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2085 


circuit, he proved to the owners of the building that it was their 
own current, and not the stray current from the trolley system, 
which was doing the damage. 

All who have anything to do with installation of electric wires 
in buildings are aware of the strict rules governing every part of 
the work, under the Board of Fire Underwriters. And it seems to 
me almost impossible for any inspector of this department to 
have passed such an installation before the current could have 
been turned on. For, if the engincer’s exposure of the situation 
was correct, the circuits must have been grounded all over the 
building. 

What I would like to know is this: How would it be possible 
to prevent a similar occurrence, supposing that the conditions 
were the same? For there are not many people who would look 
for such disintegration of their buildings, unless they were ex- 
perienced in it. 

Speaking from my own personal experience, the company 
I am connected with recently erected a building as an addition 
to its plant. The basement is constructed of reinforced con- 
crete, and just out of curiosity, a few weeks ago, as I happened to 
have a low-reading voltmeter, I tested to see if there were any 
currents escaping from the trolley rails, which run past the build- 
ing, to the columns of the structure. I found when a car was 
passing, a pressure rising from 4 a volt to 2 volts. The needle 
was deflected till the car got past and for about a mile further, | 
when it gradually came to rest. I had no method of obtaining - 
the quantity of current, but the local traction promised to look 
into the matter at once and to remedy ate 

G. D. Shepardson: We are likely to make ourselves more 
trouble than is necessary over this question of electrolysis, 
because, in so many cases the corrosion which occurs is due to 
a purely chemical action, or to local action on account of non- 
homogeneous composition of the metal. I presume that many 
of us have had cases brought to our attention of trouble, ap- 
parently caused by electrolysis, where it could be shown, at 
least to the satisfaction of interested parties, that the trouble 
might have been caused by non-electrical causes, or at least by 
purely local currents. So it seems to me that we should guard 
ourselves against too much alarm on account of stray currents 
coming in from outside. In short, other sources of trouble may 
come in which will relieve the railway companies from re- 
sponsibility. 

George A. Hoadley: Since it seems to be evident, from the 
proof that we have had, that there is a kind of disintegration 
taking place in concrete due to the passing of the current from 
the iron to the concrete or from the concrete to the iron, I want 
to ask Professor Magnusson whether it would not be possible for 
the construction companies to so arrange a metallic by-pass with 
the inside imbedded iron that the current could be shunted 
around the concrete? It seems to me that a shunt circuit could 
be provided that would take care of this. 


2086 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


A. S. Langsdorf: About four years ago, I published the re- 
sults of a series of experiments on this same subject, and in gen- 
eral they confirmed those which Professor Magnusson has re- 
ported here. I did not go quite so far in an attempt to prevent 
the corrosion as he has done, but confined the work to a study 
of what would happen if the current passed through the concrete 
specimens. It was found that even with a very small current, 
2/100 of an ampere, the damage was just as great, if allowed to 
continue, as with much heavier currents for a shorter time; but 
the question that arises is whether, under actual conditions, 
with structures buried in damp soil or water, there is likely to 
be any voltage of sufficient magnitude to force through the cur- 
rent that could do the damage that the 2/100 of an ampere did 
in the case of my specimens. The apparent resistance of the 
specimen, after the action has gone on for a short while, is very 
high, due, no doubt, to polarization that takes place; it amounts 
to about 500 or 600 ohms per specimen, with a thickness of 
24 or 3 in. of concrete; and that means that the voltages that are 
likely to be found in practise due to stray currents from rail- 
ways, say, perhaps, from one volt up to a maximum of 10 or 12 
volts, are hardly large enough to produce a current of destruc- 
tive magnitude. With reference to what Professor Hoadley 
has just said, it may be of interest to remark that after I ex- 
plained the results of my work to the Engineers’ Club of St. 
Louis, the engineer of the Board of Education took the op- 
portunity, in the construction of the concrete footings of a new 
school building, to bond the reinforcement in such a way that 
if current did get in from a neighboring street car track, it could 
get out again without going through the concrete. That is 
the only case of the kind to my knowledge where concrete foot- 
ings have been bonded in that way. 

Maxmilian Toch: C. Edward Magnusson and G. H. Smith’s 
paper on the “‘ Electrolytic Corrosion in Reinforced Concrete ”’ 
is a welcome addition to the literature on the subject. They 
have mentioned me as one of the earlier investigators on this 
subject, but since I began these investigations 10 years ago, a 
dozen or 15 excellent papers have been written on the subject, 
all of which tend to throw light on it. 

What I established was 

1. That there is such a thing as electrolytic corrosion. 

2. That corrosion always takes place at the anode. 

3. If pressure of surrounding concrete is less than the pressure 
exerted by the formation or the conversion of iron into iron hy- 
droxid, the concrete is bound to split. 

4, That no corrosion can occur if a suitable insulating paint 
be used, which * 

A. Must be proof against the action of alkali. 

B. Proof against the action of water. 

C. Of such composition that concrete will adhere to it. 

Shaffer has shown that the strength of the currents with which 


name 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2087 


he worked, and which in some instances were so weak that 
water could not be dissociated by them, produced corrosion 
just the same. 

It must be understood that I am only a quasi-instructor on the 
subject of the chemistry of paints, but in former years I was fre- 
quently consulted on matters pertaining to corrosion, outside of 
my regular business, and during such consultations I was in- 
formed and saw where much damage had been done. I recall 
one case particularly, where huge pieces had been eaten out of 
the side of a steel bridge. The corrosion was not chemical in 
the true sense, but was electrolytic, and the damage was done 
entirely by both a voltage and amperage of less than 2 

Messrs. Magnusson and Smith make a statement that I have 
worked on this problem and have prepared a special paint. I 
refer to test No. 22, two coats of Tockolith and one coat of R. I. W., 
No. 110; electrolyte, salt water; time in circuit, 124 days; average 
volts, 107; showed no evidence of corrosion. This is the only 
test in the entire lot made by the investigators which shows that 
the paints in question insulated perfectly. Every one of the 
other paints used shows a leakage, which indicates that the in- 
sulating properties are not as good as the test just mentioned. 
I dislike to criticize the tests that have been made, because the 
work deserves great commendation, but the voltage and am- 
perage are entirely too strong, for whenever electrolytic corro- 
sion takes place, either through induction or through some leaky 
wire, both the e.m.f. and the current values are usually less than 
2, and the surprise to me is that any paint should stand at all a 
voltage of 107 for 124 days. 

I made an examination of some grillage beams which had been 
coated with these same, paints and placed in salty concrete, and 
after five years, when the grillages were uncovered, the paint 
was still intact and there was no evidence of corrosion. 

What Magnusson and Smith have shown with reference to 
red lead, graphite, and, in fact, all paints in which a linseed 
oil varnish is used, is not new, but deserves the careful con- 
sideration of every engineer who still uses linseed oil paints on 
structural steel, for, even if there is no electrolytic corrosion, 
or any danger of it, alkaline moisture tends to destroy paint 
completely in which the binder is oil. Excellent work on this 
subject has been done by Mr. G. F. Shaffer. 

It is to be hoped that Messrs. Magnusson and Smith will 
continue their researches, the next time with weaker currents, 
and also with cements that are waterproof and that contain 
broken stone, so that a fair comparison can be made as to the 
action in concrete. It would be well to try out the water- 
proofing compounds on the market which are added to the 
cement, and the waterproof coatings which are often applied 
after concrete has set. 

Guy F. Shaffer: This series of tests, on a subject of such vital 
interest to concrete firms, structural, bridge and electrical engi- 


2088 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION {June 30 


neers, railroad companies using electric motive power and street 
railway companies, should bring forth the fullest discussion as 
to the limits of investigation in theoretical work of this character. 
It is the object of the writer to define, from one point of view, 
some of the limitations and give reasons for such definition. 

A. Stray Currents. The first factor in the problem is; at 
what stray current voltage will corrosion of ordinary unstressed 
steel occur? Now by ‘stray currents’? an upper limit is 
usually defined in the neighborhood of 15 volts. Even lower 
voltage drops should be secured with correct electrical installa- 
tion, but any thing above that must be considered a decided 
“leak ’’. Therefore any test which is carried above that limit 
is forcing conditions on the concrete which are not likely to 
remain long undiscovered in any electrical circuit. It is current 
flowing at lower and less likely to be discovered voltages that 
needs study. The writer has published a report on a test to de- 
struction at 3.4 volts and unless investigators wish to spend 
months in useless duplication, no further tests should be made 
above that limit. To add further data to this point let me 
say that other tests have just been completed in the labora- 
tories of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology showing that 
at 1.1 volts corrosion will occur, but these tests were not carried 
to destruction. 

Outside the question of inhibiting or minimizing stray current 
corrosion by waterproofing or other specially applied methods, 
this voltage drop is dependent upon several variables: 

1. The thickness of the concrete. 

2. The per cent proportion of salt solution in the surrounding 
electrolyte. 

3. The density of the mass (involving the proportioning of 
ingredients). 

With a decreasing voltage these factors simply reduce the 
amount of current flowing, but it is the law of the change in 
the rate of corrosion of imbedded steel which a careful study of 
these variables would define. 

B. Ingredients in Concrete. Another factor is the kind of 
cement, involving as well the kind of stone. This question brings 
up the discussion of the cause of failure in the concrete. If the 
action going on is simply an accumulation of rust, and nothing 
more, the problem of the ingredients vanishes. A test with a 
non-corrodible anode, such as an arc light carbon, would give 
some data on that question. But, if there is a chemical reaction 
going on in the block itself, the chemical nature of the cement 
and the chemical nature of the stone should be known. Under 
this head the fact should be pointed out that what should be 
studied is concrete as ‘‘ concrete,’ not as cement and sand. 

C. Imbedded Metal. Another factor is the kind of steel, iron 
or other imbedded metal used and the stress to which it is sub- 
jected. The question of stress involves not only the stress on 
the metal, both internal and applied, but stress in the concrete 


a eee 


1911} DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2089 


as well. Before the bars are imbedded or tested in any way 
electrolytically their mechanical and chemical properties should 
be known, as these properties may have a decided effect on the 
results, which effect would only be brought out by careful com- 
parative experiments. 

A complete study of the three factors outlined above, de- . 
veloped in such a way that the results given are comparable . 
with other experimental data, will determine very closely the 
law of imbedded corrosion. 

D. Prevention. A fourth factor is the question of prevention 
and under this head should be studied all the typical waterprootf- 
ing compounds and iron preservative paints so that no question 
of commercialism enters into the application of the results. 
Now to examine critically the work done by Messrs. Magnusson 
and Smith as it comes under these several heads. 

Under A: Every test reported was carried on at such a 
high voltage that the five factors they name as involved, (a), 
(b), (c), (d) and (e) were distorted out of their true relation to the 
practical side of the problem. 

The ohmic resistance across the cement and sand should have 
been reported both before and after the blocks were put in circuit. 

If by ‘‘ fresh water ”’ (mentioned in Table II) is meant 
the river or lake water, the tests are not comparative, as the per 
cent of impurities should be definitely known. - 

The mass. was not examined as to density. 

Under B: Report is given as to the brand of cement and its 
mechanical properties, but no chemical analysis is given. 

As no stone was used the question of ‘ concrete ”” is immedi- 
ately eliminated. 

Under C: Not only was the iron not reported on chemically, 
but no report is given as to the weight of the imbedded bars in 
order to determine the variation in the rate of corrosion from the 
well defined electrochemical law of 1.045 grams per ampere-hour. 

Under D: The report on waterproofing and paint tests is 
interesting and valuable to engineers, but it narrows some of - 
the results down to a basis that is unfair commercially. If 
time was lacking for general tests on iron preservative paint 
films no specific report should have been published, as this is 
unfair to other manufacturers who may have materials equally 
as good as those described. 

The specific resistances of cement and of cement and sand as 
given are valuable. 

One other test not commented on is the test on the crushing 
strength of blocks after being subjected to current. There may 
be such a question as recovery occur, SO that blocks should 
be subjected to a coincident current and crushing test. 

A general summary of this criticism then is that according to 
the report of these investigators a great amount of needless 
duplication is being done. It is hoped that a broader view of 
the variables of the problem is being studied in the work shown 
in Fig. 1 and Fig. 4. 


2090 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


The writer feels that the subject needs all the study that men 
of an investigative turn of mind can give, but the wide range of 
variables must not be lost sight of, as otherwise the data de- 
veloped will be useless. 

Harry Barker and W. L. Upson: The paper by Messrs. 
Magnusson and Smith has special interest at this time, as there 
have recently been published! the details of a case where the 
heretofore vague fears of engineers have become quite definitely 
realized. 

The writers, in this discussion, first desire to call attention 
to the conditions of the structural failures in this building and to 
point out certain ways in which prevention of trouble in similar 
cases may be secured. Secondly, there is one point in the studies 
of Messrs. Magnusson and Smith which may be critically ex- 
amined. Thirdly, the writers desire to place on record the re- 
sults of certain studies which have been made during the past 
year at the University of Vermont, which seem to throw addi- 
tional light on the mechanism and seat of the action which leads 
to the disruption of concrete surrounding iron and subject to 
electric current. 

The destruction described, in the article referred to, was in a 
reinforced-concrete packing house where there were various 
rendering processes going on which liberated great amounts of 
vapor laden with organic acids. These condensed on the con- 
crete walls and ceilings and on any cold metal exposed. The 
110-volt, direct-current lighting circuits were run in ordinary 
metal ducts unconcealed and held in contact with the steel re- 
inforcement of the beams and girders by special sockets and bolts. 
Under the severe conditions which prevailed the concrete be- 
came water-soaked and the moisture even penetrated the con- 
duits. Evidently the insulation of a negative.wire at one point 
and of the positive wire at some other point broke down so that 
current could flow to the reinforcement in one place through the 
concrete mass to the reinforcement and positive lead in another 
place, with corrosion and disintegration wherever it left the rein- 
forcement. Beams and girders were cracked and the grip of the re- 
inforcement was loosened for some 60 per cent of the total span of 
each. The original design of the structure appears not to have 
been very economical, which perhaps was the salvation from com- 
plete structural failure. There was a considerable length of 
beam (40 per cent) near the supports, which was apparently 
unaffected and this was where the greatest bond stress would be 
imposed by normal loading. Tests showed no abnormal deflec- 
tion up to 125 per cent normal load and it was decided to patch 
up the old beams for service. 

Certain preventives of such troubles suggest themselves 
to electrical engineers and among them may be noted (1) the 
use of strictly marine installations of lighting circuits where bad 


{RRS Es ville ween Ey Shs, LER See a ee ee 
1. Engineering News, June 8, 1911. ‘‘ Serious Injury to a Reinforced- 
Concrete Building by Electrolysis.” 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2091 


moisture conditions prevail; (2) practical insulation of the 
conduits from the reinforcement of the building, and (3) preven- 
tion of water-soaked walls and ceiling by covering with a water- 
proof membrane like water-repellant paint, etc. 

Messrs. Magnusson and Smith seem to conclude from their 
studies that there is no diminution of the strength of concrete, 
or mortar, due to the mere passage of current as contrasted with 
some mechanical action at the oxidized electrode. 

In the experiments where the blocks were enclosed in a glass 
box and fed with brine, certain masking conditions are at once 
recognized. The strips must necessarily have been loose, so that 
there was a layer of electrolyte all over the outside of the blocks, 
forming a path for the current in parallel with that presented by 
the blocks themselves. Indeed, the authors remark that they 
hoped to secure “a minimum by-path for the current outside 
the cubes.” It is worth while comparing this by-path with the 
resistance of the cubes themselves. 

From the uneven surface of the cubes and the easily broken 
edges which usually become slightly rounded, it is probable 
that the liquid layer between each glass plate and the cubes 
would not be any less than the equivalent of 1/64 in. thick. 
The four sides in parallel would form a path of salt solution 
1/16 in. thick, 2 in. wide and 8 in. long. The resistance of this, 
according to the figures given by Messrs. Magnusson and 
Smith, would be 1,390 ohms, using the value for fifth-normal 
sodium-chloride solution. The resistance of the concrete-block 
path works out, following the same data, to be 3,540 ohms. The 
combination of these parallel resistances should result in an 
apparent resistance between electrodes of 1,000 ohms. Com- 
pared with this we find that the resistance between plates was 
as low as 1,250 ohms, which in a general way confirms the 
assumption. Polarization voltages have been neglected. We 
may reasonably suspect that only about a third of the current 
went through the concrete blocks. This reduces the actual 
density in the concrete to such a low figure that, in the short 
space of time covered by the experiments, no diminution of 
strength was apparent. The iron oxide formed seems to have 
traveled with the current along the outside of the cubes and not 
to have penetrated the concrete. This is, in itself, an evidence 
of the masking phenomena. It also prevents a study of the 
mechanical effect of the molecules of iron oxide inside the con- 
Chete: 

Those experiments by Magnusson and Smith, relating to the 
protection of iron against corrosion, are very useful though they 
show no practical remedy. It is seen that most of the protective 
paints depend for their effectiveness on their imperviousness. 
When, in the course of time, this quality disappears, the pro- 
tection ceases. It is surprising perhaps that the experimenters 
did not use also paraffine, which comes the nearest to being truly 
non-porous, though, of course, it is not a practical paint or 


coating for such work. 


2092 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


The necessity for the greatest possible natural bond between 
the concrete and reinforcing steel needs to be borne in mind 
in considering the practical use of these insulating paints. Their 
use will not be entertained for reinforced-concrete structures 
by designing engineers. The other remedies of (1) keeping the 
concrete fairly dry; (2) isolating it from ground waters, and 
(3) preventing random electric potentials upon steel or concrete, 
must be relied upon, and so far as present rather academic 
experiments and practical experience go there is little or no danger 
to be expected if these conditions are satisfactory. 

The University of Vermont Experiments. Two series of ex- 
periments were planned by the writers a year ago and now have 
been carried out (under their general supervision and with the 
assistance of Professor J. W. Elliot), by Messrs. O. J. Olgiati 
and H. Roberts, senior students in the departments of electrical 
and civil engineering, as their bachelor thesis. The series were 
outlined in the manner hereinafter shown, after having followed 
the progress of such experiments for several years and with the 
belief that added light could be thrown on certain obscure points. 

For instance, Mr. U. J. Nicholas, in describing? experiments 
carried on at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found 
that specimen blocks could be cracked irrespective of the direc- 
ton of current—whether the central imbedded electrode was 
anode or cathode. These tests added a little to our knowledge 
in that they indicated that the cracking of the concrete was due 
perhaps more to the indirect localized heating or to the me- 
chanical action of disseminated rust. This left us to guess 
whether the softening and very general disintegration was due to 
the electric current or to some secondary chemical reactions 
of the iron, or to mere mechanical stress. 

Professor A. S. Langsdorf, in 1909, added* to the corroborative 
evidence then accumulated. Progressive corrosion of imbedded 
steel was shown; all specimens developed cracks and some showed 
soft disintegration; a coating of rust developed on the walls 
of cracks. 

Eltinge and Beers have described‘ certain experiments carried 
on at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in which they dupli- 
cated the cracking and soft disintegration of electrolysis by 
externally heating the projecting end of the imbedded bar. 

The first series of tests planned by the writers was intended 
to be wholly qualitative and using the studies already men- 
tioned as points of departure. Several points should be specifi- 
cally noted. 

1. Collapsible iron electrodes, shown in Fig. 2, were used in 
the hope of showing whether or not local thermal expansion, or 
the demand of the oxidized iron for more room at the electrode 


2. Engineering News, December 24, 1908. 


3. Journal of the Association of Engineering Societies, February, 1909; 
Abstracted in Engineering News, April 29, 1909. 


4. Engineering News, March 81, 1910. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2093 


surface would crush the electrode instead of cracking and soften- 
ing the concrete. 

2. The use of imbedded carbon electrodes, in one set of speci- 
cee was tried to study the effect of eliminating iron and iron 
oxide. 

3. By using loose carbon electrodes the effect on cracking, of 
eliminating the mechanical forces at the electrode surface and 
the iron oxides in the concrete, was studied. 

4. Duplicate specimens with these several types of electrodes 
were to be subjected to alternating current, keeping all con- 
ditions, except the kind of current, the same as in the direct- 
current tests. 

5. Special specimens were subjected to thermal stresses ac- 
cording to the temperatures actually noted in the other trials. 

All of the specimens, except two, were of the same general 
shape and make-up except as noted. Fig. 1 shows the arrange- 
ment with iron pipe, and Fig. 2 shows the collapsible electrode 
used in its place. 


To 
Pipe Plugged sp 4 
ca Se 
G CY! ae ae a Reena tas emake teegeacans< A, Sten a erie iG 
; a 5 K #5 AG 
; O> 
s j ot 
: © | ; “20 Gage Sheet |i ; j my 
& < . = e Sheet lron Ss iy 
; ; “End Sealed with Pitch Paperaiver 
kes. css Borers x 
Fic. 1 Fic, 2 


“ Tronclad ”’ brand Portland cement was used and the quality- 
test results compared well with the specifications of the American 
Society for Testing Materials, as shown in Table th 


TABLE I—QUALITY TESTS OF ““ TRONCLAD "' CEMENT USED IN 
UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT ELECTROLYSIS EXPERIMENTS 


Fineness: 
Left on 200 sieve 23.80 per cent 
Left on 100 sieve 5.85 per cent 


Specific Gravity: 
Weight cement in grams _ 65 eat it 


Displaced volume in cu, cm. 20.6 


Breaking Strengths, 
“ Neat cement briquettes: 


Days age No. 1 No. 2 No. 3 Average 
a 480 550 (588 539 
28 625 645 667 646 
1:3 sand-cement mortar:* 
7 90 95 107 97 
28 185 190 103 159 


*The low breaking strength of the mortar was probably due to the excessive dryness ot 
the sand. 


2094 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


The sand used in all tests and experiments was of uniform size, 
passing through a 10-mesh and remaining on a 30-mesh screen, 
and was thoroughly dry. The aggregate was 4-in. broken gray 
sandstone, very dry. The specimens subjected to current 
were of a 1:2:4 mixture of cement, sand and stone. In all, 
28 specimens were made for these qualitative studies, six with 
each of the four types of electrodes and two of each special 
type shown in Figs. 3 and 4. ae 

The specimens were connected in series-parallel circuits, as 
shown in Figs. 5 and 6, to facilitate regulation of the current. 
Each group contained one block with each type of electrode. 


& 
| 
‘Iron Pipe, Ends Plugged le : ‘ 
: x 
f 3 
: +) 
Fic. 3 A c 
% Q 
: ; 8 
Specimerts Resistances Mercury Cups rs 
G)-)-@)-6) j for Ammeters y es 
Doo é y & 
C)-2)-4)-© a oe =/nsulation 
"Plugged 
O 
Current Ammeter Fic. 4 


Source 


Fic. 5 


~ Copper Band 
+ —_ 


x N BX N= N wo 
N Ng EN Nee N 88 
N NEN N= TEN SS 
N N N N-c= FN S 
N N N N- 1 —“IFN 3 
Nosh Nast aN — N KS 
NSE 
Fic. 6 Fic. 7 


Two duplicate tests were run simultaneously, one with alter- 
nating and one with direct current. Current was regulated 
several times a day to the value of 0.1 ampere. A small gen- 
erator set was used for the direct current and the city supply 
system for the alternating current. 

To determine temperature effects, the special specimens, 
shown in Fig. 4, were tested with the others. They were 
placed in water as in the electrolysis experiments, but the cur- 
rent was confined to the metallic circuit and regulated to secure 
the same temperature of a thermometer in oil in the pipe as in 
the electrolytic runs. The temperatures found in the latter 


ane 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2095 


runs were so low that a current of 0.1 ampere through the pipe 
of the temperature specimen was enough. 

For simplicity, the results will be presented separately for 
each type of electrode. ; 

Solid Pipe. The behavior on direct current was in accordance 

eis .-~ With results of other experi- 
menters. When current was 
first turned on, there was an 
evident washing out of cement 
140} }-— or apparently similar mater- 
ials, with the evolution of 
much gas at the imbedded 
electrodes. At the end of 24 
hours a notable amount of 
iron oxide had been forced out 
around these electrodes. After 
a few days the entire top of 


200-7 — le — —> 


180 


60 


Ohms Resistance: 


ol tel | 1 | | ae 0 ze «the specimens, which were 
No.of Days in Circuit. out of water as shown in 
Fic. 8 Fig. 6, was covered with oxide. 


During the experiments gases 
were given off more or less from all parts of the concrete. The 
average centigrade temperatures were as shown below: _ 


Thermal test Direct-current Alternating-current 
Room specimen fset set 
22 deg. 22.1 deg. 22 deg. 22.15 deg. 


The “apparent ”’ resistances of all blocks were measured by 
the voltmeter-ammeter method. Table II shows typical results 
on one set and the data are plotted in Fig. 8. 


TABLE II. 
No. days Volts drop Amperes Resistance 
RESISTANCE OF DIRECT-CURRENT SPECIMENS 

eZ, (fee) 0.1 75.0 ohms 
4 10.0 0.1 10050) oe 
6 1120 0.1 LOZO 
8 11.5 (Oisdh da5).00 4 
10 13.2 0.1 PS220in° 
12 Nerf 0.1 157.0 * 
14 18.1 0.1 Si-O: 
16 15.8 0.1 1582072" 
18 10.8 0.1 103 ;.0'5R5 
20 5.0 0.1 50.0 “ 

RESISTANCE OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT SPECIMENS 

2 6.8 Oral 68 ~ 
4 6.8 0.1 68 =) 
8 6.6 0.1 68 z 
12 6.8 Ow 68 & 


2096 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


The gradual increase in resistance may perhaps be due to the 
accumulation of iron oxide, decreasing porosity, accumu- 
lated gas, or to some chemical change in the cement. It seems 
probable that the iron goes into solution as a hydrate and is later 
converted to oxide by evolved oxygen and perhaps by the 
cement compounds. If the last action was general throughout 
the mass of concrete, it might be expected to diminish the 
strength. If, however, the action was confined to the neighbor- 
hood of the electrode there might be no appreciable change in 
the general strength of the concrete mass. The sharp peak of 
the direct-current resistance curve, Fig. 8, suggests the beginning 
of mechanical failure. 

A specimen on direct current showed distress at the end of 
20 days and ruptured, on the following day, so that it could be 
pried apart with a screw driver. The first indication of failure 
was the appearance of small drops of colored water on the upper 
surface of the concrete. These places developed into the cracks 


Fic. 9 Fic. 10 


along which the blocks broke. As expected, the iron was 
considerably corroded and the rust disseminated throughout, 
though more marked along the line of failure. The concrete 
itself could easily be broken with the fingers. 

The specimens subjected to alternating current did not break 
at low current density, nor was there any corrosion of the elec- 
trode. The appearance of the concrete and general strength 
were not changed. No gas was liberated by the current, and 
it was not manifest by other signs. At the completion of the 
tests alternating current of up to 3 amperes was sent through the 
blocks. At 2 amperes the internal temperature increased to 
45 deg. cent. and the blocks split after being in circuit 8 to 10 
hours. They were broken apart with a hammer and, as seen 
in Fig. 9, the iron was not corroded. The disruption seems 
to have been the result of temperature stresses. The specimens 
with various solid imbedded electrodes behaved similarly, all 
splitting apparently from the same cause. 

Collapsible Electrodes. The specimens with collapsible elec- 


Pe Tee. SV eee oF ee 


es kent hs ire, vibe) 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2097 


trodes, on direct current, were the second in order of breaking. 
This tardiness might have been due in a small measure to slightly 
larger electrode diameter and probably, to a greater degree, to 
the yielding of the collapsible electrode to the demand of the 
oxide for more room. The disruption then might have come 
finally from the stresses set up by the formation of iron oxide 
in the pores of the concrete a little distance in from the electrode. 
On alternating current the collapsible-electrode specimens 
showed no signs of distress. The concrete was not softened 
and the blocks did not split on increasing the current to 3am- 
eres. 

Imbedded Carbon Electrodes. It was surprising to find that 
the behavior of these specimens under direct current was similar 
to that of those with iron electrodes. In place of iron oxide, a 
thick black material, apparently a combination of carbon and some 
ingredient of the cement, was forced up and out around the 
electrode. The composition of this material was not studied. 


Bie, Ui Fie, 12 


The carbon electrode was eaten away and considerable dis- 
semination of the corrosion product was found on prying the 
specimens apart, as seen in Fig. 12. The increase in resistance 
of these specimens was not so decided as in the case of iron elec- 
trodes. Cracks developed in 25 days. The softening of the 
concrete was noticeable, but not as marked as with iron elec- 
trodes. On alternating current no signs of damage were found. 
The electrode was not corroded and the concrete was not softened. 

Loose Carbon Electrodes. With direct current, gas was freely 
evolved at the carbon electrode and a decided smell of chlorine 
noted, though no chlorine salts or other chemicals were added 
to the water. A black compound was formed, apparently 
identical with that found with the imbedded carbon electrodes 
and the electrode was deeply pitted. After being in circuit 
for some four weeks, no disintegration of the concrete was 
found. A current of one ampere was then forced through for 
12 hr., but without apparent effect. The specimens were broken 
open with a hammer, and appeared as shown in Fig. 14. 


2098 ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


On alternating current no ill effects were noted, as may be 
inferred from Fig. 15. 

Completely Imbedded Iron. T hese specimens were made up 
to approximate actual construction conditions, where the random 
potentials might not be actually applied to the reinforcement. 
The current was led into the concrete as shown in Fig. 7. After 
18 days, with 0.1 ampere, direct current, the block split, showing 
typical corrosion of the iron and dissemination of oxide. The 
specimen on alternating current was not affected, and is shown, 
at the left in Fig. 16, after being broken open with a hammer. 

Thermal-test Specimen. The steel in this was kept at the ob- 
served temperature of the iron-pipe specimen on direct current 
during the entire run. The temperatures varied but slightly 
from those of the room and the specimen remained sound. The 
pipe was not found rusted, on breaking open at the end of the 
tests. 

Quantitative Studies. It was hoped by subjecting a large 
number of specimens, with the various types of electrodes 


Fic. 13 Fic. 14 


previously mentioned, to similar treatment, and by breaking 
samples at regular intervals, to determine whether the de- 
structive actions were gradually developed or suddenly. The 
specimens were made in standard 4-in. molds and were set under 
water for three weeks before use. A 1:2 cement-sand mortar 
was used, the cement and sand being the same as already noted. 
The current was limited to 0.03 ampere, to eliminate chance of 
temperature stresses. Fig. 17 shows the general make-up of the 
blocks, the only difference in the several specimens being in the 
use of iron-pipe, collapsible iron, imbedded and loose carbon 
electrodes. 

In all, 22 blocks with each of the four types of electrode were 
made; 20 blocks of each type were placed under current. In 
addition, 20 dummy cubes, without electrodes, were made and 
used under same conditions, except as to current. At the start, 
two blocks of each type were crushed and at regular intervals 
two more of each type were crushed. The iron-pipe electrodes 
were weighed before being placed in the blocks and as broken 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2099 


to determine the loss of iron during the test. Even loading in 
the testing machine was secured by using blotting paper between 
the block and the crushing heads of the machine. The load 
was applied at right angles to the direction of electrode axis. 
The results of the tests are shown in Table III. The electrical 
circuits were the same as for the qualitative series, in general. 


Fic. 15 


Conclusions. All these experiments, studied in connection 
with previous ones, variously noted, allow several tentative 
conclusions, concerning the seat and mechanism of electrolytic 
disruption of reinforced concrete. It is to be emphasized that 
these are only tentative and do not affect any recognized practical 


Fic. 16 


measures which may be taken to prevent conditions leading to 
structural failure in the reinforced concrete, as already noted. 

1. The disruption of reinforced concrete may result from 
stresses produced by local thermal expansion where; the current 
density is high, with either alternating or direct current and 


irrespective of the direction of current in the latter case. 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION [June 30 


2100 


ocg'LT 
002L'6T 
002L'9T 
00F'6T 
O9F'ST 
000°¢T 
00E'ST 
00¢°6T 
OFF'ST 
Oss'9T 
oo¢*ST 
OIL'8T 
OST'LT 
OSF'ST 
02061 
O10°ZS 
006'9T 
09¢'ST 
000°ST 
000‘ST 
OIs'F1T 


y4suel}s 
Bulyeoig 


POG 
P6I 
PST 
PLT 
P9T 
PST 
PFT 
Pet 
PST 
PIT 
POT 
P6 
P8 
PL 
P9 
PS 
Pv 
PE 
PG 
PT 
PO 


uoul 
-eds 


jo 


‘ON 


sepoleye uoqies 9s00’T 


0021 
00S'F% 
00T‘96 
00€'08 
0S 66 
0S3'LE 
OOT'SE 
o0s"eé 


000°F% 967 961 OLS*ST 967 cas 
ose'sT 96P oa 9 § OfS's1 9GP qt 
ogg LT HSE 20T O9F'0L $SE 401 
002°€% HSE 26 008'FT SE 96 
O0L'TS 686 98 OL8‘EL Z8G 93 
OFE'FS B8S aL 06L'F1 Z8G QL 
008°&@ 98T 99 000°OT 98T 99 
0SZ'FS 98T 9g 0SZ'FT 98T 9S 
OFL'SS 8éT ad 008°2T 8éI Y 
OZ1'SZ 8éT 9€ OL9°ET Sel 9€ 
0g9'6T 99 % O16‘S1 99 %% 
002'23 99 IT O€s' FI 99 41 
000‘08 0 70 oor'FT 0 90 
y43uel14s qmo uoew y43ues4s ymo ueul 
Buryesig 119 -toads | Suryeeig -110 -loads 
ur ‘ay jo | ur “ay jo 
“ON | on ‘ON ‘ON 


HPL 
A724 
G9 
(4°) 
OLS 
oLg 
867 
867 


sAep 
aoiy} Joy poddoys sem 489} OU 


206 
961 
981 
ILI 
I9T 
IST 
IFT 
9ET 


009°ST 
o0¢*ZI 
002'8T 
00€'sT 
OOT‘6T 
OLE'LT 
006'FT 
06¢'ST 


PPL 
FPL 
Gt9 
69 
OLS 
OLS 
SLE 
SLY 


906 
961 
981 
qLI 
q91 
4sT 
PI 
qeT 


sAep 9014} Jo} pepuedsns 4seL 


sopoijoaje uoqies peppequy | seposjzoo]a UOT efqisdeTjoD 


‘TLUUONOO GHOUOANIAA AO NOIL 


III ATAVL 


cto Te 
00s’ Te 
OT0'LE 


086'Sz 


009s 
SZE'FS 
0Z8'0 
006‘0z 
006° LT 


0L0'8T 


sotmmnp 
gO: PEO], 
Bulyeoig 


OFL' LZ 
000°9€ 
009°6z 
00¢°0z 
OSE'8z 
Ocr‘'0E 
OIT'9% 
OTL'SZ 


006°6T 
098°6T 
OFL‘'GE 
0€9'%e 
0c6'6T 
008°0¢ 
006'F6 
009‘6T 
OSL'8T 
o¢gs*61 


089‘8T~ 


009°6T 


org 


uauloeds P 
JO Peol 
Bulyeeig 


saposyoeje edid-uosy 


FIG" 
T1d° 
£06" 
261° 
(a 
Z0G" 
S6r° 
F6l 
SLT" 
G0G" 
7 
ce" 


° 


surelZ 
‘Kep sod 
SSO] 
aseloAV 


VUOALNISIC OILATOULOATA NOSLSAL AAILVLILNVNO dO SLTNSaa 


881° 
61° 
O6r° 
£6" 
9LT” 
261° 
861° 
OTZ" 


coooocoeo 


SeoooocooooocoSoSO 


PPL 
i474 
69 
GPO 
oLg 
OLg 
867 
867 


skep oe14} J0oj peddojys 4sa,L 


96F 
96h 
HSE 


. SE 


G8S 
68 
98T 
98T 


4ymo 
-Id 


ur "sy 
ae 


D0G 
D6T 
D8I 
DLT 
DOT 
DST 
DFT 
pet 


DST 
PIL 
POT 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2101 


2. With small current densities and without temperature 
stresses being developed, disruption finally results from the 
accumulation of iron oxide at and near the imbedded iron where 
direct current leaves the iron to enter the concrete. 

3. The bursting stresses developed with low current densities 
are largely caused by the formation of iron oxide, immediately 
at the anodic surfaces to a slight extent, but largely in the 
concrete near the anodes, the depth of penetration depending 
on the porosity of the concrete, the gas pressure, current strength, 
etc., among other things. 

4. No gradual reduction of the strength of the concrete has 
been shown to accompany progressive corrosion of the iron. 
The oxygen for the formation of oxide probably is furnished 
mostly by the electrolysis of water and only toa slight degree is 
taken from the cement compounds. 

5. Disruption may result with low current densities, where 
iron is not the anode material, if other compounds are formed 
from the anode or from the concrete and expand during the 
secondary reactions. In all cases, pressure of gases developed 

may slightly assist or hasten disruption. 

aR 6. The general softening of the concrete 

aia : Sant 7 ' 

after rupture is similar to that in speci- 

Je? mens crushed mechanically and may be 

Te err here regarded as largely the result of the 

bursting stresses. 

Fic. 17 7. A single current of small density may 

cause corrosion and disruption at several 

points by passing to and leaving a number of pieces of reinforcing 
steel, each completely imbedded. 

8. With large leakages of either direct or alternating current 
to reinforced concrete, structural failures may be expected 
within a few hours of the start of current, and as the result of 
thermal effects. 

9. With small leakages of direct-current an insidious under- 
mining of structural strength must be expected. 

10. With alternating currents, when the current density is 
low enough to eliminate local temperature stresses, repeated 
tests have shown no danger of structural troubles. This is in 
accord with the findings reported by Mr. J. L. R. Hayden, 
before the A. I. E. E., March, 1907, but does not mean that 
there is absolutely no effect from alternating currents. It 
would indicate rather that the secondary reactions were so slow 
that the primary reactions were practically reversed each cycle. 

11. Structural trouble is not to be expected with dry concrete 
unless random high direct-current voltages are noted on the 
structural members. 

12. Present methods of electrical survey seem sufficient to 
detect dangerous (to the structure) voltages about reinforced 
concrete structures and remedies are available for application 
as each individual case seems to demand. 


ayer of Pitch 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers,Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS IN AN INDIVIDUAL 
ROTOR CONDUCTOR OF A SINGLE-PHASE 
INDUCTION MOTOR 


BY H. WEICHSEL 


The phenomena which take place in the rotor of a single-phase 
motor, can be explained in two different ways. The first is that 
proposed by Galileo Ferraris, and consists in the resolution of a 
single-phase field into two fields rotating in opposite directions. 
The second method, which we might call the ‘‘cross field 
method, ” has been proposed by several authors.* Mr. V. Fynn 
lately developed this method to a very large extent, treating 
alternating-current motor problems on a basis similar to that 
of the direct-current motor. The cross field method has 
given a big impetus to the general understanding of the 
working conditions of the single-phase motor. Both methods 
lead naturally to the same result. Frequently it is of interest 
and very instructive to solve certain problems by the use of both 
methods, since a comparison between the two frequently throws 
more light on the subject. In this paper the wave shape of the 
currents in an individual conductor of a single-phase motor will 
be determined, first by the rotating field method; and secondly 
by the cross field method. 

Ferraris has shown that a single-phase field can be resolved into 
two fields of equal magnitude rotating in opposite directions 


*A. Poitier, Bulletin de la Societé Internationale des Electriciens, May 
27, 1894; H. Goerges, Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, Jan. 17 and Nov. 28, 
1895; Atkinson, Feb. 22, 1898; McAllister, American Electrician, June, 
1902; Franklin, Transactions A. I. E. E., 1904, XXIII, p. 429; V. Fynn, 
British Institution of Electrical Engineers, Feb., 1906; McAllister, Elec- 
trical World, Aug. 1906; V. Fynn, British Institution of Electrical En- 


gineers. Dec., 1907. 
, 2103 


2104 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS {June 30 


with equal angular velocity. Let the amplitude of the single- 
phase field be N and it follows that the amplitude of each of 


the rotating fields must be One of these fields rotates 


clockwise and the other rotates counter-clockwise. Let us 
assume that the armature runs clockwise also, and with syn- 
chronous speed with respect to the line frequency, or what 
means the same thing, with the speed of the field which rotates 


clockwise. The rotor bars, therefore, do not cut this field;. 
no e.m.f. can be induced in the bars due to this field. But the | 


rotor bars rotate against the second component or the counter- 
clockwise rotating field, Nz, with a speed equal to double the 
synchronous speed. The e.m.fs. set up in the bars must there- 
fore be of double frequency, and have a time phase displacement 
with respect to each other equal to their space displacement ex- 
pressed in electrical degrees. If the rotor bars are all short- 
circuited, as is the case in the squirrel cage construction, it is 
evident that currents of double frequency will be set up in 
these bars having the same time phase displacement against 
each other as the e.m.fs. producing them. That is, the time 
phase displacement of the rotor currents with respect to each 
other is equal to the space displacement of their conductors. 
From this it is evident that these are polyphase currents, and the 
field produced by them is rotating against 
the individual conductors with a speed equal 
to twice the synchronous speed of the line. 
This field rotating with double frequency in 
a direction opposite to that of the rotor bars, 
has a speed with respect to a fixed point in 
space equal to synchronous speed, referred to 
line frequency, and in a direction opposite to 
that of the rotor rotation. 

The rotor in a single-phase motor is com- 
pletely surrounded by iron. ' Therefore if we neglect the effect of 
ohmic resistance the currents produced by the e.m.fs. in the rotor 
bars will havea time displacement of 90 deg. behind their e.m.fs. 
The field set up by these currents, as previously explained, is a 
rotating field with direction of rotation opposite to that of arma- 
ture. We can gain a better insight into the phenomena occurring 
in the rotor if we resolve this field, due to the polyphase rotor cur- 
rents, into two fields at right angles. One of these components 
must be in line with, but directly opposite the main stator field. 
Referring to Fig. 1, the line O F;, represents the component of the 


Fic. 1 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2105 


field set up by the rotor currents which is in line with the main 
stator field O F;,. These two fields O F,, and O F;, annul each 
other, but since the main stator field cannot be eliminated, the 
m.m.f. of the stator must be increased until the original number of 
lines are set up. The additional field of the stator is repre- 
sented in Fig. 1 by O Fs, and this is the final remaining field 
in that axis counterbalancing the line voltage. The other com- 
ponent of the rotating field produced by the rotor currents is 
shown by the vector O F,,. The resultant of these two fields 
which are at right angles produces the true rotating field of the 
induction motor. This resultant field rotates in the same direc- 
tion as the rotor and with line frequency. This will be seen if 
we remember that the resultant of the fields O F,, and O F,, is 
the field produced by the rotor currents and rotating in direction 
opposite to that of the rotor bars. But one of these components 
has been annulled by the stator field O F;, and the main field 
O F, is the only one remaining in this axis. This, however, is 
displaced 180 deg. from O F;, and therefore the resultant of 
O F,; and O F,, must produce a rotating field which is rotating 
in direction opposite to that of the field produced by O Fr, 
and O F;,. It is clear also from the above discussion that the 
m.m.f. of the stator is just twice what it would be if the rotor 
had no conductors. 

The results we have obtained so far may be seen more clearly, 
and their importance more fully realized, if we solve the same 
problem on a mathematical basis. Assume that the voltage 
impressed across the stator winding follows the sine law. For 
convenience we will express this as the cosine function 


E,=E cos (m #) where m=2 7 0 
The induced voltage that counterbalances this is 


an Ni 
E,'! =E cos (m t+180) = 1" 


N,=-— (z cos (m t+180) dt 


e 


N;= +2 cos (mt) dt 


BS E sin (m2) 


N; a 


2106 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS (June 30 


This is the main transformer flux. Since the flux is propor- 

tional to the impressed e.m.f. we may write 

N,=N sin (m 2) 
where JN; is the value of the flux at any time ¢ and N is the maxi- 
mum value of the flux. 

Now let us assume that the field induction under the pole also 
follows the cosine law. The induction at any point can therefore 
be expressed as 

B. =+B5;.cos & 


where B, represents the instantaneous value of the field induc- 


K—a—>} 


Fic. 2° Fic. 3 


tion in the center of the pole (see Fig. 2). The induction may be 
expressed in terms of the total number of lines as follows: 


5 m 
— ‘a — an 2 — 
we (3 cos an2 Boo a=2 Bf sin a| =+2B 
Fd 0 : 
i) 
a N 
ah tam 


This is the true maximum of the field induction. The value of 
the induction in the center of the pole at any other instant is 
N 
Be = aay: 
The induction at any point other than the center may there- 
fore be expressed as follows: 


Ni 


Bu, =+ 9 


sin (m 2) 


= +-4- sin (m t) cos @ 


NN ee ne ee a 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2107 


Any armature loop which spans a complete pole pitch and 
whose position is such that one side of the loop is the angle a 
from the center line of pole, as shown in Fig. 3, includes Ny 
lines, where N, is given by the expression 


a +x a-+zx 


sin (m t) cos @ 


N 
Nem | Buda = 5 


Ni i BPR mee 
ier ms (m t) [ sin a| =—WNsin (mt) sina 


If the armature rotates with synchronous speed the angle a 
is equal to (mt+q) where ¢ is the angle which the armature 
loop forms with the center line of the stator pole at the time 
i=0. Substituting this value for a@ we get 


N, =—N sin (m2) sin (mt+¢) 


The voltage induced in this armature loop by the N, lines 
interlinked with it is given by the equation 


where s is number of turns in the loop; 


, &@Nssin (mt) sin (m t+¢) 
Ei; oe a é t ———— = = 


In order to solve this equation for the induced voltage we will 
simplify the second member. 
sin (m t+) =sin (m t) cos p+ COS (m t) sin @ 


Substituting this we get 


El dN s {sin? (mt) cos g-+cos (m t) sin (mt) sin 9} 
oe dt 


We may also write 


cos (m #) sin (m #) sin p= xXsin (2 mt) sin g 


E,"=N s| 5 sin? (m t) cos ¢+3 ¢ sin (2 m t) sin 


=N sXm/({sin (2 m t) cos ¢--COS (2 mt) sin 9} 
=NsXmsin (2mt+¢)= +E” sin (2 mi+¢) 


2108 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


This is the e.m.f. produced in the rotor loop of s turns by 
~ rotating the armature conductors in the alternating stator field. 
This voltage sets up currents in the rotor conductors which in 
turn produce magnetic lines. These lines set up a counter- 
balancing e.m.f., E;’’’, so that E,’’’ is displaced 180 deg. from F;”. 


Ree dN 
Ent erage 


where N2 is the number of lines produced by the rotor currents. 


E" sin (2 m t+¢+180) = ——— 
na [B sin (2mi+@) dt 


mn [B sin (2 m t) cos gd i [P cos (2m?) singdt 


M=-5— | cos (2mi+y)| 


This is the equation for the lines produced by the secondary 
current. Since the lines are directly proportional to the second- 
ary current we may write 


1g= —k cos (2mt+¢) 


The negative sign refers to its direction compared with the 
primary; kis aconstant. The equation gives the current set up 
at any time ¢ in an armature loop which formed the angle » 
with the center of the pole when ¢ was equal to zero. For the 
conductor that lies directly under the pole center at this instant 
y=0 and the equation for the current is 


i2 = —k cos (2 m2) 


From this it will be seen that the currents in two successive 
armature loops have a time phase displacement equal to the 
space displacement of their conductors, and a frequency just 
twice that of the impressed e.m.f. 

In the above discussion we have neglected the effects of rotor 
resistance as compared with rotor inductance; therefore the 


: 
| 
| 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2109 


currents produced in the secondary conductors will be displaced 
90 deg. from the e.m.fs. producing them, as shown in the equa- 
tions just derived. In order to see the effects of these rotor cur- 
rents, we must consider the limiting cases of the equation for 72. 
In the conductor under the center of the pole at the time ¢=0, 
the current is a maximum, in direction opposite to that of the 
impressed voltage. In the conductor 90 deg. from the center of 
the pole at this same instant the current is zero. This means 
that no field is set up in the direction of axis a—a, Fig. 1, but there 
is a field set up in the direction of axis b—b having its maximum at 


this instant. Inthe same way we will find that at a time /, =7 


the field in direction of b—b is zero, and the field in direction 
a—a has its maximum. We assumed at the outset an alter- 
nating field N in axis a—a of constant magnitude due to the 
impressed voltage. We now see that the rotor currents produce 
a field in this same axis. In order, then, for the 
e main field N to remain, an additional field (or 
3 currents) must be set up in the stator to annul 
the effects of rotor currents. This explains the 
fact that a single-phase motor running at 
synchronism and no load draws more current 
O with the rotor short-circuited, than when the 
1? rotor is open-circuited. 
oie The currents that we have been discussing up 
to this point are those which flow in the rotor bars at synchronous 
speed; that is, at no load. We might therefore call these currents 
the rotor magnetizing currents because it is due to them that the 
field in the direction of axis )—b exists. As soon asa load is ap- 
plied to the motor additional currents will be set up in the rotor 
bars to produce the necessary torque. If we neglect at present 
the effects of ohmic resistance and leakage it will be evident that 
the vector diagram for the stator conditions can be represented by 
Fig. 4. There are flowing in the stator three different current 
components. The vector 0-1 represents the magnetizing current 
of the stator when the rotor is open-circuited. The vector 1-2 
represents the additional magnetizing current drawn from the 
line when the rotor bars become short-circuited. This compo- 
nent counterbalances the effect in axis a—a produced by the no- 
load currents in the rotor. In the case of the ideal motor 
without leakage or resistance in the rotor, the component 
0-1 equals the component 1-2. The third current com- 


2110 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


ponent 2-3 is at 90 deg. phase displacement from these 
first two components, or what means the same thing, it is in 
phase with the impressed voltage. It is therefore the watt 
component of the total current. Since only the magnetic field 
produced by the wattless component 0-1 can exist in the axis 
a—a, as otherwise the voltage O—E could not be counter- 
balanced, it follows that the magnetic action of the current 
component 2-3 must be equalized by currents flowing in the 
rotor. For the time being let us assume that the rotor runs at 
synchronous speed even if loaded. The currents flowing in the 
individual rotor bars must be of such a nature as to produce a 
field stationary in space in direction of the axis a—a but alter- 
nating in time with the frequency of the line cur- 
rent 2-3. Such a field will be produced by a 
double-frequency current superposed upon a direct 
current, as will be seen from the following: 1 
Double-frequency currents must flow so as to 
produce a field rotating in space opposite to the o 
direction of the armature rotation, and at double 3 
synchronous speed with respect to the individual ,~ | \ 
rotor bars. This field therefore is rotating against / \ 
a fixed point in space at synchronous speed with 0 
respect to line frequency. If at the same time a , 
direct current flows in the rotor bars, it is evident 
that the field set up by the direct current will be 
constant and stationary with respect to the rotor 
bars. But the rotor bars rotate with synchronous 
speed, so this constant field must rotate against 
a fixed point in space with the same speed and Fic. 5 
in the same direction as the armature. The two 
fields we have just considered are equal in magnitude, and 
rotate with respect to a fixed point in space with equal speeds 
but in opposite directions. The resultant field produced is 
alternating with line frequency, but is stationary in space as 
represented in Fig. 5. This represents four different instants 
in the period of the fields. When the components are in phase 
the resultant is the sum of the two. At a later instant 0-3 is 
the resultant as shown by the vector addition. Still later the 
components are opposite in phase, so the resultant is zero. The 
last view shows the resultant opposite in direction to the first 
two. These diagrams show clearly that the resultant of the 
fields produced by, the components of the armature working 


bo 


7 
: 
: 
| 
L 
; 
7 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2111 


current is an alternating field stationary in space. The strength 
of this resultant alternating field must be such as to counter- 
balance the magnetic effect of the stator current component 
2-3 as shown in Fig. 4. But as the true maximum of the re- 
sultant field equals twice the field strength of one of the ro- 
tating field components, it follows that the strength of each ro- 
tating field component must be one-half of the true maximum 
value of the stator field which cor- 
responds to the stator current 2-3. 

Let N, represent one rotating field 
component due to the working com- 
ponent of the armature current, and 
let Ns; be the field due to the stator 
Ns 
2° 
From a consideration of the above we 
may determine the value of the direct- 
current component of the rotor. It 
must be of such magnitude as to pro- 
duce a field equal to that produced 
by the double-frequency current. 

It was assumed at the outset that 
all fields should have sine-shaped dis- 
tribution. The field produced by the 
direct current must therefore be sine- 
shaped, and the only way this is 
possible is for the currents in each 
bar to be different at any one given 
instant, and for this variation to fol- 
low the sine law. 

A g:aphical representation of the 
different currents flowing in one con- 
ductor of a single-phase rotor at no 
load, will show more clearly the physical meaning of the phe- 
nomena discussed above. ,Let us consider that the rotor bars 
1, 2, 3, etc., Fig. 6a, have, at the time t=0, the position indicated, 
Assume further that the line voltage has its maximum value at the 
time t=0. The line voltage may therefore be graphically repre- 
sented by curve E in Fig. 7. In order to counterbalance this 
voltage, a current, represented in the figure by the curve 7, must 
flow through the primary winding, and this lags 90 deg. behind 


current vector 2-8. Then N,= 


Fic. 6 


2112 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


’ the impressed e.m.f. The lines produced by this current are in 


phase with it. At the time ¢=0, therefore, the stator current has_ 


its zero value. The rotating field produced by the rotor currents 
has its maximum in the axis b—b and no component in the axis 
a—a. The maximum rotor current flows therefore at this in- 
stant (t=0) in conductors No. 1 and No. 9. Conductors 
No. 2, 3, 4 and 5 carry less current than conductors No. 1 and 9, 
and the magnitude of the current in each is proportional to the 


IMPRESSED STATOR E, M. F. 


STATOR MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT 


4¥ 


MAGNETIZING CURRENT 
IN COND, NO,1 b 


COND. NO,3 
T Cc 


COND, NO.5 


d 


COND, NO.7 


COND, NO.9 


ae tf 


Fic. 7.—Rotor magnetizing current for ideal motor 


cosine of the angle the rotor bar makes with the center of the 
stator pole. Fig. 7b shows graphically the magnetizing current 
flowing in rotor bar No. 1. The currents in rotor bars No. 3, 5, 
7 and 9 are shown in Figs. 7c to 7f, each having a phase dis- 
placement corresponding to the angular position of the rotor 
bar. Figs. 6b to 6d represent the positions of the rotor bars and 


: . ’ 3. 
the directions of currents at the instants ¢= a t= ws and #=—— 


: 
; 
, 
‘ 
3 
3 
& 
- 
x 
4 
: 
3 
4 
4 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2113 


. where T equals the time of one period. In these diagrammatic 


views the stator has been indicated by a single loop, and the 
direction of currents by crosses and points. These latter are 
shown light or heavy to indicate as far as possible the relative 
magnitudes of the currents. It is plainly evident that the stator 
winding carries its maximum current at the instant that the 
rotating field produced by the rotor currents lies in the direction 


IMPRESSED STATOR E.M, F. 


WORKING CURRENT|IN COND. NO.1 


COND. NO.3 


COND. NO.9 


bi 


Fic. 8.—Rotor working current components for ideal motor 


of the center line of stator pole, at the same time the field due to 
stator currents tends to annul the other field. 

It must be remembered that the diagrams above referred to 
show the no-load condition of the ideal motor without ohmic 
resistance. Ina similar manner we may show the currents that 
flow when the motor is loaded. We will still hold to the as- 
sumption that the motor has no ohmic resistance. To simplify 
the diagrams we will omit the magnetizing currents which have 


2114 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


been represented in Figs. 6 and 7. Fig. 8a again represents the 
impressed line voltage. The working current drawn from the 
line will be in phase with the impressed voltage and can therefore 
be represented by the same curve as the impressed e.m.f. This 
curve has a maximum at the time ¢=0, and its magnetic effect 
must be cancelled by the rotor currents. From a consideration 
of Fig. 9a, it will be seen that the rotor currents must be a maxi- 
mum in conductors No. 5 and 13 and 
zero in No. 1 and 9 in order that the 
resulting field may be in such a di- 
rection as to oppose the field due to 
the stator working currents. This is 
true for both components of the work- 
ing currents. After the time ore 
or what means the same thing, after 
the time taken by the armature to 
rotate 90 deg. in a clockwise direc- 
tion, the currents in the rotor con- 
ductors must be such as to produce 
no field at all. This condition will 
be fulfilled if that component of the 
working current which has double fre- 
quency is counterbalanced by the 
other component of the working cur- 
rent which is constant. As represented 
in Fig. 9b, conductor No. 1 has moved 
90 deg. in space. In order to show 94, 
the distinction between the alternating 
current and direct current the rotor 
has been represented as consisting of 
two squirrel cage windings, one carry- 
ing the constant working current, and 
the other the double-frequency work- 
ing current. In a practical motor these two windings are 
one, and the double-frequency current is superposed upon 
the direct current. As explained above, the currents must 
be such as to produce no resultant field at all. Hence the 
two fields due to the windings are directly opposing. The 
currents in each separate rotor conductor have been shown in 


bb 
(9) 


14 4312 @ 
Q C6 - 


‘ 
ORT 0) 


Fic. 9 


Figs. 8b to 8f. The conditions at the time ¢= os are shown in 


‘ 
: 
’ 
: 
‘ 

3 
; 
; 

3 


1911) WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2115 


Fig. 9c. The fields due to the two rotor currents are again 
assisting, but now in opposite direction to that shown in Fig. 9a. 
Ninety degrees later the currents are opposing each other with a 
resultant of zero, as shown in Fig. 9d. These four views indicate 
a complete cycle in the stator current and the resultant of the 
two rotor currents. 

All of the derivations and graphical representations dealt with 
in the previous pages have been based on the assumption that 
the rotor had no ohmic resistance, and was running at syn- 
chronous speed even though the motor carried load. In order 
to make the problem more general, we must consider the con- 
ditions that exist when the ohmic resistance of the rotor is taken 
into account. This means that the speed of the rotor will be 
no longer equal to the synchronous speed of the line. In other 
words, the rotor has a certain slip. Let us consider first what 
is taking place in the rotor so far as the rotor magnetizing cur- 
rents are concerned. We know that these currents must pro- 
duce a field in the axis a—a and another field in axis b—b which 
is displaced 90 deg. both in time and space. This means that the 
rotor currents produce a rotating field which rotates against 
the rotation of the armature and which has a synchronous speed 
s in relation to a fixed point in space. The rotor has a speed Se 
in relation to a fixed point in space. The speed of the rotor field 
in regard to any rotor conductor therefore must be (si+S2). 
This, however, necessitates currents with a frequency (v1+22) 
where v; equals line frequency and equals speed frequency. 
That is, v2 is the frequency of the currents which would be set up 
in the rotor conductors at the speed so, if the stator were excited 
with direct current. A graphical representation of this condition 
has been given in Fig. 10. The impressed voltage and the stator 
magnetizing current are again shown in the first figure and here 
it is also assumed that the voltage is a maximum at the time 
zero. The rotor magnetizing current in conductor No. 1 must 
be a negative maximum at this instant, (if we neglect the ohmic 
resistance as compared with the inductance), but the remainder 
of the current curve is a junction of (v,+v,). In order to 
show the current graphically we must assume a certain 
speed, and for convenience in drawing the curves we will 
say that so=3s1. The frequency of the currents in, the 
bars, therefore, must be 13 times the line frequency. The 
time phase displacement of the currents in adjacent rotor 
bars equals the space displacement of the bars themselves. 


2116 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


This has beer: shown in Fig. 10 in representing the currents 
in conductors No. 1,3, 5, 7 and 9. In Fig. 11 are shown dia- 


grammatic views of the rotor at the times t=0, a ms and Bn 


It will be noted that at the time t=4 conductor No. 1 has 


moved only 60 deg. from the center line of stator pole, neverthe- 


IMPRESSED STATOR E.M. F. 
STATOR MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT 


MAGNETIZING CURRENT 
IN COND, NO,1 


en COND, NO.7 
_ ; e 


IN COND, NO.9 


Fic. 10.—Rotor magnetizing current for two-thirds synchronous speed 


less the strength of the currents has changed in such a way 
that the rotor field is in the direction of the axis a—a. This 
may be made more clear by a study of Fig. 10, where it is seen 
that the current in conductor No. 2 would be about at its posi- 


tive maximum at this instant a . After the time a (Fig, 11) 


the conductor No. 1 is 120 deg. from the center line of stator pole, 


= an 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2117 


but now the currents have such a distribution that the field is in 
the direction of the axis b>—b. The rotor currents, instead of 
being exactly 90 deg. behind the e.m.f. that produces them, are 
slightly less than 90 deg. behind, on account of the effect of rotor 
resistance which we have here considered. 

In a similar manner we may derive the working com- 
ponent of the currents in the rotor when the motor is 
carrying load. These currents must produce an alternating 
field which is stationary in space, 
and whose axis coincides with the 
axis of the stator poles. As we 
have seen before, such a field may , 
be considered as the resultant of 
two fields of equal magnitude 
rotating in opposite directions 
against a fixed point in space witha 
speed equal to the synchronous 
speed of the line. The component 
that rotates in the same direction 
as the rotor, has a speed in rela- 
tion to the conductor equal to 
$1—Se; and the other component 
rotating opposite to direction of 
rotor, has a speed equal to s1+5se 
in relation to the conductor. Each 
individual conductor, therefore, 
carries two different working cur- 
rents; one with slip frequency and 
the other with speed plus line fre- 
quency. Under the assumption 
that the rotor runs at two-thirds 
of synchronous speed, these two 
currents must have the frequency 
1—2 and 1+3 times line frequency. 
These currents in the different 
rotor conductors, for this value of slip, are shown in the curves 
of Fig. 12. These curves were drawn up in exactly the same 
manner as the curves in Fig. 8, except that instead of a double- 
frequency current we now have a current with a frequency 13 
times the line frequency; and in place of the direct current we 
have a current with a frequency 1 that of the line. 

It is now not a very difficult matter to express in mathe- 


lia. 


11d. 


lle, 


lid, 


Bre; 1 


2118 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


matical formulas, the facts we have just stated. The currents 
producing the rotor magnetization have a frequency equal to 
the line plus the speed frequency, and therefore may be ex- 
pressed as follows for conductor No. 1: 


i2= —K cos (m, t+mz t) 


IMPRESSED STATOR E, M. F. 


WORKING PURRENT 
IN COND, NO,1 


Fic. 12.—Rotor working current for two-thirds synchronous speed 


For any other conductor forming the angle ¢ with the center 
line of the pole the equation would become 


42= —K cos (m, t+m: t+¢) 


The component of the working current which produces a ro- 
tating field in direction of the armature rotation may be ex- 
pressed by the equation 


I, = —K sin (m, t—m t—) 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2119 


and the other component, producing a field rotating opposite 
to the direction of armature rotation, is given by the equation 


I,=+K sin (m, t+mz2 t+¢) 


Since these two components must be equal we may write the 
equation for the total working current as 


T,=+K {sin (mi t+m:,t+¢) 
—sin (m,t—m, t—¢)} 


where m,=27 V; 
mM,=27 V2 
V,=line frequency 
V2=speed frequency 
g=angle between any par- 
ticular conductor and 
stator pole center line 
at time zero. 


The equations for J, and J,, have 


13 ¢. "ain es t= been plotted in Fig. 12 for five 
; oie eo different rotor conductors. 

Gt [Note The low-frequency current is the 

ae one producing the field rotating 

with the armature. As the speed 

of the armature approaches syn- 

18d. i chronism, the frequency of this 


current approaches zero, until at 
synchronous speed we have a direct 
current flowing with the resulting 
conditions as shown previously in 
Figs. 8 and 9. In Fig. 12 we have 
omitted the curve of magnetizing 
current so as to avoid confusion. It is evident however that there 
are three distinct currents flowing in each rotor bar. The first is 
the rotor magnetizing current, and the others are the two compon- 
ents of the working current. The magnetizing current happens 
to be of the same frequency as one component of the working 
current. The total resultant current therefore consists of two dif- 
ferent waves; one of which has ‘‘ line plus speed”’ frequency, and 
the other has slip frequency. ‘The total resultant current can 
easily be obtained from Figs. 10 and 12 by adding together the 


2120 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


ordinates of the three curves. This has been done in Fig. 14, 
Fig. 15 shows these same currents for three complete primary 
cycles. This figure shows clearly that it will be impossible, with 
the standard design of oscillograph, to produce a stationary pic- 
ture of this curve by the visual method, since the shape of the 
curve repeats only after a comparatively long period. The 
photographic method, however, will give the exact shape. 


IMPRESSED STATOR E, M. F. 


WORKING CURRENT 
IN COND. NO.1 
a b 


COND, NO.5 
=n ee ae 


COND. NO.7 


COND, NO.9 


—f 


Fic. 14.—Resultant rotor working current for two-thirds 
synchronous speed 


In the beginning of this paper, it was stated that the phe- 
nomena taking place in the rotor of a single-phase motor could 
be explained in two different ways. We have made use in the 
above discussion of the rotating field theory. We will now 
explain briefly the same phenomena by the cross field 
method. We will select first for this purpose the working cur- 
rent, because this is the current of greatest importance. Re- 
ferring to Fig. 16, the working current flows in axisa—a. The 


| 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2121 


current flowing in the connection between the brushes a—a must 
be a current of line frequency, and the same is true for the cur- 
rent flowing through the connection between the brushes b—6. 
Let us assume for a moment that the rotor is stationary and we 
find that the working currents produce a field in the axis a—a 
whose distribution in space we will assume follows the sine 
law. The maximum induction in the axis a—a occurs in the 


IMPRESSED STATOR E, M, F 


WORKING CURRENT 
COND, NO,1 


b 


COND, NO.3 


Cc 


COND. NO.5 


d 


COND. NO.7 


- e 


COND. NO.9 


x t 


Fic. 15.—Resultant rotor working current for two-thirds 
synchronous speed 


moment that the working current changes with the time, so 
the corresponding change in the induction may be expressed as 


B,=B cos (mt?) 


The induction at any point which forms the angle a with the 
center of the pole may be expressed by the equation 


Bvz=B, cos a= +B cos (m t) cos a 


2122 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


In order to obtain such a field distribution, the current dis- 
tribution in space must be given by 


I, =I cos (m #) sina 


where I is the maximum current which flows in any conductor 
at the time ¢ equals zero. This current, however, flows in that 
conductor which lies in the axis b—b. The field distribution will 
not change if the motor rotates, so the currents in the individual 
conductors must be such as to produce this same field. Hence 
the current distribution in space must remain constant. If we 
assume that the rotor rotates with k per cent of synchronous 
speed we can express the angle a@ through which any conductor 
has moved in ¢ seconds as a=(k mt). If the conductor under 


Fic. 16 


consideration formed the angle ¢ with the axis a—a at the time 
t=0 the total angle which it makes with the axis a—a after ¢ 
seconds is 


a=(kmt+¢) 
Substituting this value in the equation for J, we obtain 
I, = I cos (m 2).sin (k mt+¢@) 


This equation may easily be changed to a form that will more 
readily show the shape of the curve. 


sin (m t+a) =sin (m t) cos a+cos (m #) sina 


sin (m t—a) =sin (m t) cos a—cos (m #) sina 


1911] WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS 2123 


Subtracting the second equation from the first, we obtain: 
sin (m t+a)—sin (m t—a@) =2 cos (mt) sina 


also let (k m t)=mz t. 
By substitution, then, we may obtain: 


bol NI 


I, =—{sin (m, t-+m,t+¢)—sin (m,t—m2t—¢)} 

The form of this equation checks exactly with that derived by 
the rotating field theory. No attention has been paid to the 
absolute value of the constant K in the equation for J, but it is 
evident that the current J, is identical with the current J, just 
now derived. The question of the absolute values of the currents 
is beyond the scope of this paper, as it was the aim to show only 
the wave shape and frequency of the currents for the case where 
primary field is excited by sine-shaped e.m.f. and rotor and stator 
field have also sine-shaped distribution in space. 

It still remains to show-that the rotor magnetizing current as 
derived by the rotating field theory of Ferraris agrees with the 
results obtained by the cross field method. The following discus- 
sion outlines the proof for this, but for a more extended explanation 
of the theory, the reader is referred to an article by Mr. Fynn 
in the Electrical World of November, 1909, p. 1235, where a 
complete diagram of the no-load conditions of a single-phase 
induction motor is given. Here it may be stated simply that in 
the axis a—a flows a magnetizing current which in the ideal 
motor is 90 deg. phase displaced against the impressed stator 
voltage; and in the axis b—6 flows a magnetizing current which is 
in phase with the impressed e.mf. Further, we know that the 
magnetizing current in the axis a—a is equal to the magnetizing 
current in the axis 6—b. Also, in the same way as for the work- 
ing current, it follows that the magnetizing current flowing in 
an individual conductor in the axis b—b may be expressed as 


4p =1p Cos (m t) COS & 
and the magnetizing current in the axis a—a is 
la = —1ta Sin (m t) sin @ 


This expression must have the negative sign because it opposes 
the stator magnetizing current, which follows the law 


i=i sin (m1) 


2124 WEICHSEL: WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS (June 30 


The total magnetizing current flowing in an individual conductor 
is the sum of i. and 1p 


im =tatip = ty cos (m t) cos a —i, sin (m t) sina 
=i, cos (m t+a) 


The value of a for any conductor at any time ¢ is given by the 
expression 


a=(kmt+¢)=mtt+¢ 
This substituted in the equation for im gives 
im = iq Cos (Mm; t-+mz t+¢) 


This equation leads us to the same result which we obtained by 
the rotating field theory. 

A summary of the results obtained above shows that the 
wave shape of the current in an individual rotor conductor of 
a single-phase motor consists of three current components. 
One of these is the rotor magnetizing current, which has a fre- 
quency equal to line plus speed frequency. The remaining 
two are the two components of the rotor working current; one 
of which has line plus speed frequency, and the other has slip 
frequency. Two of these three current components have the 
same frequency, so the total resultant rotor current is made up 
of two distinct waves, one with line plus speed frequency and the 
other with slip frequency. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT, CHICAGO 2125 


DIscCUSSION ON ‘‘ WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS IN AN INDIVIDUAL 
ROTOR CONDUCTOR OF A SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION Moror.”’ 
CHICAGO, JUNE 30, 1911. 


Theodore Hoock: Mr. Weichsel’s interesting theoretical in- 
vestigation of the wave shape of currents in a single-phase rotor 
has been made under ideal conditions, 7.e., there has been assumed 
a machine without leakage and rotor resistance so that the rotor 
exciting current is equal to the stator exciting current, or in other 
words that the no-load current with short-circuited rotor is twice 
the no-load current with rotor winding open. The actual measured 
values, however, are smaller than those in the ideal motor, vary- 
ing between 1.60 to 1.95. The reactance, and especially the rotor 
resistance, has a vital influence upon the secondary exciting 
current, reducing it as low as 60 per cent of its theoretical value. 
The derived equations in Mr. Weichsel’s paper should, therefore, 
be corrected in figuring the actual amplitude of the current. 
Bearing this in mind it may be found valuable to apply the 
equations in investigating local fields, which are set by the rotor 
currents under certain conditions, and which cause sometimes 
very inconvenient phenomena in the machine. 

H. Weichsel: Referring to Mr. Hoock’s discussion, I agree 
that on actual single-phase motors, we find the no-load current 
lass than twice the magnetizing current. The factor 2 is only a 
theoretical conclusion, and in 
the actual machines the total 
no-load current is usually 
about 1.6 to 1.9 times the 
magnetizing current, and this 
deviation from the factor 2 
is caused by two factors, 
namely, the ohmic resistance 
and the inertia of the rotor. 


Fie. 1 


The relation between no-load current and magnetizing current 
is shown graphically in diagram Fig. 1, which is based on the 


2126 WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS [June 30 


assumption that the rotor runs exactly at synchronism and 
with uniform speed. 


0-1=e.m.f. impressed on stator winding, whose ohmic re- 
sistance has been neglected. 

0-2 = magnetizing current corresponding to e.m-f. 0-1. 

0-3 =e.m.f. of transformation in a-a axis of rotor. 

0-4=e.m.f. of rotation generated in b-b axis of rotor due to 
rotation in main transformer field. 

0-i;=rotor magnetizing current in b-b axis. 

4-5 is therefore the ohmic drop due to 73 in b-b axis. It is 
self-evident that 5 lies on a circle over 0-4. 

0-6 =e.m.f. of rotation generated in a-a axis by rotation in field 
produced by current 143. 

0-7 =resultant e.m.f. in a-a axis=resultant of 0-6 and 0-3. 
This resultant e.m.f. must be equal to the ohmic drop 
in axis a-a and is therefore proportional to the rotor 
current in axis d-a. 

2-8=primary current counterbalancing the rotor current 
0-7. It will be seen that vector 0-6 equals 7-3 and as 
0-6 is proportional to 07s and 073 proportional to 4-5 
it follows that also point 7 lies on a circle over 0-3. 
But 0-7 is proportional to the resultant rotor current 
in axis a-a, which current must be counterbalanced 
by the stator current 2-8. The end of this vector must 
lie, therefore, on acircle. For the ideal case, that rotor 
has no resistance, the panel 8 moves to 8’ and the total 
stator current is 0-8” or 2 times the magnetizing cur- 
rent. For a finite rotor resistance the stator current 
is 0-8 which, according to diagram, must be smaller 
than 0-8’ or less than 2 times the magnetizing current. 


wore: 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Convention 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


CHOICE OF ROTOR DIAMETER AND PERFORMANCE 
OF POLYPHASE INDUCTION MOTORS 


BY THEODORE HOOCK 


The theoretical part of polyphase induction motor design has 
been treated thoroughly, analytically and graphically,* and there 
is very little left for further investigation. In consideration of 
the great importance of this type of motor very little has been 
said about the leading points in the practical design. 

In laying out a new line of induction motors it is desirable to 
have a rational method for determining the influence of the rotor 
diameter upon the performance rather than using the longer 
procedure of designing a number of motors under different as- 
sumptions and comparing the final results. 

The performance is so rigidly interlinked with the mechanical 
dimensions and the windings that a theoretical design can easily 
be made which will show clearly the influence of the chosen 
constants upon the motor characteristic. 

The derived formulas in this paper are not intended to super- 
sede the detailed design but they should be used for the first 
layout. 

On the other hand the designer will find the results of the cal- 
culations very convenient for comparison and assistance in 
choosing the proper frame for certain guarantees to be met. 

It is undoubtedly of great use in the further development to 
analyze the design on a practical basis in order to find the 
limitations and the influence of the variables. 

It is fully demonstrated by tests that the D?/]; of standard 
speed motors is not limited by the temperature rise but by the 

*By Adams, Arnold, Steinmetz, Behrend, McAllister, Hellmund, de la 
Tour and others. * 


2127 


2128 © HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


performance and flux density. It is also a sad fact that until the 
present time these limits could be found only by test and that we 
have to confine the investigations to the power factor, overload 
capacity, copper and iron losses. 

Instead of dealing with the rotor diameter we express all 
results in terms of the pole-face proportions, i.e., the effective 
core length divided by the pole pitch. 7 

We will see later from (Figs. 6 to 10) that the power factor and 
the copper losses depend largely upon properly proportioning 
the pole face. There exists always one “ best’’ proportion 
for the power factor and another ‘“‘ best’”’ proportion for the 
minimum copper losses. Both conditions do not occur at the 


POWER FACTOR 
100% 


73% MAX. P. Fe 


Fic. 1 


same ratio of core length to pole pitch. Also the deviations from 
the minimum or maximum values obtainable vary considerably 
with the design; for instance with the slot dimensions, number of 
poles, type of winding and so on. It is, therefore, advisable to 
put all these deviations on a percentage basis, because it gives 
us a convenient method of comparison. 

These investigations can be divided under the following head- 
ings: 

1. Leakage coefficient. 

2. Copper losses. 

3. Overload capacity. 

4. Iron losses. 


623 eee —ay 
_ ae | 
=, . 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2129 


THE LEAKAGE COEFFICIENT 


The circle diagram, as drawn in Fig. 1, illustrates in the 
simplest way the relation between the current taken from the 
line and the power factor for any given load. 

Two tests, the no-load test and the locked test, are required in 
order to draw the diagram. The no-load test determines the 
no-load current and the no-load power factor while running 
light at normal voltage. The current and power factor at 
standstill will be found from the locked test. These four quan- 
tities Io, COS Go, Iz, CoS Gz, determine two points of the primary 
current circle. The center of the circle lies at a distance a above 
the base line, which can be found by test, calculation or with the 
aid of a simple geometrical construction. 


COS W max. 
1.0 


as ee 
9 iN Y 


CO ~ B 
8 - +S7% 
D (4S >. ~~ 0 
| (EF =>l= ae 
e) Sets 
a | | ie =< 


ik 


is 
8) -ae 4 8 8 10 ~-«21S—S«ia“'SiaG:SiC 


6% 
Fic. 2 


The tangent to the circle gives the smallest phase displace- 
ment Qmin and the largest power factor COS Ymaz (COS Pmaz 
=73 per cent in Fig. 1). 

The maximum power factor is determined by the circle diam- 
eter (Iz; —TIow1)' and the distance from the origin to the circle, 
i.e., the wattless magnetizing current Iow. We can also see 
from Fig. 1 that a shifting of the center up or down from the base 


‘line will influence the maximum power factor somewhat (3 to 


5 per cent). See curves A, B and Cin Fig. 2, 

The smallest current which will be taken from the line is the 
no-load current Ip. In loading the motor the current will in- 
crease to the full load current Irz. When we load the motor 
still more we reach I cos» max) and finally, it will pull out and 


2130 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


come to standstill. In case the normal voltage is still applied, 
the locked current I; will flow in the winding. 

In case we could decrease the ohmic resistances of the motor 
the point J, would move along the circle, 7.e., the locked current 
would increase. For the extreme case having resistances equal 
to zero the ideal locked current I,; would be taken from the line. 
This reactive current I; is determined by the leakage coefficient 
and the wattless magnetizing current. It is 


jprees (1) 
oO 


Where @ is the leakage coefficient or the ratio of the wattless 
‘component of the no-load current to the ideal locked current; 
or rewritten, 


— Lowi 
cas (2) 


The main advantage of using this coefficient is the inde- 
pendence from voltage and magnetizing current. As soon as 
the punchings, the core length and the number of poles are 
settled the leakage coefficient is almost fixed (disregarding the 
iron saturation and fractional pitch windings). Furthermore 
all the characteristics of the motor are improved by decreasing 
the leakage coefficient. 

It is not necessary to draw the circle diagram in each case 
in order to find the leakage coefficient, as it can be figured 
easily from the no-load and locked test data. 

The total reactance of a motor at short-circuit is 


> fy wey = ———$——————— noe 


and the leakage coefficient 


_ — Lowt _— Losingo Low 
o Py X= Bi XR= Pe: (4) 


The Maximum Power Factor. It has been brought out above 
that the magnetizing current Jom and the leakage coefficient 
determine the maximum power factor. Under the assumption 


19114] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2131 


that the center of the circle lies on the base line the maximum 
power factor is 

1 As Tpi— Lowi * 
1+20¢ Lyi tLowt 


(5) 


COS Pmaz = 


These equations were figured for different values of o and are 
plotted in Fig. 2, curve A. 

Curves B and C in Fig. 2 are added to show the effect of the 
center displacement upon COS @maz. Both curves are taken 
from actual tests and will be found very useful for approxima- 
tions. 

The following details may be kept in mind: 

Use curve A plus 4 to ? per cent for large motors. 

Use curve B for small and medium size motors and cos ¢, 
=0.3 to 0.6. 

Use curve C for small and medium size motors and cos ¢% 


Fe 0.75. 


If the tested power factor is plotted in a curve we can find 
readily from its maximum value the size of the leakage coefficient, 
using these curves (Fig. 2). If the no-load current is known, 
we are in a position to compute also with equation (4) the 
reactance of the motor without knowing the data of the locked 
tests. 

Another quantity which is convenient for comparison of the 
overload capacity is the current at which the maximum power 
factor occurs. It is 


il 
I (cos p max) — Lowi 4 (6) 


We can now investigate the relations between the leakage 
coefficient, the rotor diameter and the core length. All practical 
considerations, as peripheral speed, temperature rise, flywheel 
effect and so on, will be eliminated in our investigations entirely. 
It is perfectly feasible to build two motors for the same purpose, 
one with a large diameter and narrow core and the other with a 
small diameter and long core. The same D?]J; is assumed in 
both cases. The rotor diameter is proportional to the pole 
pitch for a given number of poles and therefore we have all 
results in relation to the ratio of core length /; to pole pitch T. 


adits 


Lowi 1 
is the ideal locked current Give 10 times the magnetizing current. 


cee : 
=~— is the ideal short-circuit ratio. For o=10 per cent. =0.10 


2132 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


The pole face of a motor is the product /;7. The square pole 
face will have then the ratio A equal to 1. 


The leakage coefficient @ can be figured with great accuracy 
from the dimensions of the motor.* 
Theis 


__ampere-turns circuit 
ampere-turns air gap 


> o=saturation factor = o (7) 


The sum of the leakage coefficients 2 o consists of the follow- 
ing coefficients: 


On, =Stator slot leakage coefficient. 

Tn,= Rotor slot leakage coefficient. 

os, =Stator end-connection leakage coefficient. 
o;,= Rotor end-connection leakage coefficient. 
o, =Zigzag leakage coefficient. 

oy, =Stator belt leakage coefficient. 
oy, = Rotor belt leakage coefficient. 


Or 2 6 =On,tOntOs, tts +5, + Fb, (8) 


We combine the corresponding leakage of the stator and rotor, 
and placing 


a=6 ky Cn PPE titan te) 


Is, 
b=bh (pig tee jir) aS! 


C=Co Cy ty be 


we obtain for the leakage coefficient 


a+c 


T? 


o=saturation factor ( 


+2 +08) 
(10) 


A : atc b 
=saturation factor (arart 4+ Bat +0) 


*See R. E. Hellmund. Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift, 1911, p. 1111. 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2133 


In order to determine the minimum value of the leakage 
coefficient 2 a@ we neglect the belt leakage as being a small 
amount and almost independent of the pole face proportion. 
We take the first derivative of 2 o with respect to B and place 
it equal to zero: 


dda 


ea haa 


We find that the minimum value for 2 o occurs when 


(11) 


This equation indicates that the leakage coefficient will become 
a minimum when the total slot plus zigzag leakage is equal to the 


‘total end connection leakage. 


The quantities a, b and c are determined by the air gap, slot 
dimensions and the number of poles. We can also from the 


a+c 
b 


coefficient > o will become a minimum, 7.e., when 


quotient of find the pole pitch for which the leakage 


T; -O-¢ (12) 


B b 


This relation can be used directly for the layout of the diam- 
eter and core length for a certain D?/; or for a comparison of 
machines in order to determine the most advantageous frame. 
We will carry out these calculations on a large motor. We 
assume a D?/; equal to 300,000, and split the product in dif- 
ferent values D and 1;, varying from 140 to 70 in. (3.58 to 1.79 m.) 
diameter and 15.3 to 61 in. (0.388 to 1.55 m.) length of core, 


: ; L, 
which gives a variation of the pole face proportion B ae 0.417 


to 3.33 (see Table I). 
The fifth column shows the ratio T/B (88 to 5.5). The 
values of a, b and c are 5.25, 0.556, 1.135, which are written on the 


‘ ae. 
curves in Fig. 3. The ratios ore and Bar and the sum 20 


2134 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 


[June 30 


are plotted also in Fig. 3. The minimum value occurs at 
tT  a+e 5.254 1]0i5a 


=11.5 (upper curve in Fig. 3), giving a 


fever weld 0.556 
ratio =o aiGs 
is 
When we add to curve ote te the belt leakage, the 


total =o will be found. These figures are worked out for 
12, 16 and 32 poles on six different diameters (see Table I). 


Sala 


8 


Ske, =.125" 1.40 
=.175" 
Cn = 10.1 
t,= 1.0" 
Ani= lA 
to = 0.80 
Ans 2.0 
C3,= Cs = 0.78 
ls 
a 2.04 
Sp °T 


Cy Cy = 142 


a= 5.25 
b= 0.556 
@=1.135 


Fic. 3 


The results are plotted in Fig. 4, a, b, c, against the ratio of core 
length to pole pitch. We find that the minimum value for the 
different number of poles does not occur at the same ratio 1;/rT. 


The minimum values for the 12, 16 and 32 poles lie at ae a 


1.55, 1.3 respectively. 
We can see from these curves that a design with a large diam- 
eter and small core length, as well as with a small diameter and a 


corresponding extreme core length, has a tendency to increase 
the leakage coefficient. 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2135 


The curves of 2 o have no sharp knee and the deviations from 
the minimum values are small over a large range of /;/7. 

In order to bring all curves upon a uniform basis the per- 
centage of increase above the minimum values is plotted in 
Fig. 4, d, e and f. The smallest value of 2 o for 12 poles is 
=2.825 per cent at Sai, curve a. A =0.417 we find 
Yo =4.26 per cent. This means an increase of 51 per cent, 
curve d, which is due to the large influence of the end-connection 
leakage, its coefficient being eight times as large as that of the 
slot leakage. The curve e of the 16-pole machine shows the 
same characteristic, but not quite so distinctly. The end-con- 
nections in the 32-pole design are only of moderate influence while 


TABLE I 
D? 1; =300,000—12 poles 

Ratio Ratio 

ii 5 ant + 

(inches) (inches) (inches) T 

140 isyar) 36.7 ~ 0.417 88 
120 20.9 31.4 0.665 47.1 
110 24.8 28.7 0.865 33.2 
100 30 26.2 125 22.8 
90 2 Bf 23.5 1.58 14.9 
80 47 20.9 2.25 9.3 
70 61 18.3 3.08 5nd 


the slot and zigzag leakage in the long motor with a small 
pole pitch are the largest items. It is certainly of interest to 
follow these figures to the final result which may be considered 
to be the maximum power factor (COS Gmaz)- The full load power 
factor is then only determined by the overload capacity or 
the ratio of the wattless magnetizing current Low to the full 
load current JFL. Therefore, we multiply the figured leakage 
coefficient © o by the saturation factor =1.15, assuming 15 per 
cent of the air ampere-turns for magnetizing the iron path in 
all three designs. From curve A (Fig. 2) or from equation (5) 
can then be found the maximum power factor. The results 
are plotted in Fig. 21. 

The maximum values of the COS Pmax correspond with the 
minimum values of 2g and occur at the same ratios 1;/7 as 


2136 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


the leakage coefficients 2 o in Fig. 4,a,bandc. Itis surprising 
that for 12 poles (2 o =2.825 X1.15 =3.25 per cent), the COS Pmaz 
=93.7 per cent, only 3 per cent larger than cos Omar =91 per 
cent for the 51 per cent larger leakage coefficient. (o =4.26 
1.15 =4.9 per cent at 1;/7 =0.415.) 

We can figure from curve B, Fig. 2, the deviation A o per cent 
for 1 per cent change in cos Pmaz and find curve D. This result 
shows that with a leakage coefficient of 3.25 per cent or COS Pmaz 
=94 per cent, 19 per cent deviation is permissible, for which 
amount the cos Ymaz will go down to 93 per cent. In our case 
with 51 per cent deviation the cos Pmaz=93.7 per cent is de- 


= 2.25 
is r+3.8" 
s;— = 


ay 


ao 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM 


n 0 . 7 14 18 22 INCHES 
i ROTOR DIAMETER D 


Fic. 4 Fic. 5 


creased a per cent=2.7 per cent and we actually find 91 


per cent against 93.7 per cent (Fig. 21). 

The ‘‘ best ’’ pole face of the 32-pole machine gives a COS Pmaz 
-=84.3 per cent (o =9.25 per cent) for which the permissible 
allowance is only 84 per cent for each per cent power factor. 


It, was found for the longest motor a =3.06 (o =9.3 per cent), a 
deviation of 16 per cent. The power factor cos Pmaz mail be de- 


i : : 1 
creased in this design 4 per cent=1.9 per cent or it will 


be 84.3—1.9=82.4 per cent. 
This influence is greater the larger the leakage coefficient is, 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2137 


or in other words, machines with a low power factor or with a 
large leakage coefficient will be more sensitive than those with 
small leakage and high power factor. It is, therefore important 
to choose the pole face (J;.t) of motors with large number of 


- poles as close to the best values as possible, since every variation 


of 5 to 7 per cent in the leakage coefficient decreases the maximum 
power factor one per cent and increases the full load stator current 
in the same percentage as the: power factor is decreased. 

The determination of the pole face by the formula (12) is 
very simple as long as the air-gap 6 is kept constant. This 
condition will not exist, however, in most practical cases. It is 
general practise to vary the air-gap proportionally with the rotor 
diameter, Fig. 5, except that very long cores for high speed will 
have also a bearing upon the air-gap. We will consider here 
only the standard speed machines for which these investigations 


are made especially. Not only the air-gap brings a complication 


in the analytical solution of the 


problem but also the member eee ae 

diac 5 Pe 
in quantity b, because the length of 
the end connections are (const. X pole 
pitch plus 2 to 10 in.) according to size, 
voltage and type of winding. This 
constant addition introduces an error 
which may lead to incorrect results. 
The smallest leakage coefficient does not occur always be- 


Fic. 6 


tween the ratio He12 to 1.7, as it was obtained for D? 1; 


= 300. 10%, but its location depends upon the size of the pole 
face, the type of windings, length of the air-gap and slot pitches. 
The writer has worked out a few interesting cases which will 
give an idea of the range of variation. 

In Figs. 6 to 10 the leakage coefficients = o for a D? 1;=2000 
are drawn for various number of poles. The diamond coils of 
the stator are placed in open slots and_ slightly chorded. 
The rotor has partially closed slots and a special squirrel-cage 
winding with a slot pitch of only 0.34 in. (8.6 mm.). The 
D? 1; is split up again as shown before in Table I. The air gap 6 
is varied according to Fig. 5. The slot dimensions of stator and 
rotor are given in Fig. 5. Since the slot openings are kept con- 
stant and the air gap varies, the gap factor k; varies inversely 


2138 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


as the rotor diameter, but the effective air gap 6.1 increases 
with the rotor diameter. 

The leakage coefficients 2 o are figured for all diameters and 
numbers of poles, using formula (8) in order to show the rela- 
tive magnitude of each kind of leakage. 

_ The upper curves in Figs. 6 to 9 give always the sum 2 o per 
cent and all sums are combined in Fig. 10, @ to e. 
The minimum values of = o occur for the 6- 8- 10- 12- and 


14-pole designs at a ratio ae 1.15, 1.40, 1.38, 1.40, 1.30 and 


1.20 respectively. 
In Fig. 11 the deviations of © o from the minimum are drawn, 


i 
TT 


Fic. 7 Fic. 8 


which have the same character as those of Fig. 4, d, e, f. 

The curves are somewhat further extended than we would 
find in actual machines. It is possible, however, that certain 
conditions, 2- or 4-pole, or 14- to 20-pole designs on standard 


frames would give 40.45 to 0.5 or 2.5 to 3.5. 


From these curves, Fig. 11, we can judge again, in combina- 
tion with the actual leakage coefficient o=saturation factor 
X20, how much the power factor will be decreased by making 


the pole face proportions different from those which will give the 
minimum values. 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2139 


=6 
10% 
8 
IE 
6 =e 
Bie 2 =e On; 
nl pT 
| ne 
Oz 
2 T c 
r Ost Og. 
oNG,, 
0 £OF 3 
0 1 2 3 UF 


2140 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS {June 30 


It was previously mentioned that the size of the motor, the 
slot pitches and the type of windings influence the design as 
to its most economical proportions. 

Table II gives a layout for a D?];=289—6 poles. 

The stator is in all three designs the same, chorded diamond 
coils in open slots. The rotor A represents a construction with 


TABLE II 
D? 1; =289—6 poles 
Design A | B iC 
> | 
Stator ‘slot dimenslotivvves.cutsa 0 sere ares vie es Fig. 12 | Fig. 13 Fig. 14 
« ~ le Genatant 278 yan an 2.20 | 2.20 2.20 
* # SDIbCh it". Selec a gakeloibiva it ack acetemacste 0.526 in.| 0.526 in. 0.526 in. 
Length of end connections... .....0cceses 1, =1.3 t+3.5 in. 
Air WEP) oh ee oe ciated vas aie as cies 0.0190 to 0.0276 in. 
gap factor! Ryik.c- a cttilameare sete. cee isi 1.50 to 1.58 | 1.76 to 1.87 | 1.50 to 1.58 
Rotor, slot. dimenslOwsysv as ores cole naive Fig. 12 Fig. 13 | Fig. 14 
# © COURCAND Rep des tnrae celeste sil etal sts ve 120 / 2.4 . 2.13 
& St Ete BARRO MOE COO OT Is. 0.642 in. 0.156 in. 0.241 in. 
Length of end connections.........6-+-50 ls =t+3 in. 
Copnerr section. cise egies. «siamese tiesiacleiele nik iv ix} text ' tx} 
Rotor diameter Core length Pole pitch Ratio 
D ly Tt 8 as 
Tt 
11 in, 2.38 in, 5.76 in, 0.412 
10 2.89 5.23 0.55 
3.56 4.71 0.755 
8 4.52 4.18 1.08 
5.9 3.66 1.61 
6 8.05 3.14 2.56 
5} 9.6 2.88 3.33 


bolted bars and rings with a secondary slot pitch of 0.642 in. 
(16.2 mm.) for a bar 3 by 2in. (9.5 by 9.5mm.). In Barotor is 
used with very narrow open slots with a slot pitch of 0.156 in. 
(3.97 mm.) for a special rotor winding with ys by 3 in. (1.5 by 
12.7 mm.) copper section. Design C has partially closed slots 
with a slot pitch of 0.241 in. (6.8 mm.) and a copper section 
of 4 by 3 in. (8.17 by 12.7 mm.). 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2141 


We bear in mind that the mechanical air gap 6 is the same in 
all three cases A, B and C for the same ratio ];/tT and compare 
at first the leakage coefficients 2 o. The minimum values of 


>o are as follows: = 
A B Cc 
Dorp eg GPa Res er. SN? Ee meee 6.95% 5.85% 5.7% 
ly 
DS ee ce Rios goers) pee 0.550 0.75 0.80 


We see that a smaller motor calls for a considerably smaller 
ratio ];/r than the larger sizes figured. 

Designs B and C show very clearly the good influence of the 
large number of rotor slots, which decreases 2 o 20 per cent or 
increases the maximum power factor 2 per cent. 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM 


ae. 


Fic. 11 


Design B with the open rotor slots is almost as good as C 
with partially closed slots, as far as the maximum power factor 
is concerned. The air-gap is rather small in this small motor, 
being 0.02 to 0.0275 in. (0.5 to 0.69 mm.) on one side, so that 
the gap factor k; increases the magnetizing current and affects 
the full load power factor. This leads to the conclusion that a 
motor with open rotor slots of this small size could not compete 
with one having partially closed slots. 

The percentage increase of the leakage coefficient 2 o per 
cent above the minimum values is plotted in Fig. 15. The slot 
and zigzag leakage are the largest items in design A which over- 
balance the end-connection leakage considerably and reach a 
very high percentage in Fig. 15. All three curves have a sharp 
turn. 


2142 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2143 


We see further that a motor can be made longer (large /;/7T) 
the smaller the slot and zigzag leakage can be kept in comparison 
to the end connection leakage. 


TABLE III 
D? 1; =24.5—2 poles— two-phase 
Rotor diameter Core length Pole pitch Ratio Ratio 
D ie A pat | 3 

4.52 in. 1.20 in. 7.1 in. 6.169 “42.0 
4.22 1.48 6.62 0.224 29.6 
3.92 1.59 6.15 0.259 23.7 
3.625 1.87 5.68 0.333 17:05 
3.32 graze WW 6.20% PF) Onaey Wie | 
3.02 2.69 4.74 0.569 8.32 
2.72 3.30 4.27 0.773. 552 


In Table III and Fig. 16 the dimensions, constants and the 
complete leakage data of a very small motor are given. When 
using formula (12), with a= 0.231, b=0.0227 and c= 0.348, we find 


the ratio —-=25.7 to give the highest maximum power factor at 


B 


a pole-face ratio B= “ =().25. 


The belt leakage is the largest item in the group and it changes 
the ratio 1;/r to 0.22. It can be seen again that the equation 
furnishes good results when the air-gap is kept constant. , 

We have figured previously with the sum 20 of the single 
leakage coefficients. It may happen, however, that the maxi- 
mum power factor and the derivations for the smallest copper 
losses are influenced by the saturation of the iron path. Equa- 
tion (10) expresses the influence of the saturation factor. 


; total ampere-turns iron ampere-turns 
saturation factor =—. = — 
air ampere-turns air ampere-turns 
(13) 


It has been assumed that the iron ampere-turns are: constant — 
for all number of poles and ratios J;/r. It would lead to con- 
giderable complications if we tried to introduce the iron ampere- 
‘turns in all derivations. The density in the air-gap and the 


2144 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


ampere-turns for the teeth and yoke depend largely upon the 
motor type, frequency and number of poles. In case we de- 
crease or increase the air-gap with the rotor diameter and keep 
the density in all parts of the magnetic path constant, the fol- 
lowing results may be obtained: Motors with a large number of 
poles will require a small amount of ampere-turns for the yoke, 
due to the short length of path 7. The ampere-turns for the 
teeth will be constant with all 


poles for constant density and B Homes a et 
slot depth. The ampere-turns - 

of the air gap will vary with O”)o7 7 

6k, which is almost propor- £20 

tional to the air gap 6. In 10 

turn we find for a given 


number of poles an increase pe 0.6 gali 


of the saturation factor, when 
decreasing the air gap. From 
these conclusions we can state 
that the minimum leakage 
coefficient and the maximum 
power factor are always 
shifted a small amount toward 
a lower ratio 1;/T, than found 
by figuring with the sum =o 
only. The influence of the 
iron ampere-turns comes into 
consideration only in highly 
saturated machines or in those 
with very small air gap.* As 
long as the iron ampere-turns 
are not more than 25 per 
cent of the air ampere-turns, 
the results will not be in- 
fluenced. 


= 
D? 1;=24.5-2 POLE-2 PHASE 


ww 


LEAKAGE COEFFICIENTS IN % 


— 


CopPrpER LOssEs 
The stator copper losses are 


_ TDAS sy kyla (140.004 2°) 
W stator = 14500 watts (14) 


where J,—1:+1.57+3.5 in. 


*Th. Hoock and R. E. Hellmund. “ Elektrotechnik & Maschinenbau,” 
Wien, 1910, p. 741. 


sities) \3 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2145 


E _alternating-current resistance 
,= 2 i 


. > . * 
direct-current resistance 


or, for both windings together, double the amount when we 
assume A S and the copper density s for the rotor the same as in 
the stator. The ampere-turns per inch A S and the density s 
may be assumed constant, so that in varying D and /; of a certain 
D? 1; as carried out previously, only D and 1; change in equation 
(14). 

We can write then for the total copper weight, in its simplest 
form, 


copper weight =const. D ],=const.-D (J,+1.25 to 2.07) 


A simple differentiation furnishes the smallest copper weight 
for 


l,=1.57T at a ratio +30 


1,=2.07 at a ratio =4.0 
The length of conductor is correctly 


1, =1;-+const. T+const. allowance (15) 


The neglecting of the additional constant length which is 
given by the type of the winding involves an error. In order to 
eliminate it the quantity DJ, has been figured for several D? 1; 
and is then plotted against the ratio 1,/r. The presence of 
ventilating ducts in the core increases the constant allowance 
in equation (15) and their influence can be estimated from 
curves b in Figs. 18 to 20. 

All results are reduced to a percentage basis, calling the smallest 
value zero. (See curves in Figs. 17 to 20.) We see from all 


curves that the copper weights become a minimum at a ratio 


33.0 to 5.0. These values are so high that they are beyond 


practical applications. 
Figs. 17 and 18 refer to a D® 1;= 1220-4 poles. Assuming a 


motor with a pole-face ratio 40.5, we find from curve 8, 


*A, B, Field, Transactions A. I. E. E., 1905, XXIV, page 761. 


2146 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


Fig. 18, that the copper weight will be 50 per cent higher than 
the amount required for the “lightest copper ’’ machine. For 


the square pole face a =1.0, only 18 per cent difference is found. 


esx 


8 


0 1 2 3 4 ip 
- 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM COPPER WEIGHT 
S S 


Fic. 17.—Deviation of copper weight from the minimum 


1220 4 POLES 


40 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM COPPER WEIGHT 


0 = 
0 1 2 3 4 Li 
ae 
CURVE (a) FOR MEAN LENGTH OF CONDUCTOR la=1j+1.5T+0" | ' 
oi esp ae ek “ “ “ la=Y41.6T+3.5 a 


Fie. 18.—Deviation of the copper weight from the minimum +3 
: l; 
In case we wind the same frame (+ =0.5 for 4 poles) for 10 


poles or re 1.25, approximately 20 per cent difference will be 


found from curve ), Fig. 19. 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2147 


The minimum of the leakage coefficient or the maximum 
power factor on one side, and the minimum copper weight or 
smallest resistance (constant copper density assumed) on the 


other side, occur always at a different ratio — The full-load 


D*7,;=1220 10 POLES 


(a) Ug7pl, + 2.07 4+ 3.5” 


80% 


Raa | 
DEVIATION 


lor) 
Co 


ao 


“Bs 
S 
s2& 


Nee ee a > 
Shont isonet 


ras) 
o 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM COPPER WEIGHT 


0 = 
0 1 2 3 A wl 

CURVE (@) FOR MEAN LENGTH OF CONDUCTOR Leal, +207 43.5” 
“ (by) « “a “ “ ““ Ig=li +2.0T4+6" 


Fic. 19.—Deviation of the copper weight from the minimum 


40 


20 


0 1 2 3 4 ol 


DEVIATION FROM MINIMUM COPPER WEIGHT 


T 
CURVE (@) FOR MEAN LENGTH OF CONDUCTOR Lyg=li +2.0T +6" 
i (DY eee at a oh “ Lg=ly +207 +10" 


Fic. 20.—Deviation of the copper weight from the minimum 


current is determined in the circle diagram by the no-load cur- 
rent, the leakage coefficient, the no-load and the locked power 
factor. Assuming the magnetizing current, the no-load and 
locked power factor to be constant, we find the full-load current 


2148 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


varying in the same percentage as the maximum power factor 
decreases or increases by changing the pole-face proportion. 

The following procedure can be used under these considera- 
tions for finding the ratio of core length to pole pitch at which the 
copper losses approach the minimum value. The copper losses 
vary with the square of the current. Therefore we square the 
deviations of the full-load current as derived from the leakage 
coefficient and the maximum power factor, and add to these 
values the percentage deviations of the resistances from curves 
in Figs. 17 to 20. An example will better illustrate the applica- 
tion of this method. 

We have found the leakage coefficients =o for the motor 
D? 1;=300.108 which are drawn in Fig. 4. The leakage coeffi- 
cient ¢ is then calculated by multiplying by the saturation factor 
1.15. Curve A, Fig. 2, then gives the maximum power factor 
which is shown in the upper curve of Fig. 21. The highest 
value COS Pmaz Of the 32-pole design is 84} per cent, at a ratio 
fee 1.28. For a core dimension three times as long as the pitch, 
COS mar = 824 per cent is found. This corresponds to a current 
deviation AJ of 24 per cent (see curves in Fig. 21) or (A J)? 
equal to 5 per cent. 

We assume the mean length of conductor /,=1;+2.07+6 in., 
and use the curve b from Fig. 20 again, which is copied in Fig. 21 
and marked Cu. The sum of the two curves (A J)? per cent 


+Cu per cent shows a distinct minimum at the ratio “ =3.36. 


By reducing the ordinate values to the zero line we find the devia- 
tion of the copper losses from the minimum. These results in- 


dicate a rather large ratio (= =3 36) as far as copper losses are 
concerned (disregarding the iron losses), while the highest power 
factor will be obtained at a ratio a =1.28. In case the ratio is 


made =2.25, only one per cent deviation of each item will result 
and the apparent efficiency will be near its maximum. If the 
power factor is a prevailing quantity in the guarantees, the core 


will be made narrower, approaching the ratio 421.28, This 


change, however, will involve an increase of copper losses and 


4 
] 
5 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2149 


higher cost. It can be seen from the flat shape of the curve that 
the performance of a large motor is less sensitive than a smaller 
one when the best proportions are not used. 

The same method is applied on the small motor D?1;=289 
—6 poles, designated as design A. 

The leakage coefficient = a increased very rapidly with 1,/7 
as shown in Fig. 12. With the aid of curve A, Fig. 2, the cos Pmaz 
was plotted in Fig. 22. Then using the maximum value 
87.5 per cent as a base, the percentage of current increase 
ATI per cent and (A J)? per cent were the figures. For the mean 


cos cH) MAX. 
1.0 


= = 

5 = 

oa 2 

Zz Zz 

= 4 setts "| EFF 

2: 2 : 6 POLES 

2" 200 : 

& 99 oe | | 

z eS t} | 

Fe} 020 ichW oR 

- 10 e \ > cp’) 

4 $10 Quest 

> IP. F 2 

w 0 Bo AN)i+Cy 
0 1 2 3 ii 

rT 
Fic. 21 Fic. 22 


length of conductor curve 6 in Fig. 18 has been chosen. After 
adding the curve (A J)? to Cw per cent, their sum, minimum 


locus (21.75) and their per cent deviation from the mini- 
mum were found. These results show again that the difference 


cae L; 
between power factor and copper loss loci is large, = =0.55 


: ‘ L; 
against 1.75. The deviations at the cutting point, extn 26, 


2150 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


however, are only 2 per cent, with a maximum power factor of 
85.5 per cent. If a higher value is desired the core should be 


made narrower. At a ratio 40.55, @° COS Omaz=87.5 per 


cent can be attained, but the copper weight will be increased 
approximately 30 per cent. 

These investigations show clearly the opposing influence of 
- the pole-face proportions upon power factor and copper losses. 
The iron losses introduce another component which makes the 
problem practically impossible to solve, because of its variable 
proportions in the sum of the losses. A final decision can only 
be made on the basis of a complete design. 


THE OVERLOAD CAPACITY 


The change of the leakage coefficient o with the pole-face 
proportion and its influence upon the whole performance of the 
motor introduce only variables in the problem. A base to 
start from, however, is given in the maximum torque or the over- 
load capacity. Bearing this in mind we will change all quantities 
in such a way that the pull-out torque remains constant in our 
further investigations. 

A simple method will lend itself to this purpose. The watt- 
less magnetizing current per phase Jou; can be computed as 
follows :* 


1.11 X (total ampere-turns) x p 
m, Wi fi fo, 


Lowi = 


(16) 
where 
total ampere-turns = 406 6 k; B; Xsaturation factor (17) 
It is customary to express the magnetizing current in percent- 
age of the full load current JFL. 


We combine equation (16 )and (17) and divide by the full 
load current 


Tow _ 1.11 p 406 6 k; By Xsaturation factor 
Tri Trt my wi fif p, 


(18) 


Irt m, w, represents the total ampere-turns in the stator if we 
place 
2m,lFrwm=7D,A S=2pTtA As (19) 


where A S=ampere conductors per inch circumference. 


*Arnold-Wechselstromtechnik, Ve 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2151 
Introducing A S in equation (18) we find 


Tow: __ 1.11.406 6 k, B, X saturation factor 


Tri Tide,7T Aw (20) 
or, for B; in kilolines per sq. cm. and A S in inches, 
Tow _ 0.45 6 ki B, X saturation factor (21) 


IFt ; thifpAS 


The maximum or pull-out torque in terms of the full load 
torque can be figured to 


maximum torque I wi 


full load torque ipa (20 Ma 27; Low 


(22) 
) cos Y.n 
; 1 
We take only the three prevailing quantities into considera- 
tion and plot the pull-out torque against the ratio | 


— Low : 
See (see curve a, Fig. 23) (23) 


The upper curve may be used for highly saturated motors 
with a small number of slots per pole and a “ bent” locked 
saturation curve. 

Now we combine this pull-out relation with the winding and 
motor dimension of equation (21) and write 


Tow _ 0.45 6 k saturation factor B, (0.45.6 k, B, 


o Trt oTfife, AS me oT ib A 


(24) 


We see that the pull-out torque can be determined without 
knowing the ampere-turns for the iron when the Yo is used 
instead of the total leakage coefficient o. 

We find therefore the ratio of the specific working quantities 
B; and AS 


Pie. fifat2o 
a end to 0.8 “Aare E (25) 


This ratio will be the smallest for a certain pull-out when 
TiO ; 
6 ky 


becomes a minimum. 


2152 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


The required field strength in the air-gap will then be obtained 
with the smallest number of ampere-turns per unit of length. 
Suppose it is asked that the pull-out torque be not less than 


Lowi 


23 times full load torque; the ratio - will then be larger 


than 0.5. Or from equation 


b 2 0.5 fifrT o ee Fide, Te 


S 0.456 k,Xsaturation factor : 0.45 6 ky 


B 
A 


This ratio gives a relation between the specific working 
densities and the constants of the motor for a certain overload 
capacity. 

Equation (25) may also be used directly to calculate the turns 
per phase or the correct air density for a given frame and a cer- 
tain pull-out torque. We figure for this purpose from equation 
(25) the ratio B;/A S and introduce the result into the output 
equation or the machine constant* 


Din . 133,102 


kv-a.” fife, Bia S a) 
and set 
B, ) 
B=AS (455 
Hence 
kv-a. 133. 104 
A S= D2 lin B, ) (27) 
fife, Gas 
And finally the turns per phase 
AS7D 
od Sls Ra poh A 8 (28) 


or the air density 


B, 
po, eee a) 
TN Die Omfifa ou, 


*Arnold loc. cit. 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2153 


These equations enable us to determine quickly the lowest 
air density at which the required pull-out torque will just be met 
in case the leakage coefficient is known. This refers especially 
to designs which are limited by the maximum torque. 


Tron Losses 


_ An incorporation of the iron losses complicates the theoretical 
design and these losses should preferably be calculated after the 
main dimensions are settled. 
A complete line of iron loss figures was made for the same 
D?1;=2000 as above, running the motor on 60 cycles with a 
synchronous speed of 900 rev. per min. 


Fic. 23 


It was pointed out that the pull-out torque should be kept 
constant. Assuming in this case a pull-out torque of 23 times 
full load torque, we find from equation (25) 


Bi aR 0.957 . 0.966.727 _ 19 TIC 
ATS 0.45.6. Ki 6 Ki 


if we take f:=0.957 and fp, =0.966. 
The ratio B;/A S has been figured and plotted in Fig. 7 using 
the data of the lower curve in Fig. 23. ; 
Finally we obtain with these results in combination with 
formula (23) the required air-gap density B,, Fig. 7. 


2154 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


The flux per pole is 


E . 108 
2 rete 30 
Pare Ee cwilhifr, Se 


and the maximum air density in kilolines per sq. cm. 


wy) p 
Be Bleed oa (31) 
= 64507 I etlOr hy 


The density in the (90 per cent solid) iron behind the slots 


y g Pee: ; 
Bo= 56450 . 0.90.1. ha 11600 .7. he ae) 


Combining, we find 


Bo 20.9842, ee (33) 
l ha 
or approximately 
a 
=0.36 B, Pe 


The volume of the stator core is 
vol.st,c. =(D+2 hn, +he,) 1 1 he, 0.90 cu. in.; 
of the rotor core 
vol. rot. ¢. =(D~—2 lng —ha.) TL he 0.90 cu. in.; 
of the stator teeth 
vol.si.1, =Z1 An, 2m, 10.90 cu. in.; 


of the rotor teeth 
VOl. Rot. = Ze he. Zme 10.90 cu. in. 


The iron loss is figured under the assumption of a constant 
density behind the slots in the stator B,,=9,000 and in the rotor 
Ba,=10,000. The variation of the air-gap density, Fig. 7, is 
evident in the core volume and later also in thelosses. The volume 
of the stator and rotor core reaches a minimum while the stator 


4 MO HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2155 


_and rotor teeth increase with the core length. The stator teeth 
are in this example a big item and their influence is expressed in 
the volume of the total active iron very distinctly, curve c, 
Fig. 25, which is a measurement of the cost of the punchings. 
Curve 6 represents the sum of stator core plus stator teeth, while 


cb INCH 


1500 


1000 


Fic. 25 


curve a, the sum of the stator 
plus rotor teeth, is a value for 
estimating the additional losses. 

The hysteresis and eddy losses 
of the stator core and teeth are 
figured separately and plotted 
in terms of the ratio 1;/7 in 
Fig. 26. We notice the same 
character in the loss curves as 


-+ Losses-\N. 


200 
SneRECIS Losses IN STATON 
ORE ww 
osst 
ene aon Tee 
100 |-wxS——gr ate 


D? {= 2000-8 POLES} 


2000 


TOTAL 1RON LOSSES 
1000 ! ses — 
STATOR LOSSES 
PULSATION + SURFACE LOSSES 
ae See 
| 


at 


Oo 


| 
Tt 
| wh 
| w) 

| we 


s 


S 
s 
= 
Py 
iS) 
== 
“a 
e 
z 


DEVIATION 


0 1 2 4 8B 
ar 


iia PAS 


in the curves of the volume in Fig. 24. The total iron loss 
in core and teeth caused by the rotating field increases slightly 


L; 
with an increase of core length (750 watts at ya =0,5; 800 watts 


1; 


at =1.7; 900 watts at 


T 


li 95). 


2156 HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


The total additional iron losses decrease very slightly with a 
longer core. The pulsation and surface losses in the stator 
and rotor teeth decrease even despite the fact that the volume 
(curve a, Fig. 25) increases. The explanation is given by the 
reduction of frequency of these pulsations and the speed in 
the longer core designs because the number of slots are propor- 
tional to the rotor diameter. It is very interesting to note that 
the increase of one class and a decrease of the second class 
of losses result in their sum a minimum total iron loss 
(Fig. 26). The percentage variation of the total iron losses from 
the minimum is plotted in Fig. 26. The best pole-face proportion 


of this example lies at ae 1.2. The deviation is 10 per cent at 


aod, which is smaller than the test variations. 


These figures are carried out more completely in order to justify 
our previous assumption of constant no-load losses when in- 
vestigating the copper losses. In case the iron losses have a 
great bearing upon the efficiency at full load, the choice of the 
pole-face proportion will be influenced by the ratio of the con- 
stant losses to the copper losses. 


SUMMARY 


The ratio of the rotor diameter to the core length influences 
the performance of the motor considerably. The investigations 
show that there exists for every rating one ratio of rotor diameter 
to core length for which the performance becomes a maximum. 
The power factor, the copper losses, iron losses and overload 
capacity have an opposing influence upon this ratio. In order 
to work the material in the most advantageous manner for each 
item we would obtain as many different diameters as there are 
items. It is not feasible to express all influences in one equation. 
It is, therefore, the scope of this paper to determine the proper 
ratio of core length to pole pitch for which each item of the per- 
formance will become a maximum or minimum. The intro- 
duction of the leakage coefficient, that is, the ratio of the wattless 
magnetizing current to the ideal locked current, furnishes very 
simple formulas for practical application. 

The highest power factor will always be obtained at a ratio 
of core length to pole pitch which can easily be computed from 
formula (12). Since the obtained ‘‘ best ” result usually differs 


1911] HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS 2157 


from the actual machine dimensions, all calculations in the paper 
are reduced to a percentage basis in order to judge the mag- 
nitude of the deviation from the theoretical values. 

The copper losses are based on the full load current and the 
resistance. <A set of curves are calculated and drawn in Figs. 17 
to 20 to indicate the relation between resistance or copper weight 
and the main dimensions of the rotor. 

The percentage deviation from the maximum power factor 
has then been used in order to find in a simple manner the mini- 
mum copper losses. 

The following table shows the ratio of core length to pole 
pitch at which the power factor, apparent efficiency and copper 
weight approach the minimum or maximum values of a certain 
frame (D?1;). The limits vary with the type, length of air gap, 
type of winding, slot dimensions and number of poles. 


Ratio of core length to pole pitch 
D1; 
Best power factor] Best app.eff.| Lowest copper losses*| Lowest copper wt.* 

20 0.2 to 0.3 0.5 to 0.8 1.0 to 2.0 2) to3 

200 0.4 * 0.8 Ome 2.0 1 Bi B26 2.5) “3.5 
2000 0.8 “ 1.4 a ersyy ate Ea) QB 1863 2.5 “4 
10,000 0.9 "1.5 Zee 1G Wel hed eas) 3.5) SD 

300 . 10° Tee LS PP all Sea) sere 3.5:" 6 


*Por stator winding or wound rotor motors only. 


The field of application or the characteristic of the type usually 
settles or limits the main dimensions. The peripheral speed, 
temperature rise, flywheel effect, method of manufacturing, 
ventilation, available floor space, shipping weight, load factor, 
power consumption and factory cost are some of the factors 
determining the choice of the diameter within small limits and 
sacrificing certain parts of the performance. In the analysis 
of a concrete case the above points should therefore be con- 
sidered carefully. 


NOTATION 
a = See equation (9). 
AS = Ampere conductors per inch circumference. 
b = See equation (9). 
B, =Density in the iron behind the slot. 
B, = Maximum density in the air gap in kilogausses per 
Sqn, em. 
= Frequency in cycles per second. 
C = See equation (9). 


2158 


HOOCK: INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


=Constant for zigzag leakage. 
“ “ “ “ 


“ “ slot “ 
et oe “ end-connection leakage. 
=Bore of stator punchings in inches. 
=E. M. F. induced in stator winding. 
= Winding factor. 
= Pitch or chord factor. 
= Depth below slot. 
= Slot’ depth. 
= Full load current. 
= Wattless component of no-load current. 
= Short-circuit or locked current. 


fag Lowi 


= en i te Ideal locked current. 


Xk 


= Percentage of current valuation. 

= Air gap factor. 

= Eddy cufrent factor. 

= Core length in inches. 

= Mean length of conductor in inches. 
= Effective core length in inches. 

= Length of end connections. 

= Number of phases in stator. 

= Rev. per min. 

= Terminal voltage per phase. 

= Number of pairs of poles. 

= Copper density in amperes per square inch. 
= Slot pitch. 

= Watts input at short-circuit. 

= Turns per phase of stator winding. 
= Reactance per phase. 

= Average tooth width. 


l; : : ; 
9a ee Ratio of core length to pole pitch. 


Efficiency. 

Slot constant. 

= Leakage coefficient, see equation (7). 

= Sum of leakage coefficients—see equation (8). 
= Pole pitch in inches. 

= Flux per pole. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2159 


DiscussION ON ‘‘ CHOICE OF ROTOR DIAMETER AND PER- 
FORMANCE OF POLYPHASE INDUCTION Motors. CHICAGO, 
JUNE 30, 1911. 


E. F. W. Alexanderson: Mr. Hoock’s paper is a valuable 
contribution to the literature of induction motors, not in the sense 
that it will enable the designers to produce better motors or even 
enable them to save time in doing so, but from the educational 
point of view. The value of Mr. Hoock’s paper, to my mind, is 
his method of dealing with the proportions. The problem for the 
designer is very much circumscribed by practical conditions, 
and his work consists in compromising between those conditions. 
Therefore, in order to do so intelligently, he must have a clear 
conception of the effect of any change in proportions and if he 
has such physical conception, it is not necessary to use any form- 
ula or curves; in fact he would not have time to do so. If Mr. 
Hoock had written the paper for parties who have an outside 
interest in induction motors, rather than designers, he probably 
would have formulated his theories somewhat differently. 
However, there are a number of points that ought to be of general 
interest. I particularly refer to what he calls the leakage coeffi- 
cient. The leakage coefficient, according to his definition, is the 
ratio of magnetizing current to the ideal short-circuit current; 
and this factor is most important of all proportions of induction 
motors. I think the name of ‘‘ leakage coefficient ’’, although it 
may have some precedence in literature, is rather inadequate, 
because it does not convey to the mind of the general engineer 
the features of practical importance which it is intended to 
signify. If it is stated that, in a certain induction motor, the 
short-circuit current is twenty times the magnetizing current, 
this statement contains complete information regarding power 
factor and over-loading capacity. More often the motor is 
described by saying that the short-circuit current is seven times 
the full-load current, and this information does not mean any- 
thing unless it is coupled with other information on magnetizing 
current or power factor. The ratio of short-circuit and magne- 
tizing current are inherent characteristics of the motor, whereas 
the ratio of short-circuit current and full-load current are charac- 
teristics of the designer’s method of giving the motor a commer- 
cial rating. I believe it would be of advantage if the practical 
significance of the so-called ‘leakage coefficient,” that is, the 
ratio of short-circuit to magnetizing current, were more generally 
known and appreciated, because it makes it possible to furnish 
almost the complete information as to a motor’s excellence in 
power factor and overload characteristics by stating only one 
figure. 

°C. J. Fechheimer: The author makes a statement near the 
beginning of the paper as follows: 

“ Tt is fully demonstrated by tests that the D?1; of standard 
speed motors is not limited by the temperature rise, but by the 
performance and flux density.” 


2160 INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


He then follows this by subdividing the investigations under 
the following headings: 

1. Leakage coefficient. 

2. Copper losses. 

3. Overload capacity. 

4. Iron losses. 

This would convey the impression that these are the only 
important limitations to be considered in choosing the diameter. 
I do not agree with him in the statement that the temperature 
rise does not affect the D?/; and believe that in a great many 
motors this should influence the choice of dimensions at least as 
much as the performance and flux density. He has not considered 
the effect of the diameter and length upon what I believe to be one 
of the most important considerationsin proportioning motors; that 
is, the cost. Forexample,in most 25-cycle and many 60-cycle mo- 
tors we have no difficulty whatever in obtaining reasonably high 
power factors, efficiencies and torques, but we find that we would 
have to use a very great amount of copper to keep the tempera- 
ture rise within the specified limits, if at the same time we were 
to obtain just enough torque. In extreme cases, moreover, such 
design may involve the use of very deep slots in the stator; to 
such a degree that, for a given internal diameter, we can increase 
the number and size of conductors, (thereby increasing the flux), 
and use shallower slots, and thus obtain the same, or possibly a 
smaller external diameter than with the larger number of con- 
ductors. As the heating in the majority of standard speed mo- 
tors is nearly entirely dependent upon copper loss, it-will be seen 
that for a given temperature rise, the section of conductor is 
proportional to the number of conductors. Hence, for the same 
heating, the weight of copper will be practically proportional to 
the square of the number of conductors. Therefore, the small 
flux motor has a large amount of copper and a prohibitively 
great cost. In other words, in many standard speed motors, 
temperature rise, cost and flux density are the limitations placed 
upon the dimensions of the motor and not performance; but in 
some motors, performance, flux density and cost (not temperature 
rise) are the limitations. 

Now, when we come to consider the effect of the diameter 
and length upon the cost, we shall find that in general the large 
diameter motor is more expensive than one of small diameter, 
even though the active material in the two motors be the same. 
This will be apparent when one considers the great increase in 
weight in mechanical parts, such as the yoke and shields, and the 
increase in labor with the increase of external diameter of the 
stator punchings. We cannot go too far, however, in decreasing 
the stator diameter (and increasing the length), for after a certain 
point is passed, we obtain a machine of such length that 
a great increase in active material would be required to obtain 
the desired performance and temperature rise. 


From the above it follows that the performance, temperature 


rise and cost are related to the diameter and length to such an 


— 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2161 


extent that we cannot neglect any one of these factors in de- 
ciding upon the proportions of the motor. While it may be 
possible to reduce the relations of the many quantities involved 
to the form of mathematical equations, the final expressions are 
liable to be so involved and complicated that they would scarcely 
admit of solution. 

In proportioning the parts of squirrel cage induction motors 
the importance of the effect of diameter upon the losses which it 
is possible to obtain at starting for a given temperature rise, 
should not be lost sight of. It can quite easily be shown that 
the temperature rise of the conducting material in the rotor cir- 
cuit is dependent upon the watts per pound of conducting ma- 
terial and the specific heat of this material. This is based on the 
assumption that all the heat which is generated at starting is 
absorbed by the material in which it is generated. 

It is also well known that the starting torque, expressed in 
synchronous kilowatts, is equal to the kilowatts lost in the rotor 
circuit. Hence to obtain high starting torques and at the same 
time keep the temperature rise within reasonable limits, it is 
necessary to have a large amount of conducting material in the 
rotor circuit, as we are limited by the specific heat of this ma- 
terial. : 

We cannot put too much loss in the rotor bars, as this would 
result in high temperature rise in the rotor circuit under oper- 
ating conditions, thus causing undue temperature rise in the 
stator. In a great many motors we must therefore place 
most of the loss in the end rings. Assuming a definite specific 
heat and resistivity of the material to be used in the end rings, 
the loss in the rings can be increased in proportion to the square 
of the diameter for the same loss per pound of material. 

We would of course increase the loss in the end rings without 
prohibitive heating at starting by increasing the specific re- 
sistance of the material used, which would increase the section 
and thus enable use of a smaller diameter. This, however, be- 
comes a very serious objection in many cases, as the end ring 


‘assumes such huge proportions that the ventilation is seriously 


impaired. In this, as in nearly everything that the designing 
engineer has to decide, he must rely upon his judgment for the 
choice of the diameter as affected by the loss in the rotor. 

S. Haar: Mr. Hoock prefixes to the curves of his paper a 
description of the circle diagram for determining characteristic 
curves and of the leakage factor as a design constant, in_the 
use of which he follows the general practise in Europe. Here, 
in the United States, the analytical methods of design and calcu- 
lation are still in use, which in my opinion are the only ones suit- 
able for the designer in commercial practise. Had Mr. Hoock 
spoken from the point of view of a teacher or a lecturer before 
a mixed audience, it would be idle to take exception to his 
methods because in such a case there would be no question of the 
results being used in a contract; however, the introductory 
paragraphs of the paper express the hope that the curves deduced 


2162 INDUCTION MOTORS {June 30 


will be useful for the layout of a line of motors, and for this 
reason I wish to dissent from his methods. 

I have investigated every circle diagram which has come to 
my notice and have yet to find one which always gives reliable 
results. While the circle diagram is useful for approximating 
extended characteristic curves or for demonstration purposes, 
it must always remain an approximation because it is fundamen- 
tally wrong. The magnetizing current does not remain constant, 
and the locus of the end of the current vector is not a circle, as I 
proved by determining analytically the centers of circles drawn 
through successive groups of points. Short arcs of the locus may 
strongly resemble a circle, but neither the centers nor the radii 
of the successive circles remain constant. Since the determina- 
tion of part load power factors by the circle diagram is easier 
than by the analytical approximations, the lack of a thoroughly 
reliable circle diagram is regrettable. To my mind, one reason 
for the confidence in the circle diagram is its trial on motors with 
high power factor and efficiency; for such motors, almost all 
methods of approximating give good results. Unfortunately, 
however, some of the motors which are built have low power 
factor; here the rapid approximations fail so that just when re- 
liability is most needed, the accuracy of a circle diagram is most 
uncertain. 

Furthermore there is no saving of time in most cases. Four 
points or at most five will determine satisfactorily the charac- 
teristics of a motor between half load and 50 per cent overload. 
A five point curve can be calculated by a person of average skill 
with a slide rule within an hour, and an unusually rapid calcula- 
tor can reduce this time to about 40 minutes. In order to secure 
an accuracy comparable with the analytical method, a circle 
about 20 in. in diameter is necessary and by the time the dia- 
gram is laid out to scale just as much time will be consumed. 
In the occasional case when the characteristics throughout the 
whole range of motor action are desired and exact values are not 
necessary, the circle diagram saves time. 

The system of calculations of either Dr. Steinmetz or Professor 
Pender seems to give the same results; after a trial of both I 
find practically no difference in the time required. One great 
advantage of the Steinmetz method is that the whole calculation 
can be carried out with only a slide rule, while it is necessary to 
have tables of some of the factors employed in the Pender sys- 
tem. It may be objected that the theory of these methods is 
difficult of comprehension. This argument does not apply as 
calculators unacquainted with the theory have no difficulty in 
obtaining correct results. All that is necessary is to tabulate 
the successive steps and follow the order systematically. 

The leakage coefficient by definition involves both the magne- 
tizing current and the leakage reactance; these vary in quite 
different manners and the difficulty of their predetermination 
is not at all the same (it is comparatively simple to calculate 
the magnetizing current); why then use a factor containing two 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2163 


independent variables when one will accomplish the same pur- 
pose? The leakage coefficient is no more constant than the 
leakage reactance; if it is necessary to calculate either one, the 
same assumptions are used, and if data from tests are at hand, 
the same readings in either case will give the necessary informa- 
tion. A designer using the leakage coefficient would probably 
draw the diagram for the purpose of obtaining the maximum 
torque and maximum output of a motor; whereas by the use of 
very simple formulas involving the resistance and reactance, these 
characteristics can be calculated in a few minutes. 

Experience indicates that short cuts such as the curves pre- 
sented in this paper will be of only moderate value to any one 
except the author because their aim (selection of motor dimen- 
sions to meet certain guarantees) is not the chief criterion by 
which the dimensions usually are decided, and furthermore be- 
cause motor design is an art and not a science. By this I mean 
that the arbitrary assumptions, such as the spread of flux in the 
gap, the length of coil ends, etc., differ enough among designers 
so that it would be necessary for every one using the author’s 


* methods to refigure the curves to suit his own particular practise. 


It usually happens that a motor must be developed from pat- 
terns and dies already existing; therefore the first approximation 
will be from the frame of something already built which would 
have the rating desired at the speed given. The next point, in 
my opinion, is to settle the maximum output. After this comes 
the choice of copper densities and finally the efficiency and 
power factor. It is my experience that a satisfactory design can 
be arrived at more quickly by this method than by starting from 
the D?1;. This constant must be used with considerable dis- 
cretion, and I should prefer to consider it only as a check on 
other methods. For determining the gap diameter, a good be- 
ginning can be made by choosing the number of slots per pole 
per phase and tooth pitch by judgment to conform to the guar- 
antees expected, and selecting the nearest practicable diameter. 

It is the exception rather than the rule, however, that motor 
builders are called upon to meet definite guarantees, and it is 
probable that as time goes on, the custom will die out. In the 
early days of motor drive, when power plants were smaller and 
the cure for troubles from low power factor was not so generally 
known, high power factor was demanded, and the motors were 
relatively expensive. Nowadays, it is frequently more eco- 
nomical to use smaller motors of lower constants and adopt addi- 
tional means for obtaining a satisfactorily high power factor; 
in the future this tendency will probably increase. 

J.D. Nies: I believe that the following is a simpler method of 
determining the wattless magnetizing current than that used by 
Mr. Hoock. 

Let Baye be the average density in lines per sq. cm. in the gap, 


oe flux of one pole 


Buse 
ave area of one pole 


2164 INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


Let h be the ampere-turns required to project this flux density 
across the air gap of A cm. depth, or 


Barve ras 
0.4 7 
this being the average value of the sinusoidally distributed 


m.m.f. 
Then the wattless magnetizing current per circuit is 


pee 


h sin 
I=1.16 a 


in which 
— =slots per pole in the stator. 
=half the conductors per slot, or turns per coil in wind- 
ings having as many coils as slots. 
\=pitch expressed as decimal fraction of full pitch. 
2 
1.16 =—"— =constant used for three-phase motors. 


6 v2 


2 

-(1.23= ae =constant used for two-phase motors). 

I=effective amperes per circuit, 7.e., in a ring-connected 

motor with two parallel circuits per phase, JI 

would be the effective current in one circuit only, 

and the star or line current would be IX2X 1.73. 

An example may be taken from Hobart’s ‘‘ Electric Motors,”’ 

page 421, 1904 edition, where dimensions and tests of the follow- 

ing motor are given: 


Horse, POW? on:.7,-as/eoremnaled hae 100 

fit ie. ee ee ee 500 

Phases cweincnsa oar osiateat ear 3 

Cycles. seuss ehenkscs Mere 8 50 

Poleswe.. ay Sex cchadomisarcenat 12 

Stator, Slota..ncephe pues Peia eater’: 180 

Stator slots per pole.......::.. 15 (Nesp) 

AMT CRD thls? cca thence tases 0.15 cm. (A) 

Turns: percotle): cas, aeicies hate L.. Bake} 

Pitch, is. full. stasis ngeok Sites ld 

Connechoaiy ys wiv peteeton eeblen een star 

Circuits ~per. phase jdicilivaens 2 iw ws 1 

Areaof, L. poles asunder ee 625 sq. cm. 
Calculation: 

Flux per pole 1,480,000 lines. 

1,480,000 


Biwe= son 2,370 lines per sq. cm. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2165 


_.2,370X0.15 


h Wier om 283 ampere-turns. 
283 sin 6 deg. 
r=1.16 cae enti =23 amperes effective star current. 


This result agrees exactly with the tested value as quoted by 
Hobart. ; 

_ The above method follows the logical order for such calcula- 
tions, since it begins with finding the flux density, next the am- 
pere-turns necessary to produce the density, and finally the am- 
peres to give the ampere-turns. Besides being extremely simple 
the method is exact under all conditions. 

Theodore Hoock: Mr. Fechheimer emphasized the im- 
portance of cost analysis in induction motor design. When I 
tried several years ago to combine the cost data with the machine 
dimensions, I obtained such complicated formulas that they were 
evidently not fit for practical use. This was chiefly due to the 
inactive material, which is usually a large percentage of the total 
factory cost. A quite accurate estimate of the cost can easily 
be made by means of a set of curves showing the cost of the dif- 
ferent parts in ratio of the outside and inside diameter of the 
punchings, core length, voltage, number of poles, type of wind- 
ing, number of slots, and so on. 

As to Mr. Alexanderson’s remarks on the adaptability of the de- 
rived formulas, I refer to the statement in my paper. “ The 
derived formulas are not intended to supersede the detailed de- 
sign but they should be used for the first layout.” 

The main object in presenting these investigations was to 
study the relation of the different items of the performance. 
There are only two publications to my knowledge on the subject 
of minimum leakage. Hobart* published curves showing a 
constant decrease of the leakage coefficient when the core length 
was made smaller (the influence of the end connection caused 
this misleading conclusion), while Professor Arnoldt derived 
the opposite result, that is, an increased ratio of core length to 
pole pitch should decrease the leakage. We see however that 
there are distinct minimum values which may be obtained from 
equations (11) and (12). 

I made the statement that the D?/; of standard machines is 
not limited by the temperature rise. There are certainly ex- 
ceptions. A definite limit cannot be given on account of the 
influence of construction and ventilation. In case blowers are 
used to cool windings and cores, the temperature limits will sel- 
dom be reached (at reasonable speeds), but the air gap density 
will cause disturbance. Either the iron losses will effect the 
efficiency (open slots) or prohibitive magnetic noise may be the 
result. I mean the objectionable hum, howling or whistling of 


*H. M. Hobart, St. Louis, 1904. A. I. E. E. TRANSACTIONS. 
+E. Arnold. Wechselstromtechnik. Vol. V.1.,p. 348. 


2166 INDUCTION MOTORS [June 30 


machines which eliminates their application in hospitals, apart- 
ments, hotels or offices. oe eae. 

We have at the present time no systematic investigations on 
this subject, neither on alternating-current or direct-current 
machines, and only cut and try methods in connection with ex- 
perience are available. The prediction of noise with certain slot 
combinations is very uncertain. There are-many other sources 
for magnetic running or starting noise, as the amplitude of varia- 
tion of the air density, field form, rotor currents, unsymmetrical 
windings, loose punchings, weak yoke iron, mechanical and elec- 
trical resonance, etc. Fundamental research work on magnetic 
noise should be well worth while undertaking by advanced 
students. Any results on this subject will be appreciated highly 
by the designing engineer. 


Mr. Haar discussed at length a part of my paper, which’ 


is in no way connected with the main scope of it. The 
superiority of analytical over graphical methods for com- 
mercial work is open to discussion. The preference for either 
one is chiefly a question of personal taste. The circle diagram 
has proved a success. It might be interesting to note that ap- 
proximately 30 to 40 per cent of all induction motors built in 
the United States are designed or guaranteed on the basis of the 
circle diagram. I personally use either one or both methods 
whenever the problem demands it. The advantage in using 
the leakage coefficient or its reciprocal value is brought out in 
my paper and by Mr. Alexanderson. 

The accuracy of the results obtained by the slide rule or circle 
diagram is practically the same. It is, furthermore, not justifiable 
to condemn a method because of its inaccuracy in a problem 
in which the first assumption cannot be predetermined or vary 
within 5 to 10 per cent. The argument that a calculator who is 
unacquainted with the theory can obtain correct results when 
using the slide rule only is in my mind no proof in favor of the 
analytical, but for the graphical method. A number of lines 
can easily be drawn and its construction memorized, but the 
large number of equations have always to be looked up in order 
to avoid mistakes. On the other hand, I consider it a dangerous 
procedure to take calculated or graphically obtained results 
from a person who is not acquainted with the theory. 

The results of my paper are based on correct scientific in- 
vestigations and since art (motor design) is an applied science 
I do not see why a designer could not use the results in the table 
given in the Summary to great advantage. 

Regarding the remarks of Professor Nies, I can only say that 
I go through the same steps that he does with the exception 
that I avoid the complication of two sine functions. Further- 
more, he neglects in the cited example the increase of the mag- 
netizing current due to the slot opening and saturation of the 
iron. Taking these points into consideration his method of 
calculating the magnetizing current is quite correct. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 


neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


THE APPLICATION OF CURRENT TRANSFORMERS TO 
THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS 


BY J. R. CRAIGHEAD 

The performance of current transformers when their second- 
aries supply simple series loads, and the methods of test for 
determining the errors introduced by the transformer when used 
with known secondary connected loads, have been considered 
in previous papers. The secondaries of two or three current 
transformers whose primaries are supplied from the lines of a 
three-phase circuit, are, however, frequently interconnected 
to save room, simplify wiring, and diminish cost. In this case 
the equivalent load carried by the current transformer secondary 
can not be determined in the simple manner that applies to an 
ordinary series connection, since the devices used in a series 
circuit may constitute a very different equivalent load when used 
in an interconnected circuit. An understanding of the equiva- 
lent load carried by each transformer is necessary in order to 
determine suitable limits of load from results of tests made in 
the ordinary manner. The term “ equivalent load ease ete 
used to indicate the load carried by the secondary of a current 
transformer where this may differ from that obtained by com- 
bining in series the resistances and reactances of the devices 
used. 

In interconnecting secondary loads for current transformers, 
the load is placed in the form of a Y, the differences between 
the various interconnections arising from the various methods 
of connecting the transformer secondaries to the three load 
terminals. The difference between this load and the ordinary 
load connected in Y to power transformers is that the power 
circuit operates with practically constant voltage, while the 

2167 


2168 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS _ [June 30 


current and the impedance of the devices connected change to- 
gether: while on the Y supplied by current transformers, the 
impedances of the devices remain constant, the current and 
voltage changing together. 

The following formulas serve to determine the delta voltages 
(voltages between external terminals) of a Y-connected circuit, 
when the resistance, reactance and current flowing in each line 
are known. 

Referring to Fig. 1, let 4, B and C be any three Y-connected 
loads for current transformers. Using the ordinary nomen- 
‘clature, 

ZA=a—J%XA 


Zp="p—Jj XB 
PCat On MG 


The currents flowing are I4, Ip, Ic. If @ represents the angle 
by which J lags behind J4, and S is the ratio of Iz to I, (r-m.s. 
values of equivalent sine waves), 


Ip=S I, (cos 6+ sin >) 
Then, since the circuit is a Y-connection, 
Ic= —I,—Izp= —I,-S if (cos o+j sin dp) 


The voltages from the three terminals to the common point, 
across each of the three loads, are 


ea=I, (ra—j Xa) 
ep=I1pg (rp—j Xp) =S I4 (cos $+) sin o) (r——j Xz) 


ec=1I¢ (rc—j Xc) =(—La—S I (cos 6+] sin $) ) (re—j Xe) 
=—I,4 (1+S (cos $+ sin ¢) ) (re—j Xe) 


The delta voltages across the supply terminals, entering A, B 
and C respectively, are 


E,=e4—ep=T1, (ra—j x4)—S I, (cos 6+jsin >) (rg—j xp) 
=I, {ra—jxa—S (cos $+ sin d) (rg—j xz)} (1) 
E,=ep—ec=S I, (cos $+) sin o) (rg—j xp) +14 {14S (cos 


+j sin $)} (rc—j xc) =I [S (cos $+ j sin $) (rg—j xz) 
+{1+5S (cos 6+) sin $)} (rc—j x¢)] (2) 


a OR ee 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2169 


E3=ec—ea=—TI4 {14+S (cos $+) sin )} (*e—jxc)—La (ra 
—jxa)=—I,4[{1+S (coso+jsin b)} (re—j xc) H(ra—Jxa)] 
(3) 


Secondary loads for current transformers are expressed in 
terms of volt-amperes and power factor at a standard current 
and frequency. The formulas given above are stated in terms of 
I4, and the angle 


_, imaginary component 


tan 
real component 


gives the angle between Ei, EF, or Es andI,. Theangle between 
E, and Iz may then be obtained by subtracting ¢, and that be- 


Fic. 1.—Y-connected loads. Connections and theoretical diagram 


tween E; and Ic by subtracting the angle between Ic and Ly, 
obtainable in the same manner from the preceding equation for 
Ic. The cosines of these angles are the power factors of the 
equivalent secondary loads. 

The volt-amperes supplied by a transformer are the product 
of the voltage across the secondary by the current flowing in it, 
but this value must be reduced to standard conditions. If # 
is the voltage and I is the current, the volt-amperes at 5 am- 
peres (used as a standard in stating current transformer loads) 


=EKI x or es. In all balanced current conditions, the 


voltages supplied to different parts of the circuit may be com- 
pared instead of the volt-amperes, the current being merely 


2170 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


a common multiplier which may be neglected for convenience in 
comparison. In any Y-connected circuit where the conditions 
are known, the voltages may be obtained by substitution in 
formulas (1), (2) and (8). These formulas are based on the 
phase position of I4, and the angles obtained from (2) or (3) 
must be corrected by addition or subtraction of the angle be- 
tween I, and Iz or Ic in order to represent the phase angles of 
the voltages with respect to Ig or Ic. 

For any given case these formulas will give the three delta 
voltages on the loads. If two transformers only are used, 
two of these voltages are the secondary voltages at which the 
transformers operate. If three transformers are used, they are 
connected in Y, and divide the delta voltage into Y components, 
whose magnitude and phase position for each transformer is a 
function of the exact characteristics of the transformer as well 
as of those of the loads. In considering each particular case, 
the formula may be applied, or an approximate result as to 
possible maxima may readily be reached by an inspection 
of the load diagram. 

In using two current transformers on a three-phase circuit, 
they may be connected symmetrically, in two lines, as though 
one transformer were omitted from a three-transformer Y- 
connection. This is called ‘‘ straight ’’ connection. Or the 
secondary of one transformer may be reversed; this is called 
‘‘ cross ’’ connection, and is equivalent to an open delta con- 
nection of the secondaries. 

The following causes ordinarily produce negligible effects on 
the amounts and phase position of the equivalent loads on the 
current transformers, and will be omitted from the discussion: 

1. Variation of wave shape in the primary current. 

2. Differences between primary and secondary currents due to 
the phase angle and inaccuracy of ratio of the transformer. 

The following causes may change the equivalent secondary 
loads carried by the transformer without any alteration of 
connections: 

1. Change in the relative amounts of current in the primary 
lines. 

2. Change in the phase angle between currents in the primary 
lines. 

Variation of load due to these causes (changes of S and @ in 
the above formulas) must be accepted as unavoidable, and a 
reasonable margin should be allowed for their effect in planning 
an installation. 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2171 


The following causes control the amount of equivalent second- 
ary load carried by the current transformers, when conditions 
stated above do not vary, and are the real basis for selecting 
combinations which will operate properly on three-phase circuits: 

1. The amounts (volt-amperes or impedances) of the second- 

ary loads A, B and C. 

2. The power factor of each of these loads and the relation of 
these power factors to one another. 

3. The number and method of connection of the current trans- 
former secondaries. 

A short consideration will be given to each of the chief con- 
ditions arising from the above mentioned variations, referring 
more frequently to figures than to the formulas stated above. 


' 
=Q----y1 
{ 

i] 

e-—=> 

i 


> 
> 


yeas 
fitz 2s 


Fic. 2.—Three transformers. Fic. 3.—Two transformers 
Secondary connections straight-connected. Second- 
ary connections 


A. Two TRANSFORMERS ‘ STRAIGHT ’’-CONNECTED, Fic. 3 

1. Balanced conditions throughout; equal primary currents 
120 deg. apart, equal secondary loads A, B and C of the same 
power factor. (Fig. 5s) 

The voltage of transformer A will be e,—ec=—Es=(ra 
Se ol AE 0.866+1)=e4 (1.5+j 0.866) =1.73 e4 


BOE or 1.73 e,4 lagging behind e4 30 deg. 


tate 


The voltage on transformer Baeg tes E2=14 “(ra-J % A) 
(—0.5+7 0.866-+1—0.5+ 0.866) =e4 (7 1.73) =1.73 e, lagging 
90 deg. behind e,4, or 1.73 ep leading eg by 30 deg. That is, the 
volt-amperes on each transformer are equal to 1.73 times the volt- 
amperes of load A, B or C; but the phase angle between voltage 
and current is changed 30 deg. in the lagging direction on trans- 

‘former A, and in the leading direction on transformer B. Evi- 
dently for power factor of secondary loads A, B and C varying 


2172 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


from unity to zero, the power factor of the equivalent load on 
transformer A will vary from 0.866 leading to 0.5 lagging; while 
on transformer B it will vary from 0.866 lagging to a negative 
0.5, which must be considered as meaning that the input to the 
transformer is really on the secondary side. 


Fic. 4.—Two transformers, cross- Fic. 5.—Two transformers, straight- 


connected. Secondary connec- connected. Primary currents equal 

tions and 120 deg. apart. Loads A, B 
and C equal and of the same power 
factor. 


2. Equal primary currents, 120 deg. apart, secondary loads 
varying in amount and power factor. (Figs. 6 and 7, 8, 9, 10.) 
Fig. 6 shows the effect of varying load C from a very low value to 
a very high value, while the power factors of A, B and C remain 


Es 


ie €o ey Ti. 

Fic. 6.— Two _ transformers, Fic. 7.—Two_ transformers, 
straight-connected. Primary straight-connected. Primary 
currents equal and 120 deg. currents equal and 120 deg. 
apart. Loads A and B equal apart. Secondary loads equal, 
load C(ec) less than A or B,and and non-inductive. 


also (ec’) greater than A or B. 


constant. From the formula, when rc—jxc=0, E2=eg and 
—3=e,4, which means that the circuit is really two separate 
circuits, electrically in contact at one point only. Whenrc—jxc 
becomes (proportionally) so large that eg and e4 may be neg- 
lected, H2= —ec and —E3;=—e¢. 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2173 


That is, if load C is diminished or A and B are increased the 
loads on the two transformers approach the amount and power 
factor of load A and load B respectively; if load C is increased 
(or A and B are diminished) the loads on the two transformers 
approach the value of C, and the angle corresponding to the 
power factor of the equivalent secondary load approaches the 
value 60 deg.+6@¢ for transformer B and 60 deg. —6c for trans- 
former A, where 0¢ is the angle by which I¢ lags behind ec. 
Figs. 7, 8 and 9 show the effect of variation of power factor of 
load C, loads A and B remaining non-inductive. Fig. 7 shows 
power factor of C=1, Pies 8, 0.5nFign 9) Osl Fig. 8 evidently 
represents the maximum equivalent load which can be caused 


Fic. 8.— Two _ transformers, Fic. 9.—Two transformers, 
straight-connected. Primary straight-connected. Primary 
currents equal and 120 deg. currents equal and 120 deg. 
apart. Secondary loads equal, apart. Secondary loads equal; 
loads A and B non-inductive, loads A and B non-inductive, 
load C 0.5 power factor load C 0.1 power factor 


by change of power factor, which is the arithmetical sum of the 
volt-amperes of A and C occurring where 0c—0,=60 deg. In 
Fig. 9, passing lower than 0.5 power factor, when 6c—9,4 is 
greater than 60 deg., the voltage developed on both transformers 
decreases. The tendency with lagging power factors in load C 
is to increase the equivalent load on the transformer A which is 
connected in the leading phase, and to diminish the equivalent 
load on transformer B which is connected in the lagging phase. 

Low power factor in loads A and B combined with high power 
factor in C produces similar conditions, but here the maximum 
voltage is on transformer B (in the lagging phase) instead of A, 
(in the leading phase). See Fig. 10, which shows a combination 
where E, is near the maximum limit. 


2174 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


3. Primary currents varying in amount and power factor. 
To avoid complication in the diagram, the secondary im- 
pedances are shown equal and of the same power factor. Fig. 11 
shows effect of diminishing Jc and Fig. 12 the effect of increasing 
Ic. The limit in one direction is reached when I¢ becomes zero, 
in which case the two transformers are working on a single- 
phase circuit, carrying load A and B respectively; that is, by 
formula, F2=eg and —E3;=e,: and in the other direction when 
the angle between J, and Ig diminishes toward zero, when (if 
the power factors of A, B and C are alike), transformer A carries 
the arithmetical sum of e, and ec, while transformer B carries 
the arithmetical sum of eg and @c¢. 

When the currents in the two transformers are unequal, 


Fic. 10.— Two transformers, Fic. 11.— Two transformers, 
straight - connected. Primary straight-connected. Equal 
currents equal and 120 deg. primary currents in the two 
apart. Secondary loads equal; transformers. Smaller current 
loads A and B have low power in the line without transformer. 
factors, load C a high power Secondary loads equal and of 
factor the same power factor 


(see Fig. 13). The transformer B having the larger current 
carries a load approaching the arithmetical sum of ec and eg: 
while the transformer A having the smaller current carries a 
voltage approaching eg. As this transformer does not carry 
full current, its volt-ampere load is not fairly represented unless 
it be reduced to standard terms for comparison. That is, for 
transformer B (assuming Ig,=5 amperes) 


volt-amperes=5 Ey 


For transformer A, 


25 25 Es 
or = 


volt-amperes=I, XE 
p AXKL3X T,? ie 


Ss 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2175 


substituting actual values in (2) and (8), if J,4=0.5 amperes 
and Jp=5 amperes (S=10), rg@=rg=rc=l,.«,4=xp=xc=0, and 
g = 120 deg., HE. =0.5[10 (—0.5+ 70.866) +1410 (—0.5+ 7 0.866) | 
=9.76 volts. Volt-amperes on transformer B=9.76X5 = 48.80 
volt-amperes. —H#;=0.5 (1+10 (—0.5+ 70.866) +1) = 4.58 volts. 
4.58 X25 
0.5 
This calculation represents a very extreme case of unbalancing. 
The loads C and B are almost entirely carried by transformer B 
with full current, while the volt-ampere load on transformer A is 
more than four times as great as that on transformer B. It 
should be noted, however, that the ar 
current on this transformer is a 
very small part of the total amount 
flowing, and therefore the actual 
error caused by the overload is 
small. 


Volt-amperes on transformer A = = 229 volt-amperes. 


Fic. 12.—Two transformers, straight- Fic. 13.—Two transformers, 


connected. Equal primary currents straight - connected. Uiiie 
in the two transformers. Larger cur- equal primary currents 1n 
rent in the line without transformer. _ the two transformers. Sec- 
Secondary loads equal and of the ondary loads equal and of 
same power factor the same power factor 


To summarize equivalent loading on the straight connection: 
1. Under completely balanced conditions, the load on each 
transformer is 1.73 times one of the three equal loads, and the 
power factors of effective secondary loads are altered by a shift 


of 30 deg. in the corresponding angle, lagging for one, leading 


for the other. . 

2. With balanced primary conditions, variations of amount 
and power factor in the secondary connected loads produce dif- 
ferent distributions of load between the two transformers, the 
maximum load on either transformer not exceeding the arith- 
metical sum of its load and the load in the secondary line with- 
out transformer, and the increase of load on one transformer due 


2176 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS _ [June 30 


to variation of power factor being in general accompanied by 
a decrease in the load on the other. 

3. Where primary conditions become unbalanced, the tendency 
is to increase the volt-ampere load on both transformers, es- 
pecially that carrying the smaller current. 


B. Cross CONNECTION, Two TRANSFORMERS 


1. Balanced primary currents, 120 deg. apart, equal secondary 
loads of the same power factor. (Fig. 4 and 14). 

Since the transformer B has its secondary reversed, the current 
Iz is 180 deg. from its previous position. The current J¢ is the 
resultant of two currents 60 deg. apart instead of 120 deg. and 
is not proportional to the current in any single primary line. 

From formula (2), 

E,=I, (r4—j xa) {1+2 (cos—60 deg.+j sin — 60 deg.) } 

=e, (2-73) =e4 V7 leading e,4 about 41 deg. 
or lagging Jz about 19 deg. 

From formula (3), 

—F3=I, (ra—jxa) (2.5—j 0.866) =e, V7, leading e4 about 
19 deg. 

The voltages —E; and F» carried by the 
transformers are each removed only about 
19 deg. from e, and eg instead of 30 deg., 
as in the straight connection, and their 
values are considerably greater than in the 
straight connection with the same loads, 
because of the greater J¢ and the smaller 
angle between —ec and e, or ez. 

2. Balanced primary currents, 120 deg. 
apart. Secondary loads varying in amount 
and power factor. 


It is evident from an examination of F1G. 14.—Two trans- 
formers cross-con- 


Fig. 14, that the maximum voltage on nected. Equal pri- 
either transformer due to changes in the mary currents, 120 

‘ : deg. apart. Secon- 
relative size of the load cannot exceed the dary loads equal 
arithmetical sum of ec and e, or eg. Also, and of the same 


that because of the smaller angle between  P°™™ saga 


I, and Iz, the phase displacements of EZ, and E; due to the dif- 
fering power factors in A, B and C will be in general less than on a 
straight connection. If load C is reduced to zero we have the 
same condition as on the straight connection; that is, two 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2177 


separate circuits which are in electrical contact at only one point. 

3. Primary currents varying in amount and power factor. 

Variations in equivalent load and power factor of load caused 
by this will be of the general nature of those with the “ straight ” 
connection, but will be somewhat less because of the smaller 
angle between J, and Jy. There is the same tendency. for the 
transformer carrying the smaller current to operate against a 
comparatively heavy volt-ampere load. 

Summary of Cross-Connection. This method gives a true 
secondary representation of only two of the three primary cur- 
rents; the total load carried by the transformer is greater than 
where the same apparatus is used with the straight connection. 
The effective loads, however, are somewhat less influenced by 
changes in primary current or differences of power factor of the 
secondary connected loads than the ‘‘ straight ’’ connection. 


C. THREE TRANSFORMERS WITH SECONDARIES Y-CONNECTED 


The voltages carried are those shown in the “straight ” 
‘connection, with the third voltage which completes the voltage 
triangle. The transformers, however, are Y-connected, and the 
division of voltage among them is dependent on the charac- 
teristics of the individual transformers and the conditions in the 
primary lines. For this reason the exact voltage for each trans- 
former in an actual case is difficult to calculate even with full 
knowledge of the characteristics of the transformers. In practi- 
cally every case, the mean equivalent loads ona two-transformer 
straight connection are diminished by the insertion of a third 
transformer to complete the Y. If the common point of the 
three loads is connected to the common point of the three 
transformer secondaries by a lead of negligible impedance, the 
connection becomes simply three independent circuits which 
are electrically in contact at one point only. 

The following methods have been in use for some time for 
approximation of the volt-ampere loads on interconnected. cir- 
cuits. They are based on the formulas for balanced conditions 
of primary current and for secondary loads of the same power 
factor. They are sufficiently accurate to use as a check to prevent 
the overloading of transformers. 


A. Two TRANSFORMERS WITH SECONDARIES “ STRAIGHT ar 
CONNECTED 

This is best divided under three headings, according to the 

ratio of total volt-amperes on the secondary line having no cur- 


2178 CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


rent transformer to the total volt-amperes in the line directly 
connected to the secondary of the transformer considered. 

a. Where the ratio is greater than 3.2. Total volt-amperes 
on the transformer under consideration equals the sum of volt- 
amperes directly connected to its secondary and volt-amperes 
in secondary line without transformer. 

b. Where the ratio is less than 3.2 and greater than 0.4. Total 
volt-amperes on the transformer under consideration equals the 
sum of volt-amperes in the line directly connected to its second- 
ary and 0.75 times the volt-amperes in the secondary line with- 
out transformer. 

c. Where this ratio is less than 0.4. Total volt-amperes on 
transformer under consideration equals the sum of volt-amperes 
in the line directly connected to its secondary and 0.5 times 
the volt-amperes in the secondary line without transformer. 


B. Two TRANSFORMERS, WITH SECONDARIES “ Cross ”’- 
CONNECTED 
The total volt-amperes on each transformer equals the sum of 
the volt-amperes in the two lines directly connected to the two 
secondaries and three times the volt-amperes in the secondary 
line without transformer, the whole divided by two. 


C. THREE TRANSFORMERS, WITH SECONDARIES Y-CONNECTED 


Total volt-amperes on each transformer equals the sum of the 
volt-amperes of the three secondary loads, divided by three. 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 


Certain methods of interconnection of secondary circuits 
of current transformers are used because of advantage in cost, 
space occupied, simplicity and convenience. 

The use of these interconnections results in the transformers 
carrying equivalent secondary loads which differ decidedly from 
those resulting from the use of the same devices with a plain 
series secondary connection. The power factor of the effective 
secondary load may be leading or even negative in extreme cases. 

The variations in equivalent secondary load due to the power 
factors of the separate loads have a general tendency to offset 
one another; that is, when the power factor of one equivalent 
load is changed in the leading direction, the other is usually 
changed in the lagging direction, when one equivalent load is in- 
creased, the other is usually diminished. Therefore, these varia- 


1911] CRAIGHEAD: CURRENT TRANSFORMERS 2179 


tions may be neglected in making approximate estimates of 
volt-ampere loads. A method of making estimates based on the 
assumption that the power factors of the three secondary loads 
are alike will give results accurate enough to prevent over- 
loading. 

Unbalancing of primary currents has a general tendency to 
increase loads on interconnected current transformers, and where 
the circuit is known to be unbalanced to an unusual degree, in- 
terconnections should be avoided or the loads connected to the 
secondaries should be kept considerably below the amounts 
allowable under balanced conditions. 

All load estimates made in the approximate way given are of 
value chiefly as mean results for the combination, and not as 
definite limits for the equivalent load on each transformer. 

The exact volt-amperes and power factor of the equivalent 
loads of a two-transformer combination may be obtained if re 
quired from formulas (1), (2) and (3). The results for a three- 
transformer combination cannot be exactly calculated from the 
volt-amperes and power factor of the separate loads, because 
the characteristics of the transformers themselves affect the di- 
vision of the load among them. This circuit may be changed by 
the addition of a common return lead to three simple series cir- 
cuits, whose volt-amperes and power factor are easily obtainable. 
This is the better connection except where the load in one line is 
an overload for one transformer, when the interconnected com- 
bination divides the load in such a way as to relieve the over- 
loaded transformer. 


ond 


aba 


. yl hvorrpeinh 
a I 


——e vested 
" ra ee 
mitearstuaets ‘a 
ert hy ieee. 
“idee sila 
i> Ay a 


al sit aeiate 


“fie qth yao ey as 
wt Re or sind = ; 
merce onakt foodaal 


¢ : 


sul 


“ca 
“wee lpr even ein 


— st mee is ta 
> ae 
= Bra i. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 


BY E. C. STONE AND R. W. ATKINSON 


The following paper is an investigation of the losses produced 
in a system by the distributing transformers, with a view to 
determining the cost to the central station of supplying these 
losses. The cost of the losses occurring in a transformer is of 
the same order of magnitude as the cost of the transformer itself 


and should, therefore, receive the same amount of considera- 


tion. If a transformer had a perfect magnetic (iron) circuit 
and a perfect electric (copper) circuit, no losses would be pro- 
duced if it were placed on a system. Hence the losses which do 


‘actually occur come into two general divisions, viz.: (1) losses 


due to imperfect iron, and (2) losses due to imperfect copper. 
The expense involved may be divided as follows: 


1. Elements due to imperfect iron. 
(a) Iron loss, involving: 
(A) Consumption of energy in transformer. 
(B) Station and line capacity to take care of such energy. 
(b) Magnetizing current, involving: 
(A) Copper loss in generator and line. 
(B) Generator and line capacity to take care of this 
magnetizing current. 
2. Elements due to imperfect copper. 
(a) Copper loss, involving: 
(A) Consumption of energy in transformer. 
(B) Station and line capacity to take care of such energy. 
(b) Fluctuating secondary voltage, causing shortening of life of 
lamps, and perhaps dissatisfaction to consumers. 


A great many factors enter into the problem, the value of 
which can be determined only roughly, hence the absolute result 
can be only approximate. However, the approximations are of 

2181 


2182 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


such a nature as to permit of sufficiently accurate selection of the 
most economical transformer for a given service, from a group 
of transformers having different performances. 

Furthermore, the effect of the losses upon the active material 
in a transformer will be taken up in a general way, merely to 
give an idea as to the limitation of the designer with respect to 
the variation of these losses. Transformers are designed and 
will be designed and sold to meet the demand, regardless of the 
cause of the demand. If the operating man specifies a given 
performance, he will get bids on that performance, though 
perhaps at prohibitive prices. If he is prepared to accept dif- 
ferent performances, knowing exactly what is their relative 
worth to him, he is in a position to obtain that which will ensure 
him the greatest ultimate economy, and is able to compare the 
values of transformers from different manufacturers, different 
types from one manufacturer and, of not the least importance, 
different sizes of one type. 

It will be assumed in this discussion that all the elements of 
cost of power supplied to a customer are known, the commercial 
problems of rate-making being, of course, entirely eliminated. 
Only the special problems of the cost of the losses will be con- 
sidered. 

The cost of power is ordinarily divided into three parts: 

1. Output charge, consisting of all elements of cost propor- 
tional to kilowatt-hour output. 

2. Capacity. or capital charge, consisting of all elements pro- 
portional to the kilowatt capacity of the station. 

3. Fixed charge consisting of all elements independent of both 
output and capacity. 

The last of these, part of which is often called the ‘‘ customer 
charge’, is not affected by transformer losses and requires no 
further consideration. The cost of the losses is, with certain 
exceptions, which will be explained later, the same as the whole- 
sale cost of power. The “ diversity factor ’’ will be mentioned, 
in its effect on the copper loss of the transformer. The special 
problems introduced are the effect of the magnetizing current 
associated with the iron loss and the regulation due to the copper 
loss. 

The cost of the iron loss of the transformer will include the 
cost of generating such loss and of supplying the station ca- 
pacity with which to generate it. It will also include the cost of 
transmitting the energy consumed by the loss, from the station 


—_=) 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2183 


to the transformer. Iron loss introduces certain peculiar con- 
ditions due to the fact that it requires a continuous supply of 
energy at a power factor very much lower than that of any other 
part of the load. The power factor of transformer exciting 
current varies from 10 to 40 per cent. This means that engine 
and generator capacity much larger than the total iron loss must 
be kept in service all the time. Energy at 30 per cent power 
factor requires twice as much generator capacity as energy at 
70 per cent power factor and three times as much as at 100 per 
cent power factor. With full kilovolt-ampere load at such low 
power factor, the losses in the generator become, of course, a 
much larger part of the energy output. Suppose that during the 
day, one engine and generator carrying full kilovolt-ampere load 
and having 15 per cent engine friction and generator losses, takes 
care, at times of light load, of transformer extiting current having 
a power factor of 20 per cent. At full kilovolt-ampere load, the 
energy generated is 20 per cent, and the loss 15 per cent. Hence 
the loss which the exciting current produces in the generator 
and engine is in this case 15/20 or 75 per cent of the iron loss 
itself. If the power factor of the exciting current had been 
100 per cent, the generator would have taken care of four times 
the energy and the loss would have been only 15 per cent instead 
of 75 per cent. Likewise, the loss in the line due to the large 
wattless current becomes a larger percentage of the power. 

Furthermore, the greater the exciting current, that is, the 
lower the power factor for a given iron loss, the greater is the 
total current at the peak of the load, and hence the greater must 
be the station and line capacity to take care of the peak. It 
should be distinctly understood that low power factor of ex- 
citing current’is not in itself objectionable. For example, sup- 
pose that with a constant value of exciting current, the iron loss 
is reduced. It is evident that the improvement of the trans- 
former has resulted in a lower power factor. It is important, 
when considering magnetizing current, if the power factor be 
considered, that it be considered only in connection with the 
core loss. It is ordinarily much simpler and more precise to 
make no mention of power factor, but only of magnetizing volt- 
amperes. 

The copper losses in station and line produced by the exciting 
current are, of course, continuous but they are not constant, for 
they depend on the magnitude, power factor and wave form of 
the exciting current, and upon the magnitude and power factor 


2184 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


of the load. The increase of copper loss caused by the funda- 
mental component of the exciting current depends upon the 
magnitude of the line current. That part of the exciting cur- 
rent made up of harmonics produces a constant copper loss 
regardless of the amount of line current. See Fig. 1. 

Since magnetizing current increases the line current and con- 
tinues all day, and therefore at the peak, it necessitates an in- 
crease in line and station capacity to take care of it. At the 
station, the increase of capacity will be only in the electrical 
end, since obviously, wattless current does not-affect engines 
and boilers. 


COST OF MAGNETISING CURRENT “% OF COST OF IRON LOSS 


SCALE | 10 20 30 £0 50 60 70 80 
AVERAGE WATTLESS COMPONENT OF LOAD- % OF FULL LOAD LINE CURSENT 
SCALE 2 5 10 15 20 25 


MAGNETISING CURRENT- % OF FULL LOAD TRANSFORMER CURRENT 


Fic. 1—Cost of magnetizing current 


(a) Cost of 5 per cent magnetizing current for various wattless components of load current 
(b) Cost of various magnetizing currents—wattless component of load =0 


We must next consider copper loss. Several new elements 
enter here, such as duration of load, relation between station 
capacity and connected transformer capacity, and effect of 
regulation. ' 

A transformer is loaded only part of the time, hence, the copper 
loss is not continuous, so that a kilowatt-year of copper loss 
costs less than a kilowatt-year of iron loss, which is continuous. 
The load will vary from 0 to 14 or 14 times the transformer 
rating—or may be even greater for short periods. For calcula- 
tions, the load per day should be reduced to an equivalent num- 
ber of hours of full load, on the basis of square root of mean 
square current. 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2185 


Since not all transformers are on full load at the same time, 
it will require somewhat less than a kilowatt of station capacity 
to take care of a kilowatt of peak load transformer copper loss. 
The ratio varies with the nature of the load and also with the 
number of separate installations on each transformer. If there 
were only one installation per transformer, it would be the same 
as the so-called ‘‘ diversity factor.”” As the number of customers 
on a single unit is increased, the peaks tend more and more to 
occur at different times and the ratio of station capacity to 
connected transformer capacity increases. The opposite ex- 
treme to one installation per transformer would be where there 
would be only one transformer on the system, in which case 
station and transformer capacity would be equal. It may be 


-assumed that 


rated station capacity required _ peak station capacity 
rated transformer copperloss connected transformer capacity 


both transformer copper loss and capacity being based on full 
load rating. The annual charge against copper loss will, there- 
fore, be the capital charge, as previously explained, multiplied 
by this ratio. 

Transformer regulation cannot be considered entirely apart 
from the regulation of the secondary network. The following 
general discussion applies whether the regulation considered 
is entirely or in part due to the transformer. 

The variation of voltage due to regulation causes irregularity 
in the amount of light and may be a cause of “* flicker ’’, hence 
must be kept within reasonable limits in order to satisfy the 
customer. If the regulation should become great enough to 
cause noticeable fluctuations in the light, it might outweigh all 
other considerations in importance. 

The effect of the introduction of tungsten lamps may be 
noted. A given change of voltage, with tungsten lamps, causes 
less than two-thirds the change in candle power that would be 
produced in carbon lamps, so that the tungsten lamp will stand 
more than.50 per cent greater regulation without causing greater 
change in candle power or more unsatisfactory service. It is a 
peculiarity of tungsten lamps, moreover, that they do not 
change in quality of light as does the carbon lamp when voltage 
is lowered, hence it is quite probable that a considerably greater 
regulation than above indicated would be permissible on tung- 


2186 -STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


sten lamps without causing dissatisfaction. A common standard 
on direct-current circuits is a maximum of 2 per cent regulation 
for carbon lamps. The same standard of service could be met 
with tungsten lamps on 3 per cent or possibly higher regulation. 
Ordinarily the standard is lower on alternating-current circuits, 
and the allowable regulation would be increased as before for 
tungsten lamps. This question of customer’s satisfaction is an 
exceedingly important one, and in those cases where regulation 
causes or may cause a noticeable flicker, it cannot be ignored. 
If an incandescent lamp is operated on a fluctuating voltage, 
the cost of a given amount of light will be greater than if it is 


_ 
ims 
J 


3 


7 (ov) 


HR-PER CENT 
8 
(Sr 
G 
a 


COST PER 1000 LAMP 
Ss S 
Alt 
+--+ +--+ — 
a 


i Sh. c! 
20 I Se ly if 


70 80 90 100 110 120 130 
WATTS PER CANDLE POWER-PER CENT 


Fic. 2.—Cost curves for carbon lamps 


(a) Cost of energy 
(b) Cost of renewals 
(c) Total cost 


operated on a constant voltage having the same value as the 
mean of the fluctuating voltage. That is, the life of the lamp is 
shortened so that the cost of renewals becomes greater, and this 
increase in cost varies as the square of the regulation. Two per 
cent fluctuation in voltage (2 per cent regulation) will produce 
about 0.6 per cent increase in cost of renewals of carbon lamps 
or about 0.3 per cent for tungsten lamps. Except when the 
regulation is quite low, this is of considerable importance in com- 
parison with the copper loss of the transformer. A more com- 


plete discussion of this subject appears in the appendix. (See 
Fig. 2.) 


— —- = 
-. . 
~ \ 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2187 


It has been said that regulation reduces the voltage upon 
the load, and therefore, causes a direct loss of revenue by reducing 
the power sold. Under ordinary commercial operation, regula- 
tion causes not a lower voltage, but a fluctuating voltage. There 
is some voltage which the central station operator desires to 
maintain at the customer’s outlet. If it is possible to maintain 
this as a constant voltage, provided there is no transformer regu- 
lation, then it is obviously just as possible to maintain it as a 
mean voltage when there is transformer regulation. To make 
the most desirable voltage the mean rather than the maximum 
—which is attained only at no-load—is evidently the more 
economical arrangement. Is it the custom of progressive central 
stations to regulate their systems so that the really desirable 
voltage is reached only when there is no load connected? If 
the mean voltage with transformer regulation is maintained at 
the same value as the constant voltage without regulation, the 
power delivered to customers must be the same in both cases, 
hence there can be no loss of revenue (power sold) due to regula- 
tion. : 

The losses and their effect on the amount of active material 
required are interesting. Suppose, as an illustration, the voltage 
of a transformer to be changed, while the kilovolt-ampere out- 


put is kept constant. The copper loss will then vary inversely as 
2 


‘the (iron loss)* , where a is the exponent of the iron loss curve, 


and is about 1.9 in modern distributing transformers. This 
means that by increasing the iron loss one per cent, the copper 


loss is reduced in the ratio = or 1.05 per cent. For example, 


£9 


if the copper loss is twice as great as the iron loss, to reduce 
the iron loss one watt will increase the copper loss approxi- 
mately two watts. 

In modern transformers, however, the limits of the active 
materials are such that to change materially the ratio of the 
losses would require distortion of the design, so that with a given 
amount of material, to reduce greatly either loss at normal rating 
would require a much larger increase in the other loss than 
indicated above. The most efficient shape does not depend upon 
the ratio of losses except when it must be distorted for the above 
reasons. In transformers of different voltage ratings and sizes, 
the relative dimensions, unless distorted as explained above, vary 
only with space occupied by insulation and relative price of 
copper and iron., 


# 


2188 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


With the quality of iron at present used in distributing trans- 

formers, to decrease the copper loss 1 per cent requires about 
1.6 per cent increase in the active material; to decrease the iron 
loss one per cent requires 1.7 per cent increase; and thus to 
decrease both losses one per cent requires about 3.3 per cent 
increase in the cost of the active material. 
. The above relations are true only when the relative space 
available for copper is constant, that is, the space-factor is 
constant. Since the space-factor is improved by increasing the 
size, neither the additional material required to decrease the 
losses nor the reduction of material attained by increasing the 
losses, is always as great as would appear from the above state- 
ments, more especially in the small sizes. At all outputs, the 
question of density comes in, if the size is to be reduced, and 
makes it possible to go only a very short distance in that direc- 
tion. There is no limit except cost to the reduction of losses. 

It will be of interest to show why the loss and amount of ma- 
terial per kilowatt are less for large capacity. Suppose each 
dimension of a given transformer be multiplied by two. The 
amount of material will then be multiplied by 22 X2 or 8. 
If the turns, flux density and current density are kept constant, 
the losses are also multiplied by 8. The cross-section of copper 
and iron will each be multiplied by 2 X 2 or 4; hence the current and 
voltage will each be multiplied by 4, and the output by 44 or 16. 
From these relations, it will be seen that both the loss per kilo- 
watt (per cent loss) and active material per kilowatt have been 
divided by 2. In many cases, the gain is much greater than this, 
due to the improved space-factor in the larger sizes. 

The problem to be considered in selecting a transformer for 
a given service is two-fold: 

1. The transformer should be operated with the ratio of 
copper to iron loss such that the total cost of the loss is a mini- 
mum. 

2. The total cost, taking into consideration the first cost of 
transformer and the cost of the losses, should be a minimum. 

The operator has a certain degree of freedom, inasmuch as 
there are standard lines of transformers on the market, having 
different rated primary voltages, for example, 2200 and 2400 volts. 
He also has a certain degree of freedom as regards the size of the 
transformer. First the transformer must be large enough 
to carry its load without overheating. Next it must come 
as near as possible to satisfying the minimum cost conditions 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER’ LOSSES 2189 


given above. The effect of the ratio of losses can best be seen, 
as mentioned before, by maintaining the kilowatt load on a 
given transformer constant, and varying the voltage and current. 
In this way, any desired ratio of losses may be obtained, ac- 
cording to the relations given above. The curve thus ob- 
tained is shown in Fig. 3. As the ratio of losses increases, 
the copper loss increases much faster than the iron loss de- 
creases, hence the ultimate temperature rise must increase also, 
but since the transformer with larger ratio is required only for a 
load of short duration, the maximum rise in that case may not 
be excessive. Fig. 4 shows the cost of losses for a typical case 


110 


120 


WATTS LOSS 


REGULATION -PER CENT 


1.0 1.5 2.0 pp) 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 


COPPER LOSS 
RATIO IRON LOSS 


Fic. 3.—2200/220 volts 60 cycle 5 kv-a. transformer. Output constant. 
Voltage varies 


(a) Copper loss and regulation 
(6) Iron loss 


under the conditions when ratio of copper loss to iron loss is 
vatied from 1 to 4.6. The lower curve is cost of iron loss and 
copper loss alone. 

The upper curve, Fig. 4, includes the effect of magnetizing 
current and loss due to regulation, thus giving the total cost 
of all losses caused by the transformer. It will be seen that here 
the minimum total loss occurs at a larger ratio of copper to iron 
loss and that the increase in cost is greater as we depart from 
the best ratio. This is caused by the high exponent of the satura- 
tion curve of the iron which causes the magnetizing current to 
increase much faster than the iron loss. 


2190 . STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


The total cost of a transformer performing a given service 
depends upon the amount which must be paid for the losses 
during the life of the transformer and upon the price paid for 
the transformer itself. The smaller the transformer, the greater 
the cost of the losses and the less the price paid for the trans- 
former and vice versa. In considering losses and price paid for 
transformer together, the losses may be most conveniently 
represented as a capital cost by dividing their annual cost by the 
interest and depreciation factor. The result will be’ the 
amount which would be required at the time of installation of 
the transformer to pay for the losses during the whole life of the 


va 
S 
— 


g 


TOTAL COST OF LOSS— 


110 


100 


1.0 14 18 2.2 3.0 3.4 3.8 4.2 4.6 
*COPPER LOSS 


RATIO TRON LOSS 
Fic. 4.—Cost of losses 


(a) Cost of iron, and copper loss 
(b) Cost of all losses including magnetizing current and regulation 


transformer, and may be added directly to the first cost in order 
to determine the total cost of transformer and losses. 

For determining the proper capacity of transformer to be 
used, the use of recording ammeters in the secondary circuits 
of transformers is well worth while, because of the large saving 
effected by adaptation of the transformer to its load, which is thus 
made possible. In general, it will be found that transformers 
will operate most successfully—losses and first cost considered— 
when run at their limiting temperature rise. This will mean a 
small transformer at overload for short-hour load, hence a high 
ratio of copper to iron loss and small first cost—these being 
conditions demanded by loads of short duration. The im- 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2191 


portance of using a transformer of proper capacity for a given 
load is emphasized. The reduction in cost of losses gained by 
using a transformer which is too large is not nearly so great as is 
the increase in first cost. 

It may seem from some of the foregoing that the designer is 
free to vary at will the losses of the transformer, decreasing one 
at the expense of the other or at the expense of the active 
material, according to the curves given. This would’ be 
approximately true if one were considering the initial design of 
a standard line of transformers. In this case, the theoretical 
efficiency of design may be reached, since it is possible to 
gain full benefit of all such items as special sizes of copper strap, 
punchings, etc. Otherwise, there would be waste space which is, 
of course, expensive. In the case of special transformers made 
in smaller quantities, these items and also the increased propor- 
tion of such items as time of engineers, foremen, and inspectors, 
cause such an increase in cost that it is not possible actually to 
reach the theoretical curve shown. The true practical condi- 
tion would be represented by a curve of the form of the dotted 
one in Fig. 4. The theoretical efficiency will, in general, be 
reached only on the ‘‘ standard lines”. In the case of “ specials” 
the departure will be more or less great, depending upon par- 
ticular conditions. Hence, while general laws may readily be 
stated as regards the cost of losses from the standpoint of design, 
yet it cannot be said that any particular desired performance can 
be obtained in accordance with these curves. 

The method of selecting transformers used by the Government 
seems the most logical. A certain performance is specified, 
and it is also stated that in comparing transformers of dif- 
ferent performances, the iron loss will be evaluated at 88 cents 
per watt and copper loss at 11 cents per watt. (See Bureau 
of Standards Bulletin ‘‘ Specifications for Distributing Trans- 
formers.) It would seem quite practical for any purchaser 
to evaluate the losses similarly, using figures corresponding to 
his own conditions. Were there a general definite idea of the 
cost of the losses, the standard design would soon be such as to 

-give the minimum total cost of losses and of transformers. 
° 
SUMMARY 
We have shown (1) a general method of determining the cost 
‘of the transformer losses. The cost of energy, the capacity 
charge, the line loss and the line cost of any part of the system 


2192 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


are known very closely. The losses, magnetizing current and 
heating of the transformer are determined by test as soon as 
the transformer is received, or perhaps from maker’s guarantees. 
The copper loss has a less cost than the iron loss, due to the re- 
duction in output charge because of its short duration, and also 
has a slightly less capital cost due to its ‘‘ diversity factor.”’ 
The cost of magnetizing current is shown to be of considerable 
importance in many cases. This is the most variable factor 
entering into the cost of the losses. The cost of the regulation 
associated with the copper loss is due, not to any reduction of 
power sold, but to customer’s satisfaction or dissatisfaction and 
to the effect of the varying voltage upon the performance of the 
lamps. If the total cost of all losses due to the transformer is 
100 per cent, the various elements will be approximately as 
follows: 


TrOnelOoSS ecm teenie ae erect ee Per Cene, 40" 1 Pen sCelle 
Magnetizing current............ 1 per cent to 30 per cent 
Coppetwloss 2.7 ell eas catered percent to’ ol per cenk 
Regulation loss% .2c1y.hs.scee.« Lauper: cent: to 10. per cent 


(2) A discussion has been given showing the general relation 
of the cost of the losses to the amount of material in the trans- 
former. It has been found that for a given amount of material, 
as the ratio of the losses is varied, the copper loss of the trans- 
former increases faster than the iron loss decreases, thus making 
the total loss larger, the larger the ratio of the losses. The 
amount of material in the transformer increases faster than the 
losses are decreased, when the losses are varied by varying the 
size of the transformer. For lighting transformers, the amount 
of active material varies inversely as more than the third power 
of the loss. 

(3) In general, in order to obtain minimum operating costs, 
transformers of the present standard performances should be 
used on a load which will bring them to their maximum safe 
temperature rise. 

(4) In the appendix will be found a development of formulas 
for the numerical determination of the cost of transformer losses; 
also a special case, worked out in detail with values so chosen as 
to give, as near as possible, typical results. 

We wish to extend our thanks to the Allegheny County Light 
Co., Rochester Railway and Light Co., the Westinghouse 
companies, and the National Electric Lamp Association for 
valuable assistance in the preparation of this paper. 


Sin 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2193 
APPENDIX 


I. Cost or IRon Loss 
Let ci1=cost of energy per kw-hr., in dollars. 
C,=capacity charge per kilowatt of station and lines 


(not including secondary network) in dollars per 
year. 


w=watts iron loss in transformer. 


Then, since the iron loss occurs 24 * 365 =8760 hours per year, 
the total cost of the iron loss for a year is: 


(i 


1009 (8760 a+C) dollars (1) 


II. Cost oF MAGNETIZING CURRENT 
E=line voltage. 


T=line current. 


a=power component of line current, expressed as a fraction 
of the line current, that is, power factor. 


b=wattless component of line current expressed as a fraction 

of the line current. 
t=magnetizing component of transformer exciting current, 

expressed as a fraction of the line current, 

ft being that part at fundamental frequency, 

ht being that part made up of harmonics. 

k=line loss expressed as a fraction of full load volt-amperes. 
(If the line loss is given in terms of power output, this 
value must be divided by the power factor to get k). 


The line loss before the transformer is put on is 


k (1) EL=k (a@ +b?) EI 


(2) 
After the transformer is on, the line loss becomes 
k(@-+tbift tht) EI (3) 
or 
k (@+e+20ft+fi tht) EI (4) 
The increase in line loss is then 
b(Qbft+ft tht) EI=k(2bfit#) EI (6) and 6) 


2194 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


If M=magnetizing component of exciting current in volt- 


;. transformer magnetizing current _ M_ 
peor ope) line current sh 
and k M (2b f+#) =increase in line loss. (7) 


* 
: , 4 , t 
the increase in current is proportional to k M (° Vi ay ) 


If b is the average wattless component of the line current. per 
day, this expression will give the average loss caused by the 
exciting current during the day. 

Because of the transformer magnetizing current, the total 
amount of the peak load is increased, and the line should, there- 
fore, be increased. As a sufficiently close approximation, the 
line capacity may be assumed to be increased in proportion to 
the ratio of average increase in current to the rated capacity of 
the line. Hence, the line loss is increased only in direct propor- 
tion to the increase in current. We may then say: 


Line loss due to magnetizing current =k M (3 f+ 5) watts. (9) 


Cost of line loss due to magnetizing current 


kM t 
Baie (6 i+4) Xc; dollars. 


(10) 
M (3 rae 4) 
The increased capacity of line will be 3 (O00, kv-a. (11) 
The increased cost of line will be 
M (3 j+4) 
Saas 1'1' ae cost per kv-a. of line capacity. (12) 


Note:—This is only that part of line between transformer and 
station and only the portion, the cost of which increases with the 
kilovolt-ampere load, 

If k;=engine friction and generator loss, in terms of full load 
kv-a., and b6,=the average all-day wattless component of total 


station load, the increase of station loss=k; M (2, f+ 5) watts. 


eee 2 
*When x is small V1 xt = 145 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2195 


The cost of increased station capacity will be: 
M 
1000 
The total cost of magnetizing current will therefore be: 
in the line 


kX8 
M (2 an ‘) (RX ea Lonnce cost of line per kv-a.) (13) 


(2, j+- if) annual cost per kv-a. of generator capacity. 


in the station 


-a.) 
m(o, ype ee cy+annual eae penérator per kv-a. (14) 


Cost OF COPPER Loss 
1, Ci=cost of energy and station capacity as in cost of iron 
loss. 
peak station capacity 
connected transformer capacity 


h=hours of day at full load (in case of load not being uni- 
form during use of transformer, h is the number of 
hours which would be required at full load to give the 
same copper loss as the load actually existing.) 
W,.=copper loss of transformer. 


Total cost of copper loss per year = ni (365hc,+D C;) dollars 


EFFECT OF VARYING VOLTAGE ON COST OF LAMPS 


The characteristics of carbon and tungsten lamps are approxi- 
mately as follows: 


Carbon Tungsten* 
lamps lamps 
7 (renewals) varies aS.......-....+-- E25 tng 
ife 
Candle power ON ah ce nok Aaa Re ES? pets 
Watts CMT OE ME Shy 3 FE? pe 
peal oth it. 5. Gi he aad oko nae gor Je ie 
watts per c.p. 
Lif UF watts \e watts J 
al tes Wiis frees candle power candle power 
1 : ‘ 
*For drawn wire lamps, —— varies as hayes 


life 
The above figures for tungsten lamps were given by the National 
Electric Lamp Association. 


2196 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


Using these relations, curves of cost of energy and cost of 
renewals may be plotted against voltage, or what amounts to 
the same thing, watts per candle power. This has been done 
for carbon lamps in Fig. 2. The total cost of the light will then 
be the sum of the two curves. It will be seen at once that the 
lowest point of this resultant curve gives the watts per c.p.~ 
at which the total cost will be a minimum. If instead of oper- 
ating constantly at this efficiency, suppose that a lamp is oper- 
ated half the time at 10 per cent lower watts per c.p. and half the 
time at 10 per cent* higher watts per c.p. The cost of energy is 
not increased, since the energy cost curve is a straight line, 
but the cost of renewals is increased by the amount c’ d’, 
and the total cost by the amount cd, or about 4 per cent. 
If instead of operating one-half the time at each extreme voltage, 
the voltage had varied uniformly, the increase in cost of renewals 
would have been but 3 as great. 


Cost OF REGULATION 


The increase in cost of lamp renewals due to variation in 
voltage can be expressed as a function of the variation, and of 
the copper loss of the transformer. 

Suppose life varies as (watts per c.p.)* and E” varies as 

1 
watts per c.p. 


Then 1 per cent variation of voltage will cause an increase in 
the cost of renewals equal to 


a (a—1) 


bX 8 


<0.01 per cent (15) 


of the cost at normal steady voltage, or if the variation is uniform 
from 3 per cent above to } per cent below the average, the in- 


creased cost is 


ax * ae s 0.01 per cent (16) 

The increased cost depends on the square of the voltage varia- 
tion, and hence is four times the above value for 2 per cent change 
in voltage. In figuring a specific case, it should be remembered 
that maximum regulation must be used, that is, the regulation 
at the heaviest overload that the transformer frequently carries. 


\ 


a. 4 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2197 


Let r=approximate cost, in cents, of renewals per 1000 lamp 
hours. 
p=energy consumed per 1000 lamp hours, in kilowatts. 
x =increase in cost of renewals for 1 per cent regulation 
expressed in terms of r. 
L=the increase in cost, in cents, of renewals per kw-hr. 
of transformer copper loss, for 1 per cent regulation. 
ne xr (19) 
P 
for 1 per cent regulation, and varies as the square of the regula- 
tion. 
For 50-watt, 16-c.p. carbon lamps, 


p= 9 OO x0? 0.11 cent. 


For 25-watt tungsten lamps at present prices, L=0.20, ‘and 
for 60-watt tungsten lamps, L=0.12 cent. 
Let R=regulation at maximum overload at which trans- 
former is operated. 


W.=copper loss. 
h=hours per day at full load, as in copper loss. 


Cr=cost of regulation in cents=L RX365 hXani (18) 


TotaL Cost oF TRANSFORMER LOSSES FOR A SprcIAL CASE 


Assume cost of energy ¢:=$0.0075 per kw-hr. 
Capacity charge C:= $30.00 per kw-hr. per year. 
($20.00 for station) 
($10.00 for line) 


Assume a 5-kw. transformer with an iron loss of 45 watts, a 
copper loss of 93 watts at full load, and magnetizing current 


of 2 per cent. 
Then W,=45 watts, W.=93 watts, M=100 volt-amperes. 


From formula (1), cost of iron loss = 7005 (8760 X 0.0075 +30) 


= $4.31. 


2198 STONE AND ATKINSON: [June 30 


Cost oF MAGNETIZING CURRENT 
M=100 volt-amperes 


Suppose that cost of line=$10.00 per kw. 
Cost of station (electrical equipment) = $10.00 per kw. 
t _ 0.02 
k=0.10, b=), =0.20, k1=0.12, f=0.85, = = =a =(0.01 


Substituting in formula (2), cost of the magnetizing current 
in the line= 


5 : 10.00 
100 (0.200 S62 0.01) ee eres ed 
1000 
Cost of magnetizing current at the station = 
100 (0.20 0.85 +0.01) ae eee = $0.32 


1000 


Total cost of magnetizing current = $0.62. 
It will be seen, then, that in this case the magnetizing current 
costs 14.5 per cent as much as the iron loss itself. 


CopPER Loss 
W,=93 
Suppose that D=0.8, h=4, maximum frequent overload 
=33 per cent, ci, Ci, as before. 


Total cost= (365 X4X0.0075-++0.8X 30.00) = $3.26. 


Cost OF REGULATION 


The regulation at full load is very close to the per cent copper 


loss or 1.86 per cent. At overload, it is 1.83 1.86 or 2.48 per 
cent. 


Assume L=0.11. 
Then the cost of regulation, by formula (18),=0.11 0.0248 


365 x4 
93 — Ol. 
x 1000 $0.37 
The total cost of losses is, therefore, 
Trot logs. Sh i% 2 eed I, Fee nc Ga enone < Aten $4.31 
Magnetizing current 2..,..0 asuderen ie kaata ee tee ee .62 
GCoppity lossa sige ea) soc ah hueter CEs e Melee Sek Sara eee: 3.26 
Regulation soos cu cnt oeetecsie sh atraneiete RT ae eee eee 37 


1911] COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 2199 


Now if a 10-year life be assumed, with interest at 6 per cent, the 
interest and depreciation factor will be 13.8 per cent. -Therefore, 


the ‘‘ capital cost ’’ of the losses will be BS 008 = $62.00. 


This is more than the first cost of the transformer, hence it 
will be seen that a saving of 10 per cent in the losses in this case 
would be of greater value than to obtain a reduction of 10 per 
cent in the price of the transformer. 

Similarly, the operating cost of a transformer of the low effi 
ciency type may be calculated: Assume 


[GRO ia HOSS y 4 tees nude ROC esis SIE Oren ENe oor =62 watts 

(Oper Ossett ets cease ee eagle kip «le =0@e4 & 

Masnetizine Current:....---,.-+-+e-----e22--- = LO per cent 

All other factors as before. > ; 

Ma@ah GORE Ol aktohay LOSS, sucegero to Gre aptabm® ao wimeaomle ciceor = $5.94 

Mea tetizine CULPEDt. ce... cs ain ne ee eng canes ons oe on 3.78 

GCOS cater nie ag htoioce ersmiins eas rane nce ks nie iorere aS secs sale ee 3.26 

UMoaccolichis tua, skeen ge ibe What OMe arpes area senate Ronen = 37 
$13.35 

rik. seek 13885 Me 
The ‘‘ capital cost 0.138 $97.00. 


If, now, the former transformer cost $60.00 and the latter 
$50.00, the total costs will be $122.00 and $147.00. 

The importance of the cost of the losses is quite evident. 

The cost per watt of iron loss or copper loss may be readily 
calculated. In these cases, the iron loss and magnetizing current 
costs from 80 cents to $1.10 per watt of iron loss; the copper loss 
and regulation costs 28 cents per watt of copper loss. 


2200 TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


Discussion oN “THE APPLICATION OF CURRENT TRANS- 
FORMERS TO THREE-PHASE Circuits,” ‘‘ Cost OF TRANS- 
FORMER Losses.” Cuicaco, JuNE 30, 1911. 


A. H. Pikler: It is now more than 26 years since the first 
large transformer installation was made in Budapest, Hungary. 
Both the system of operation of distributing-transformers and 
the transformers themselves were inventions of Messrs. Ziper- 
nowsky, Déry and Blithy. The parallel system, or as it later 
was called in this country, the multiple arc system, is used to- 
day exactly as it was in use then, and the general design and con- 
struction of the transformers of that time has undergone very 
little change in comparison with the transformers of the present 
day. Most of the changes or improvements which we find in 
the present transformers as compared with the first types are 
due to the improvement in the materials, as insulating materials 
and the steel used; further to the increase in cost of labor. 

That the distributing-transformers are still of acute importance 
is shown by the present paper. The reason for this is the very 
large amount of capital invested yearly in such transformers, 
and the large amount of money expended in operating them. 
The Bureau of Standards of the United States Government, 
recognizing the great importance of the subject of distributing- 
transformers, went into a thorough investigation of the value 
of the various characteristics of such transformers expressed in 
dollars and cents, and a few years ago issued the Circular No. 22 
where a report of the investigations is found in connection with 
other useful suggestions relating to the same subject. 

The paper written by Messrs. Stone and Atkinson is to my 
knowledge the first one that takes into consideration every single 
item affecting the operating cost of the transformers, and gives 
a thorough and full presentation of the whole subject. The 
manner in which the authors deal with this subject I consider 
classical because not the least little detail is lost sight of, from the 
power house to the consumer. The important difference be- 
tween the government circular and this paper lies in the fact 
that Messrs. Stone and Atkinson point out the method whereby 
operating cost corresponding to the exciting current and regu- 
lation may be taken into account in the same way as the core 
loss and copper loss. 

By this additional information the transformer purchasing 
public is put into a better position as to the selection of the most 
economical distributing-transformer. By the use of a high mag- 
netic density in a transformer core, the dimensions of the mag- 
netic circuit will be decreased and a small transformer will be 
obtained of considerably lower cost than when using a lower 
magnetic density. If considering the core and copper loss 
only in comparing the high magnetic density transformer with 
one having a low magnetic density, on the basis of evaluation 
used in the government circular, it may frequently be found 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2201 


that the lower losses in the transformer of generous amount of 
material may not suffice to quite offset the difference in price 
between the two transformers. If, however, the exciting current 
is also and rightly taken into consideration, such will not be the 
case. 

Another important point which the authors bring up and 
which may bear some further illustration is that the low power 
factor in a transformer, in itself, is not objectionable when it is 
accompanied by a low core loss. 

I have often heard statements like this: 

“ The introduction of silicon steel does not mark such a great 
gain in the transformer as may appear from the core loss watt- 
per-pound figures of the ordinary and silicon steels. The power 
factor at open circuit in the silicon steel transformer has de- 
creased considerably as compared with what it was in the trans- 
former built with ordinary steel. Therefore what we gain in 
core loss in the transformer we lose on the line due to lower power 
factor.” 

That the logic of this statement is not correct may be seen from 
the following: 

Let us assume for instance two 5-kw. transformers, one of 
the old type made with ordinary steel, another of a recent type 
made of silicon steel. The old type transformer has a core 
loss of 64 watts, the modern transformer has a core loss of 
45 watts, the exciting current of both transformers is the same, 
that is, say 2 per cent of the full load current. Then the old 


: . 64 
type transformer will have a no-load power factor of 002 < 5000 


=64 per cent. The modern transformer will have a power 


f +, cals aida 
BELO LODO 2S B000 


old transformer is higher than the new one. But is the old trans- 
former therefore a better transformer? It is not, because the 
exciting current, i.e., the no-load current on the line is just the 
same, moreover in the new transformer we have a transformer 
which in connection with that same exciting current has a lower 
core loss. 

Another item of importance that may be pointed out in con- 
nection with a magnetizing current which is of value to the 
purchaser of transformers is as follows: If the normal mag- 
netic density in the transformer core is higher in one transformer 
than in the other, then a slight increase in line voltage may cause 
a very large increase in the exciting current of the transformer 
having the higher magnetic density in its core. This is self 
explanatory from the well known saturation-curve. 

I do not agree with this statement of the authors: ‘“‘ Trans- 
formers are designed and will be designed and sold to meet the 


=45 per cent. The power factor of the 


2202 TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


demands, regardless of the cause of the demand.” I consider it 
rather academic and do not believe that it coincides with the 
real, actual development of the transformer. Not only a trans- 
former but any kind of machinery is made by the manufacturer 
so as to produce it with the greatest economy to both the manu- 
facturer and the public. The public buys what is offered to it. 
Later on competition steps in and causes further improvements 
in the apparatus. It is therefore the competition that creates 
further development in the art and not the demand of the public. 
The public generally specifies the best performance offered by 
the various competitors. 

That the decrease in core loss and copper loss requires a greater 
expenditure of material can be appreciated from the figures 
given by the authors stating that 1 per cent decrease of both losses 
requires about 3.3 per cent increase in the cost of the active 
material. 

There is a paragraph in the paper where it is explained why 
the loss of the amount of material per kilowatt is less with in- 
creasing capacities. I beg to offer the following explanation, 
which I think is broader and clearer: Let us consider a trans- 
former or any other electromagnetic apparatus with linear di- 
mensions of unity; if these dimensions are doubled, then the 
volumé of material and with it the weight will be increased as 
the third power, the cross section of the iron core and with it the 
total magnetic flux will increase with the second power. The 
cross section of the copper and with it its current carrying ca- 
pacity will also increase with the second power. Since, further, 
the output of any electromagnetic apparatus can be expressed 
as the product of magnetic flux and ampere-turns, it may be 
seen at once that by doubling the linear dimensions of the ap- 
paratus, its output increases with the fourth power whereas 
the amount of material increases with the third power. Using 
the same densities in both cases, the watts lost are directly pro- 
portional to the weight of the material. Therefore it will be 
readily seen that the apparatus of the larger output will have a 
lower loss per kilowatt output, that is, a higher efficiency. It 
should have been pointed out, however, by the authors that the 
radiating surface increases only with the second power and this 
influences the design in a much greater measure than does a 
change in the winding space factor, as is the authors’ opinion. 

In closing I wish to point out the fact that the significance of 
the various items entering into the real economy of the trans- 
former can be best appreciated by the figures given at the close 
of the paper, which show that whereas the initial cost of a 5-kw. 
transformer, for instance, is approximately $60, its operating cost 
will be of the order of $50; so that the total cost of the trans- 
former to the purchaser will amount to $122 to $147. This is 
the total cost assuming a 10-year life and capitalization with 
interest at 6 per cent, taking into account depreciation and 
interest. 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2203 


W. C. Smith: Viewing the question of transformer losses 
from the manufacturers’ standpoint, I would like to add a few 
words to the discussion of the excellent paper by Messrs. Stone 
and Atkinson. 

That the cost of losses is an important consideration in the 
selection of distributing transformers, even approaching a value 
equal to that of the transformer itself, has been clearly shown by 
the authors. 

The demand of the central station for lower losses has been 
insistent, until today, for a given kv-a. rating the distributing 
transformer is the most efficient piece of electrical apparatus on 
the market. The improvement in core loss by the introduction 
of silicon steel has, of course, been one of the greatest contributing 
factors in this development. The actual watts per lb. at normal 


180 - 
| 
- TOTAL LOSS 
160+ 2 
140 
120 ; - 
CLAIM LOSSES IN PAST 12 YEARS. 
op tale! L130) 
5 KV-A- SOG Es TRANSFORMER. 
x 100 
kK 
et 
Lt 
= 80 
60 (ies COPE |LOSS 
40 i 
20 al 


97-98-1900 02— 04S 06 0810 1D 


Curve of losses 


working densities, due to hysteresis and eddy current losses, 
has, within the lifetime of the average transformer, been re- 
duced at least one-half. 

A curve of losses on the 5-kv-a. standard lighting transformer, 
as given in published claims of a prominent electrical manu- 
facturing company in this country, shows the remarkable de- 
crease that has been accomplished during the past few years. 

With such marked reductions in the losses, combined with 
better mechanical construction in the new types as they were 
put on the market, a very high depreciation value naturally 
had to be placed on apparatus already installed. In other 
words, the “‘ smashing point ”’ was reached early in the life of the’ 
old lighting transformer. 


2204 TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


Today, conditions are changed. In the best class of this ap- 
paratus now on the market, every part has been scientifically 
proportioned. There is no waste space anywhere. The con- 
struction is extremely rugged and the heating uniform. With 
steel absolutely non-aging, the customer is assured of proper 
division of losses and constant efficiency. The processes of manu- 
facture are such as to warrant long continued service without 
disturbance of the various parts. 

In other words, the best class of modern distributing trans- 
formers is now built primarily for long service. No radical 
mechanical changes can be anticipated, which will warrant 
replacing these units. Only a very material reduction in losses 
can suffice for such replacement. 

However, with efficiencies already of 97 to 98.5 per cent, any 
very material saving in power cannot be anticipated even though 
the present losses be decreased by a fairly large percentage. 
No improvement is of course expected in the quality of copper. 
It is too much to hope for any marked improvement in the 
permeability of the steel, which means that, even though the 
core losses per lb. be considerably reduced, it will not be possible 
to operate at higher flux densities due to magnetizing current 
considerations. We must, for these reasons, look toward the 
core losses for any great improvement in efficiency. But even 
assuming a 25 per cent decrease in core loss (and this is hardly 
probable) we shall only find 8 per cent decrease in total losses, 
due to the fact that the present division of losses is two of 
copper to one of iron. 

With the foregoing facts in mind, the value of a small deprecia- 
tion factor becomes at once apparent. Taking the typical case 
of a 5-kv-a. transformer already cited, if the life be increased 
from 10 to 20 years, interest at 6 per cent, the interest and de- 
preciation factor will be 8$ per cent. Assuming the same 
original costs, the increased life of 10 years can be shown to be 
equivalent to a 69 per cent difference in cost of total losses 
between two transformers giving the same length of service. 

This consideration shows such a large saving, due to long life, 
as to almost eclipse the demand for lower losses which has been 
pressed so strongly upon the manufacturer during the past few 
years. Other factors remaining the same, lower losses will still 
be sought for. But a far greater consideration will be that of 
long life under continued service. 

Rather than any marked decrease in total losses, resulting 
from improvement in materials, reproportioning of parts, etc., 
it is possible that the future may see a development toward 
higher operating temperatures, resulting in a cheaper trans- 
former. Before the advent of silicon steel, aging required an 
80 deg. cent. temperature limit. At the present time, the flow 
point of the impregnating compounds gives, let us say, an ulti- 
mate temperature limit of 90 degrees. It is possible that the 
development of synthetic gums will soon reach a stage to permit 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2205 


of actual operating temperatures of at least 125 deg. to 150 deg. 
centigrade. Sucha development will naturally present a problem 
2 the ee refiner—a situation, however, which can undoubtedly 

e met. 

_E. A. Wagner: The paper by Messrs. Stone and Atkinson 
gives a basis of calculation for the comparative operating costs of 
different types of transformers which is of considerable value. 
The exciting currents, or magnetizing currents, are, as a rule, 
not given consideration when summing up the comparative 
values of transformers. A study of the formulas will show, how- 
ever, that the results obtained depend solely on the assumption 
made at the beginning, so that with different assumptions en- 
tirely different values will result. 

In the summary of the losses Mr. Atkinson tabulates the value 
of two transformers of different characteristics, one a so-called 
high efficiency type, and another one a so-called low efficiency 
type. In the high efficiency type, according to this formula, 
the magnetizing current has a value of 62 cents, and in the low 
efficiency type a value of $3.78, thereby increasing the cost of 
exciting current more than five times with a transformer showing 
50 per cent higher core loss. Such examples, given as typical 
illustrations, are apt to prove misleading to one not thoroughly 
acquainted with transformer performances. It is a matter of 
fact that magnetizing currents do not increase proportionately 
with the core losses. In transformer design we find that low 
costs and high efficiencies are arrived at by crowding the mag- 
netic circuit (operating at densities close to the saturation point) 
and increasing the space factor by eliminating as much of the 
insulation between layers and coils as possible. Such a trans- 
former, in comparison with one designed to operate at lower densi- 
ties in the iron, but witha considerably heavier cross section in the 
magnetic circuit, assuming that modern silicon steel is used in the 
construction of the core in both cases, will show fully as high, if 
not higher, exciting currents. With a given quality of silicon 
steel, and retaining a winding space factor not varying more 
than 3 per cent, transformers of widely different characteristics 
in regard to core and coppet loss and widely varying weights of 
copper and iron, will all produce very close to the same full load 
efficiency. In the design of this type, and assuming the valua- 
tions given by Mr. Atkinson, it will show that the so-called cheap 
transformers, or low efficiency transformers, will be much more 
desirable than the one which he classified as a high efficiency 
transformer. In other words, the choice of transformers is 
dependent almost entirely on the value of the magnetizing cur- 
rent. 

H. B. Gear: I wish to emphasize the remarks made by a 
previous speaker regarding the importance ‘of securing long life 
in modern transformer design. In the larger systems where the 
cost of energy has been reduced by large turbo-generators, until 
it approaches the vanishing point, the item of depreciation as- 


2206 TRANSFORMERS [June 30 


sumes greater importance than the cost of the iron and copper 
losses. The larger companies are therefore becoming more 
interested in these days in the life of their transformers then 
formerly. i , 

Although the iron losses in the line transformers in the Chicago 
system amount to approximately 6,000,000 kw-hr. per year, 
the cost of producing this energy is only about half the fixed 
charges—interest and depreciation—on the investment, based 
on an average life of 15 years. 

Improvements in the methods of manufacture and insulation 
which would add five years to the average life of line trans- 
formers, are therefore fully as important as a reduction of 25 per 
cent in the core losses. 

The operating engineer who endeavors to specify to the 
manufacturer a type of transformer which would be most eco- 
nomical in operation, must choose between a unit which will be 
most economical with lighting customers having a low load 
factor and a unit which is most economical for power customers 
having a high load factor. 

The ratio between iron and copper losses should be lower for 
the consumers with small load factors and higher for the con- 
sumers with higher load factors. 

It is not practical for operating companies to attempt to carry 
two kinds of transformers in stock for general distribution work 
and the operating engineer must therefore strike a happy medium 
which will be most economical for the average load factor of his 
customers. 

R. W. Atkinson: I have been much interested in the points 
brought out by the various speakers. I shall refer to an objec- 
tion made by Mr. Pikler to our statement that the manufacturer 
will adjust the losses to correspond with the demand. I think, 
however, that Mr. Pikler’s idea is not really different from our 
original statement, namely: It does not make much difference 
whether the demand for any performance is for logical or il- 
logical reasons or is because the salesmen of the various 
companies making transformers have convinced their cus- 
tomers that a certain loss should be reduced or that certain other 
losses should be left as they are. Two transformers of different 
performances will have a relative difference in their market value 
due to a difference in their performance. For instance, suppose 
that one has 90 watts iron loss and the other 100 watts iron loss. 
That difference of 10 watts iron loss will make a different sale 
value of the two transformers. Difference in value may be 
purely commercial, due to the fact that the salesmen have con- 
vinced the average user of the transformer that that difference 
is worth a certain amount to him, or it may be because the con- 
sumer has worked out, from either a logical or illogical stand- 
point, that that difference means so much to him in dollars and 
cents. It does not make any difference what the basis of the 
demand is, the manufacturer will design his transformers to 
meet the demand of the market. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2207 


There has been a constant tendency to increase the tempera- 
ture rise. As small transformers were built a few years ago, the 
limits were the efficiency. It was impracticable to build trans- 
formers with a high temperature rise, simply because they would 
have been so inefficient that it would not have paid to use them. 
At present, due to improvement in materials and design, the 
dimensions have been decreased more than the losses, thus in- 
creasing the densities, with a consequent tendency toward an 
increased temperature rise. If the insulating people can do what 
Mr. Smith hopes they may do there is a field now, as there form- 
erly was not, for a material capable of withstanding high tem- 
perature. 

A word in regard to the question of cost of magnetizing cur- 
rents in the two transformers used in the problem. These were 
two particular transformers that were on the market at the time 
the figures were made. There is a tendency, I believe, for the 
high iron loss transformer to have high magnetizing current, 
although this is not necessarily so. I think the reason for this 
tendency was brought out by Mr. Wagner, that transformers 
are operated at densities very near the saturation point, and if 
the iron loss is increased with a given type of transformer there is 
a tendency for the magnetizing current to be increased in much 
greater proportion. Of course that can be modified by changing 
the design. The question of magnetizing current is a separate 
one from the others, and it is true that if the two transformers in 
the problem had about the same magnetizing current, and with 
the other figures as we have given them, the ultimate costs 
would not have been greatly different. The cost of magne- 
tizing current is the most variable factor in the cost of trans- 
former losses and depends largely on local conditions. If the 
transformer is put on the line with the purely lighting load, where 
the power factor is high, the magnetizing current will not be as 
expensive as if it were on a circuit of low power factor. 

In regard to the relative ultimate cost of the low efficiency or 
high efficiency transformer, I would say that it depends very 
largely upon the purposes for which the transformer is to be 
used and the conditions of the cost of power. Ifthe transformer 
is to be used for a long-hour load then it will pay to have a 
relatively low copper loss and a relatively higher iron loss. I do 
not want to say, as a general statement, that it will pay to use 
either a low efficiency, or a high efficiency transformer, that 
it will pay to use a low ratio of copper loss to iron loss, or to use 
a high ratio. The point we wish to make is that the cost of the 
losses is dependent upon specified conditions which may vary 
with different systems and perhaps with different parts of one 
system, but in such a way as can easily be determined. 
Furthermore this cost is of such importance that one cannot 
afford to determine it by guess. 


Fam 


"a 


A paper presented ac the 28th Annuae Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


SOLUTION TO PROBLEMS IN SAGS AND SPANS 


RY WM. LE ROY RORERTSON 
Solutions for sag and span problems occurring in overhead line 
construction have been developed from time to time by many 
authors. Frequently during the process of development one 


- author has taken up the work where his predecessor left off and 


has endeavored to make the formula more complete. Such 
solutions heretofore developed are approximate, and apply to 
the case where the sag is very small compared to the span. All 
solutions up to the present time are based upon the assumption 
that a span of wire forms the arc of a parabola. The formulas 
are approximately derived and are mathematically inconsistent. 
For instance, the formula for length of arc in a span, instead of 
being derived from the parabola, is derived in an approximate 
manner from the circle. Again the stress value is taken at the 
center of span and assumed to be constant at every point along the 
wire, when in reality it varies at every point, reaching maximum 
values at the supports. Further, certain small errors occur in for- 
mulas dealing with the effect of changes in temperature and stress. 
Again, in the case where one support is higher than the other, 
a certain discrepancy occurs which will be explained later under 
that particular heading. However, when the sag is very small 
compared to the span, the error introduced by the formulas 
is of no practical consequence, although when the sag increases 
sufficiently there may be considerable error introduced. The 
data produced by the solutions are adaptable to a limited num- 
ber of span values and usually are adaptable to only one material. 
Complete recalculation is necessary for a second material. 
The question of large sag is important, and must be considered. 
Relatively larger sags occur in long spans. When abnormal 
2209 


2210 ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS {June 30 


weather conditions cause the wire to stretch, large sags are often 
the result. Again in the case where a difference in height exists 
between supports, it will be found, as described later, that the 
sag is never less than the difference in height between the sup- 
ports, and may be larger. 

In the solution hereafter considered, it is proposed to give 
mathematically consistent and correct formulas and to supply 
data sufficient to solve problems with the least additional com- 
putation. It is also intended that the solution so far as possible 
will be universal and not limited to any particular sag and span 
values, nor to the kind of material. 


SELECTION OF CATENARY 


Plate No. 1 gives a comparison between the equations of 
various curves and actual measurements made upon a span of 
wire. The length of the span is exactly 80 ft. and a comparison 
of the deflection is made as given for a two- anda 10-ft. sag. 
The span of wire which was measured consisted of No. 12 an- 
nealed bare copper. The supports were perfectly level and 
rigid and the transit was used in taking the measurements. 

It will be noted that the suspended wire follows the course 
of the catenary much more closely than it follows the other 
curves. It.is possible that some wires under certain conditions 
would perhaps more closely follow the curve of the parabola. 
A stiff, thick wire in a short span would not be expected to follow 
the catenary. 

The results show that when the sag value is small in comparison 
to the span, it is immaterial which curve is used, except the 
circle. 

Considering that wires and cables tend to greater flexibility 
in longer lengths; that spans are as long as 2000 ft. and over; 
that in proportion to the span larger sags are more likely to 
occur in long spans; that, when the supports are at different 
levels, larger sags exist; and that the catenary formulas on the 
whole are probably as simple as any, the catenary seems to be the 
best curve. . 

Plate No. 1 also gives a rough idea of the difference existing 
between various formulas. The greatest difference is in the 
stress, which in turn would cause an error in the effect of tem- 
perature and stress. . vit 

Formulas. The basic principles underlying all solutions to 
sags and spans are set forth in Chapter IV, of J. Weisbach’s 
‘‘ Theoretical Mechanics ”’. 


2211 


SAGS AND SPANS 


ROBERTSON 


1911] 


*(qooy sod -q]) eJIM Jo yysIom JueyNsel= M 
‘ueds JO Iojue0 7e Ssorqs jeqxoL4 *sjioddns ye sserys [8}0L+ 


M 000°08+ eeee°e8 | mM 000 00Fr+ €EET 08 |(@HOqezed) pesn ATuouTUIOD 
se[nurioj jo wostredurod M THO’ €6x €81Z°€8 | M 799° COP* LES TROT meee mane “+ *(ensz) Bjoqesed 
suvds pue : s8eGS—T ‘ON Givid M G19 T6« FIPS €8 M T&S ZOr* SEET O98 | cha oe “+++ Areuayed 


ssoijs [eyo], jore Jo 433u97]| ssarqs [eyo], jore jo qi8ue7], ee, 
sen 


ueds ‘J 08 Ut Bes “4F OT | ueds ‘jj QQ Ul Bes “43 Z 


‘ueds Jo Jajyus0 saps ayisoddo uo Sutiino90 sonjea ox] Jo odvionve oY} St MOI IOMOT *sqyuoUoInseoul Jenjoe ayy St MOT redd Qn 


rSupaae ee 
iF or9' 898k 9 Teh’ 8 L69 Bl mean 6\1ch'8 98% igre | . _quouromseour yenyor Ag 
€h9'€ GHP O|LTP 8/669 6, 96S 6 STF 8 0Eh 9079'S = 
| | | | | | : = 
OF=? 5 ae 
0  |009° 00% 900% 81009" 6 000°0T 009° 6 0078 00r'9\009' | 0 Dy=~ ejoqeied | 8 
| | | 5 P=3 95) t+ 
0 |¥P9'E FH 9/SZh' 8/9096 000° 01/909 6Seh 8\FPF 9FVI'E 0 shia 4 (v/x-a+0/x0) Z/D=& Areuszyey ra 
| | = rn 
0 | 8F9°€ SPP’ 9/8ZF°$809°6.000'0T 809°6 8aF'8\8FF' 98F9'E 0 ale e/A—KIgh=x asd |% 
: | | . =4 ies a 
0 |9FL°S TFS 9 T8F'8'ES9'6 000 OL E29 BG I8P' SIPs 99PL E 0 fe RFGH=ATrO | PED 
. | . . . | | . | . . | . 
se @EL0 842° 1189 T/9T6 Pee 916° T/T89° 1/822 T/@2L°0) _Juauiamsveur penjoe Ag 
9620 08Z°T|189° 1 Z16'T 0Z6°T 189° 1/926 T2120) re 
a apie. ; eee 00g =? KDP=X vjoqvie S 
0 |0ZL°0 08° T.089°T 026 T}000°S 0Z6°T, 089 F086 T\06L°0, 0 ‘ Pa Vid ered Ae 
; Ra Ne ae | GEE “OOF =? a a) Z/p=« KAreue 
0 |04°0 08° 1/089" 1\0Z6°T|000°S 066° T\089°T\08Z°1/0ZL°0| 0 : (v/x-8-+0/x9) Z/D=& Areueyey | gv 
| | | | | + = 2. 
0 |022°0 081089" T.0Z6' 1000'S |0Z6"T 089° 1/086" T 0ZL"0. 0 r007 e/—Cogh=x asdyrq |™ 
| | | | i re 
0 1220/1861 2691 0F6'T.000°S (OF6' 1 Z69'T I8Z'T1ZL'0| 0 ie Cte hoe Sie) 
sodiy) FIV HWW OW aw| aa ad wo wa WH¥ rV s10d3y 
| | | | | 
(3293 UL YYBUEe]) UOoeyeqd 
— SNOILVLINdG WOO 
NI 
qaasn gAaXNo 
a2) fe 
Sie dc ane ane 


\ 


ROBERTSON 


SAGS AND SPANS 


sjioddns Jaaey *Aivuayvo uo paseq suolyeynduroo pu se[nwiog 


‘sueds pue s8eg—Z “ON dLVId 


[June 30 


“.M M,, JO sutioy ur ¢ | 


| oar Appanoodsas AL «aX. e qqy "(n/x-9—/x?)D=D (4) 

pue . ¥,, Jo sui} ul 9 pur g | S J d 2 

j 7 uIs . x 
_Y_=s (01) ‘Mt &=M (qtr) =o = (L) 7 Al Es +1] ee EY 
s A TLeA AP 
q 
u ae 
‘uorjesuops % X= (@s—ts) 5 ‘OV. (6) me =A (9) "(o/x-8 — 0/x9) lar arc 4 uez (8) 
e 

a) dig) = OV ae (8) get p= OS ay (g) "(0/x-9+ »/x9) oak (T) 


400j Jod d1tM JO JYBIOM JURyNSeI= 44 
AL 8L0°0008} 41 9ST°0008 M 0008| TT00'OOT | F9ST'O | 0008 
M 9ST O0OF) A LLEOOOF 1 OOOF| GEOO OOT | OLTE'O | OOOF 
M G1E'000G) Al Z9"000G AA 000Z| GOTO OOT | OFG9'O | 000G 
M LF9OOOT| AM OFS] LOOT Ad OOOT| FTFO OOT | €OSG'T | OOOT 
M GFO'LO9 | 1 S80°GO9 (Ad 009 | SETI OOL | 9F80'°% | 009 
MGLUIOF | Al 62 EOF AL OOF | FO9G'OOT | OGZI'E | OOF 
M FOL'GOG | M1 €8Z'90G Al 00G | 8FPO' TOL | 9G86'9 | 00G 
MO9LFOT | AM C9LGIT AL OOT | S8IG' FOL | 6Z9L'°SL| OOT 
MG90°6S | M PST LL om os T06S "ZIT | OPST 26) OF 
MPLE9F |MSSCOPE |M SS Lere ISI | 6FS0'69| cs | X 
asvioaAy sjioddns | uedsjo yacj yao} yaaj 
VV | 1aquao ore Beg | sonyjea 
WW jo 14 
: yysua’y 
aiIM JO SUOT}OAIIp } 
Buoje “sq] ul ssetjys [eJO] ae: 
es 5 
ueds 400j-Q9[ UO paseq | 
suoljeynduro,) 


(‘ur ‘bs rad ‘q]) sso1ys ul asueyo = (¢s-'s) 

‘(ur ‘bs tad ‘q[) a11M Jo UOTDaIIp UI ssaijs= 

‘(quiod AlaAa JO} sateA) (“q] [@}0}) 211M JO UOTOaIIp UT Ssaljs= 
*(quiod A1aAd 10] SaTIvA) (“q] [2}0}) JIM UT Sse1}s [VOI}IOA = 
*(quiod AiaAo IO yURYSUOD) (“GI [e}O}) AIIM UI Ssot}s [BJUOZTIOY = 
‘sjtoddns jo jysisy UsaMjeq soUdIZYIp jooj= y¥ ‘001/T= 
‘SUIYJIESZO] UTiIs.dueN JO aseq—ISzsI1Z= 

‘Qinjeisdwisa} Ul asueyo= (*4j-ly 

g ae{ Ses) ainjye1adwis4 saeiZap = 

“AjlOijseja jo snjnpow = 

(-1ye} ‘Sap sad) quatoyjaoo ainqesioduiay = 
(3 tod -q]) o11M Jo 1yZIeM JUeINseI= 
‘(cur ‘bs) o11M Jo vaIe= 
*(ssaiqs) 9 Ul osuRyo= 
*(-duio}) 9 ul s8ueyo= 
‘o1e Jo Yysus,T= 3) 

"XO IOA = g 

“UISLIO = O 
d 

x 


SBS eoNMBAYH 4 


(PRSeS 


onjuA uv 


=~ 


SONY 
197 


SPV[NUILO Wy 


sJOqUIAS 


COUNT: ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2213 


Plate No. 2 gives all the necessary formulas based on the cate- 
nary and on level supports. Formula (1) is the equation of 
the catenary. Formula (2) is derived from formula (1). For- 
mula (3) is the integral equation for length of arc of any curve 
in ordinates of x and y. Formula (2) is substituted in formula 
(3), giving the formula (4) for length of arc. The remaining 
formulas are self-explanatory. All formulas up to and including 
(7) are derived from the catenary. The others are derived 
independently of the catenary. 

Inspection of the formulas shows that Wet Bed 0 Ve Ga td. 
and V values be multiplied by a constant K the relations of the 
formulas remain unchanged. 

If we take the value x or the value of span and multiply it 
by two, all the other values in the formulas will be correct only 
when multiplied by two; in this case K equals 2. In all the 
following curves and computations, the constant K is used, and 
span is taken at 100, making the value of K equal to the length 
of span divided by 100. The use of the K factor renders the 
following curves adaptable to any value of span. 

Computations and Curves. In equation (1), by substituting 
various a values for a given x value, the corresponding value 
of y and hence the sag can be obtained. Likewise, in formula 
(4), for the same given x value, the corresponding length of arc 
can be obtained by substituting the same various a values, and 
in formula (7) the corresponding maximum stress can be ob- 
tained by substituting the y value corresponding to the same 
various a values. 

Obtaining the stress values for various points along the wire, 
by substituting in formula (7) various y values for a given a 
value, and averaging them, the average stress value may be ob- 
tained corresponding to the given a value. This can be repeated 
for all a values. All of the above substitutions must be made 
for the one given x value. 

Formula (5) gives the stress value at the center of the span. 

On Plate No. 2 a full set of computations for various selected 
a values is given based on a 100-ft. span where K equals one. 

From these computations three sets of curves are plotted in 
sections—Curve No. 1, between sag and length of arc; Curve 
No. 2, between sag and stress; and Curve No. 3, plotted for 
wires and cables from formula (10), Brown & Sharpe gage. 

Plates No. 3 and 4 give data on wires and cables, which cover 
tensile strength, modulus of elasticity, ice and wind load on 


[June 30 


SAGS AND SPANS 


. 
. 


ROBERTSON 


2214 


. 


AjUO Jaddoo 410; 4Oo} Jod 4ysIam 4YULI[NSeI= AM JO} son[eA ‘“SelTM uo BIeqQ—'E ‘ON ALVId 


‘o]qey Ul woATs Fy ‘fy ‘%y4 ‘TA onjtea AUe—juUsU0dWIOD [eOI]IZA= 4 


196°0 9610 999'°0 PEL'O 9690 ¢g0'°0 ILL°0 2L0'0 8LS'0 #500 OIF 0 ZE0 0 OL# 
$86'0 0220 $89 '0 ISt'0 69¢ 0 820 °0 €98°0 960 °0 €6¢ 0 290°0 €€P'0 0S0°0 8 # 

860 'T Lz 0 FIL'O 6810 6g9'0 éIL'0 088°0 ) F210 1190 S380 °0 c6r'0 640°0 9# 
080° T ¥ZE 0 0gL'0 SZG'0 0g2Z'0 FOL 'O G16 0 9ST'O €€9 0 8010 89¢'0 9zT 0 t# 

PFI 'T 88¢'0 S6L°0 692 0 906'°0 8920 2960 9610 1990 9ET'O 119°0 10G'0 CH 

GLI 'T 9IF 0 FI8'0 682 0 896°0 908 0 916°0 | 066°0 8219°0 €ST'O 8hrL'0 £960 L# 

002 'T SFr 0 €€8'0 T1le'0 S80 °T 00F 0 000 'T | ¥FG'O ¥69'0 6910 8€8'0 61E'0 0O* 
9ES'T O8F 0 898 '0 eee 0 G0Z'T 067 '0 ZE0'T 916'°0 LIL'0 2610 876 '0 €0F 9 00 # 
$82 'T 86¢'0 G68 9 L9€°0 H8E 1 089 '0 890'T oie 0 GFL‘ O L1Z'0 180'°T soc 0 000 # 
Pre 'T 8890 €€6°0 80P 0 08g T SLL‘0 FOL 'T | 8FE'0 L9L°0 GFZ 'O CFS I 0790 0000 #¥ 
HIG TI 88F 0 F980 6660 CFI T FCF 0 960 'T | 082°0 |- 062°0 F6L 0 GL8'0 BSE 'O O# 

666 T 9€¢'0 468 °0 hipecony 86 1 66S 'O GL0 1 91€'0 | StL'O 6120 $86'°0 90F 0 00 # 
oSe°T 929°0 8£6°0 | me Lee 69 1 €¢9°0 GIL T 99€°0 | GLL°0 L4Z'0 FEIT eI¢'0 000 # 
OOF 'T ¥P9 0 6160 Ltr’ 0 679 T 0080 9ST 'T 00rF' 0 § 008'0 82420 F661 9F9'0 0000 # 
OFF T ¥89'0 000 °T GlV 0 0248 °T $86 '0 G6 T Str'O | 828°0 IT€°0 6EF 1 F9L'O 000‘0Sz 
HOF T 802°0 020 'T G6P 0 610° PLT GEST | 9247°0 | &98°0 og 0 0€9'T 116°0 000 00€ 
GIST 9S2°0 0c0'T Sco 0 186° SPE T GLE 1 91S°0 | €88°0 sce'o0 €08°T 0L0°T 000 0¢E 
9cc'T $08 0 080 °T 8s¢'0 9ES's eos T FOE TL occ 0 S060 €8¢ 0 G06 °T €62'T 000 00% 
7s8c T 8280 OOT 'T G1o'0 G6LS FELT Ore 'T r8¢°0 | O€6°0 90F 0 8L1°S LLELT 000‘0¢F 
Foo 'T Gos "0 O€l T 6S 0 F1I6'S F681 GLE T 919°0 | 32c6'°0 8cF 0 8ce's OES T 000‘00¢ 
GLLT 0€0'T 0€s'T SOLO €93°¢ SIL's@ soc 'T gcl°0 €F0'T 0z¢ 0 Os € 882°C 000‘0¢2 
026 °T SLIT Tee Tt S080 S08 Ff osc ’¢ 0€9'T 6L8'0 8éI'°T 909°0 060 °F oco'€ 000‘000'T 

8Hq +H = 97 °H vA eA a | Se *H "7 tA "A 
aot ‘ut $+ | uolyejnsul | sot ‘ur $+ | uolefnsut | sof ‘ul £ | uolzefMsut | sor ‘ul ¥ | auoje | ool “ul ¥ auoje aot ‘ul £ auoje ‘SB 
uolqe[nsul + 31TM uotyeynsul + d1TM — + +20mM | AM = +2TM atm + oll ase 
+ 9ITM + 9tTM uoryensut otTM . | oTTM 
+ 31TM < EEO 
‘Igy Jed sayiu 9g ‘Iy Jed sajtur oc ‘Iq tod sofim gg | ‘34 Jed satu oc 
ainsseid pul ainsseid pul 
“yj Jod ‘q] 011M Joddoo payensul pleiq sei, *4y tod ‘q] o1tm Joddoo oreg ~ 
‘a]qe) UI WATS & ‘5 + 9 wer &hrr Sor ‘Ter ontea AUe—jUSUOdUIOD [eJUOZIIOY = 
19%} Ur UeAIs 87 H “H “H ‘H eny I 1104 = H Frey yy 


I0jONnpuod Prjog 


toyonpuoo pepuriys | 


ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2215 


1911] 


ssoljs pue oinjerodurey jo yooya 
solIm uo eJeq—F ‘ON dLVId 


“1yej “Bap ted 8Z10000°0 
000‘000°6 
yout ‘bs Jad *q] 000'FT °F ZT 
yout “bs ted “q{ 000'9% 


“ryej dep tod 9600000'0 


000‘000°6T 


yout “bs Jed “q] 000'L 


yout “bs ad “qI 000 


‘ 


VE 


‘rye} “Bap Jed 960000070 


** uolsuvdxe jo "jaoo ‘duray, 


000‘000'9T “+++ Aqtorysepa Jo sn[Hpo 
yout ‘bs sod “q] 000‘0F OF 08) rary, onserq 
yout “bs Jed *q] Q00‘L9 04 OG Aes yysuerljs efisuay 


unurUIn,y peyeeuue uMeIp-piey, 
iaddog taddog 
(yj3ua| [eUISiso yo uso od) uorLsUETy 
OF ce Of Se 0e cl OL ‘) 0 


re OF 


PLT LOE 6L 
LLG 687 Or 
OVP BLL 8 
004 LEG 9 
PIPL L96T v 
GLLT LOTE G 
VEGG 9PLE it 
8186 8SS7 0 
€Sce 9G6S 00 
O8?PT 0899 000 
ogs9g OTEs 0000 
poyeouuy |umerp-prey | 23e2'S 2 “g 
siequin Ni 
qystem Zulyeeiq—spunod [ejo J, 
(s,BSuljqooy) ait 
reddoo jo Y4S8uel14s oTIsuay 


aged danjdns = @—"dON 


Huauojo 5 OUds Ut 


+—+_ +++ 


os 


ODULYI DON 


“Ur [yOE'O “Weip Ar[047 UALIp-psLy ILE. = 


iia 


“ul He = wep Ao[osy Ua 


imi 


(ur “bs sad sq) SS241g 


FOGI “SINO'| Ig Iv SsosdUCD [LUO NUIO UY “dodUd s,[oMHAIL[Y “O “A AY WtOs) WOU) Sodiaw doddoa 40} uresys PUL ssodzs U90M%10q sang ~ 


2216 ' ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


100.2 K. >> 100s2-K> 
ne 


00 It Coco ++ 4-|+1 t+ AH 
.09 = mai mad = rt ia bak jaene ia; Ie a ae im 
08 FEC ESE +H HH See Zcee 
OF + ay rH 7 + + 4 a ie t a 
06 HH pies PEE [estat ado te latatonat ct 
il S-.02 
os FEPE tae EERE HH 
-~ . u : if i if 
Gos ECCS ree. Soccer SC ra 
Bh ee |" 4 Pe iebeta, Chae oe / rrr 
es. bee caer EH Per ee aus 
PU sess tai] sevavasataenescacteeteeces saPecear caus 
< COC ie Cee eet Ae 
po. tor Coe eee eee 
100.1 k 10d-H0K _ —- 
mk aa ERT pa aR ERTL TORT Lye oye ly 
r a sie ema | Tr és i 
= 08 Peet Spit sag tree | a | Pee 
Q 08 Fi) CURVE No.1 (SECTION A) - tacit 
wT BETWEEN Q : STAC ime 
5 wi > | a) SN NA 6 SHI i 
|| LENGTH OF ARC AND SAG aml Vv ‘2 
06 Pn) LENGTH OF SPAN NATTY Wy WAT ET wi 
ie, Lk oon 
; FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN i im 
U4 HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS ‘ar = | 
03 HA | 7 3S Ct 
oe FH : ae0e gteneee  ccsnsaaaananeees 
‘ol : a == 
100,0 K. - 
0 .OK 1.0K 1.5K 2.0K 2.5K 
SAG (FEET) 
RASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 
CurvE No. 1.—Section A 
101,0 : 
p CURVE No.1 (section-B) —r as +f} } 
BETWEEN PoCecceee a Ty Sao le 
100.9 KJ; LENGTH OF ARC AND SAG } mi a 
_ LENGTH OF SPAN ane / Ww ARR BS Ak Skee 
KS See 100 LOR Aine it GELS 
100.8 K ja FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HS SP SASS Ssh - 
Tl HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS mie) ra v, s 
F 100,7K ela le ara nEea Be a aa a 
uw é sana St ekne in a ae ae H+ 
100.6 K]--E- is 
eee gs ae smn a ; - 
& CEE eee 
us 100.5 KF- 1 te ik 
Pid at a | ® 13 
- 004K oy a -| | = 
5 Oe Lat Bn baie ql 
z : 2 a! cal Danae PS See 
nh 100.3 K Bil aie i! . ai Z an i—} =e = 
100.2 KE} a z x 
100.1 K+} 
100.0 K a ste alla 
0 WK 20K 30K 40K 50K GOK 70K SOK 9.0K 100K 10K 


SAG (FEET) = 
BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


CurVE No. 1.—Section B 


o te “< 


. 
] 
: 
¢ 
5 


LENGTH OF ARC (FEET) 


LENGTH OF ARC (FEET) 


102 K 


101K 


100 K 


110 K 


105 K 


100 K 


ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 22 


TI lO {i EL a Lt a a |" “DART 
| He a ane 
it irate | (eel Ct Acts 
(TG st Oe Sia ial aw 
oD Co ia 
Sie ele ful ia & wl fe 
=H CURVE No.1(sECTION Cc)  |— ‘i 
raleetan BETWEEN isi Peles 
"p} LENGTH OF ARC AND SAG [-} pl 
HH Kk = LENGTH OF SPAN = 


h __ FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN [- 


~ HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS 


et 


NG lS es al 


samawe 


oe Poe aauEers , f aaell KE of sSUESSSESRSEEE 


0 


Ik 2K 38K 4K 5K 6K 7K 8K 9K 10K ILK 12K 18K 14K 
SAG (FEET) 
BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


Curve No. 1.—Section C 


SURPEREMeE AE BBE 
ae ArH a 1 SS ra a al 
faa name Ty a 
I fl oh a ea | 
a 2 \— |—t. = 
a 3 | 
73 = aa (RM =i | al LI 
eeereccasaaeazeee soeessaseersees 
a japgiotabelel atl atal fae ales LT 
Tak i 7 ! it LH _| 44 
SeacETeceUaeesseazeee]serneusceeeezeegee® 
a 1 fEe sae Rewe Pt ttt Palas) 
CURVE No.1(SECTION D) [7 rel iaetelale nerd 
BETWEEN |_| HH a a 
LENGTH OF ARC AND SAG [7/111 WA ni 
ne k = LENGTH OF SPAN | NY NG a A 
jy — FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN |--+-]44-4-- ee Beata aon 
= HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS 4 Paes 
feast 
| mel 1 4 a 
EEE A : : 
| 
0 5K 10K 15K 20 K 25K 
SAG (FEET) 


BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


Curve No. 1.—Section D 


SAGS AND SPANS 


ROBERTSON 


2218 


i 
EHH 
mt 
Lt Popol a a 
ist CEE 
i Corr 
tN % aaeel + 
PRR EEE HEH EE 
; [ nae) LX Bie 
SeEBSseuc{ yseastnctezente 
SEERRRCeseey “cece ceessncerse 
POSSESSES 
SULEEERBSSESEaS Ce 
He BEG awe au a ims Si fo 
Lt H+ a> a oN 
TI Scceeeenr tN i. 
o Gt oo i a 
uo ra Pee et ue a | 
a | Se Teta | i 
oz be a cH 
Bo BPR 
w>Oz SSC if {et oo al 
Cia sg) 2° Coo ae 
wea eS Coo ats 
sera y SG Becee Someic oie aace 
SEU Olo Be] —|- ao 
zgo 28 Sse ete 
w roy eeridd i iurbstat 
>= ES Bm i a 1 
eo i al sO 
asd fen re jy ed oi 
Ow == et a a | i 
ras | | ui | I 
T oH Peto 
a | 
a [ 
x x x x x“ 
zg - 2 eh Sg 3 


{1333) DY¥V JO HLON]ST 


40K 60K 80K 
SAG (FEET) 


BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


20K 


CurvVE No. 1.—Section E 


CURVE No.2 (section-A) 


TOTAL STRESS AND SAG ~ 
__ LENGTH OF SPAN 


K 


— FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 
HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS 


W= RESULTANT WEIGHT OF WIRE PER FOOT. 


SAG (FEET) 


CurvVE No. 2.—Section A 


1911] ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2219 
20 000 Kw, a 
SiSgRSEEEEE SanuE i CURVE No.2 (section-B) [1+ 
Iai (salem ian Shes i BETWEEN Cel 
18 000 Kw. Sc Serre TOTAL STRESS AND SAG ia 
STEEL 3 05 allel Amul K LENGTH OF SPAN HE | 
16 000 KW. |-} a fae = RESULTANT toh 4 
oe - +4 fii 7 1 OF WIRE ; FOOT, . A a 
ie oon ee FEELERS EEEE EEE EEE HAGEL f=" wcrone aranronres Pt EE as 
; 2 SHEE PACeeeee SEER EEE eH i 
000 Kw. Pr a Resse ay dR eee we! Sila hl i ‘I 
Ae KW. letestetrstale. i < 4 i od ia i | a a ER 
C a man i 2S C| 
uw vee PEEP suuae 
10 000 Kw. H | | 
i Pu roe 2 FECES OAH Pere To 
at [K) Tees, | eA et i | Ets ‘ial i aan 
= 3000 Kw. NEEM CI aid i Las Keel ican 
5 mal Feb \ Hy ett Hw j 
“ Gal ia) Ga (a Sa Pu ia | | NG fal 
- _| fe al 3) 
6 000 kw. EEE ag hae psn ea We CI 
= FTE i F riz albite ia | 
4.000 Kw. igadas CECE REE SCARE EEE 
CCE CENE Pe f FLEE a 
2000 kw. ft TE SEF : EH mel 
F ‘ mre Se SS = tH i 
al P Lr ——— 
0 i ial a i 
0 5K 1.0K 1.5K 2.0K . 25K 
SAG (FEET) 


BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


Curve No. 2.—Section B 


j 10 000 kw. ie 
; . CURVE No.2 (section-C) “CEE 
| BETWEEN CI a 
= emp iow 7 EAGLE DATorTat STRESS AND SAG }‘f 
, a HH if “ih K LENGTH OF SPAN YT al i 
7 8 000 Kw. a He gigi Pree 100 Sere inet qeialele 
; z __resuctant wetcht_T 7) TT 
a Ea GOO KW. TL Wor wire per Foor a | -E i f 
wo! Vt FEET DIFFERENCE GE 4 
ae = Sf] N= setween keicnt 4 
= ¢ 000 kw.} ir, OF SUPPORTS. 4% | ane 
Ae cant mI 
va) . F XY 1 SE 
o | i a a 
uw a a 
a 5 000 Kw. a {eles Oy 
E space cennasaererescaierer 
sh ! EEE EEE PEE EEE EEE EES ECE 
= 4000 kW. Gooey et 4 
5 aaapectien tee 
4 | | ie | Fale i 
; 8000 kw aa 4 at 4 sane t 
Wat 
L ae 4 iB 
2.000. kw.}- LL EAE EEE EEE aeeee isa 
weet 
E a Hey en B= WALL 
1 000 kw.| a aia ieee HEECEE 
= : aoe 
ore aS =~ —— = ea 
0 1K 2K 3K 4K 5K OK TK 8K 9K 10K 


SAG (FEET) 
BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


CurveE No. 2.—Section C 


2220 ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


> 1200 KW. 


CURVE NO. 2(secTION 0) 
= BETWEEN 

| TOTAL STRESS AND SAG 

_ LENGTH OF SPAN | 

sad 100 


TOTAL STRES 


‘W KESULTANT WEIGHT OF WIRP 
>| Pep Foot 
hh FEET DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 
HEIGHT OF SUPPORTS, 


0 ‘= 
0 1K. 2K 3K. 4K, 5K. 6K. 7K. 8K. 9K. LOK. 11K. 12K. 18K. 14K, 


SAG (FEET) 
BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


CurvE No. 2.—Section D 


400 KW, 


B00 KW, 


© aaa NO. 2 SECTION E 
AT: BETWEEN 
TOTAL STRESS AND SAG 


K LENGTH OF SPAN 
100 


RESULTANT WEIGHT OF 
WIRE PER FOOT 


TOTAL STRESS (18s.) 


SAG (FEET) 
BASED ON HIGHER SUPPORT 


Curve No, 2.-—-Section 


eo. 


J 


B- 
: 


1911] ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2221 


TOTAL STRESS (as ) 


TOTAL STRESS (Les 


4000 
eta i a ante i 
CURVE NO.8 (SECTION A) J 
BETWEEN | 
+1] torAat sTRESS AND STRESS PER SQ. IN. | +} 
En B, & 8. GAUGE isi ea a 
3000 ; 
Sw ianEEeA 
T i y, j z Bl as ioe Bly | 
t zi H 
x | 2 ely i ae 
1000 z : Ht 
I i rt 
> 0 “I EOE eet 
T oa |_| { | 
{ [ | iB | tT 
ro o2=-— ae Se oe 
0 = : == == g7iesaese #12 
0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 
STRESS PER SQ. INCH(L8s.) 
Curve No. 3.—Section A 
20,000 ij : 
i i es Sos ials| ceacae a 8 a a A 
ra CURVE NO.3 (sECTION B) See sIeI ee eee Aanane 
BETWEEN ES ROA eet 
TOTAL STRESS AND STRESS PER SQ. IN. i Bu ilies 
15,000 
10,000 
5,000 
EH 


0 5,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 
STRESS PER SQ. INCH ( Les.) 


Curve No. 3.—Section B 


fTIVT TN 
KESTER WOR 
PIN I 
I a - } 
i [ is i 
! 3 
HH ! I s 
& if 
' oe + 
F ~ ie 2 ah 2\% 
d a Cummabi a ealthre Milian Fo 
e. io) = re i 12 9 os, 
: Q aoa ie 
| = a Mo & SB 
l oO 
x D 29 
n H r Ha % 
S Gy Sie wie 
a a 
| F 
a (a i wn Oo 
> rl b h | i i rf Z 
S | CNT imi au se fea] 
I i | l I | > 
H T T aaaeee 
w 6 ot LS CPS 4 S| 
- Oo f { 
Sl 5 22 | EN \ n 
= o - | I | l 
5 Ba 82 3H LESSEN 
& ~ wl ax 6 CCCCeee SS 2 
$5 na? NSS g 
2a 4H. Crt fa TELLER 
Re raat oa PEEEHH i. HH PI 
S'S HA Ht anna 
eras 18 ce 
Peo Meroe 4 
> > 
S18 Bie8 6 ee ees ae ae g 
N Ss = ro) Far ° ry ~ ” R 4 = 3 s a = 
x ($981) SS3Ya1S TVLOL (‘$91) SSSYLS TYLOL 


STRESS PER SQ. INCH (LBS.) 
CurVE No. 3.—Section D 


1911] ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2223 


wires, etc., all of which make up an important factor in the solu- 
tion of sags and spans. The data which we have at hand to- 
day are not sufficient. Wires, when stressed, do not return to 
their original length; there is frequently a permanent set. This 
fact is overlooked in previous solutions, which are more or less 
dependent on the wires being perfectly elastic. Mr. O. F. Black- 
well, in a paper read before the International Congress at St. 
Louis, 1904, gives some very good data on the stress and strain 
in wires, where permanent set has taken place. When an an- 
nealed copper wire is stretched, it hardens, becomes somewhat 
drawn, and increases in strength. There do not seem to be 
available any detailed data on this property of wire. Full de- 
tailed data, of this kind, are desirable. 

The data given on Plate No. 3 for wind pressures are based on 
the formula* P =0.0025V2, where P is the wind pressure in Ib. 
per sq. ft. and V is the actual wind velocity in miles per hour. 
Authorities disagree, however, on wind pressures. The above 
formula is generally accepted as correct, yet according to an 
article by Piatt, Lane and Kistler in the Journal of Electricity, 
Power and Gas, July 29, 1911, wind pressures are found to be 
much higher, and especially so for the smaller wires. 


EFFECT OF CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE AND STRESS 


The effect of a change in temperature or W value is to in- 
crease or decrease the length of wire in a span and thereby alter 
the sag. 

In turn, every change in the sag causes a corresponding change 
in the stress. : 

For instance, if an increase in temperature alone takes place, 
the wire will lengthen and the sag will increase. Because the sag 
increases, the stress will decrease in turn, causing the wire to 
shorten, whereby the sag will tend to decrease. 

An increase in the W value brings about a similar condition.. 

The resultant sag is a state of equilibrium between the action 
of the above forces (forces tending to increase sag and forces 
tending to decrease sag.) vn 

To compute the resultant sag by means of a formula is a diffi- 
cult matter, involving complex equations depending on many vari- 
able quantities. The following graphical method employing a 
hypothetical condition is givent 


*See ‘Transmission Wire Crossings,” F. F. Fowle. 
{See paper by H. W. Buck, International Congress, St. Louis, 1904. 


2224 ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS {June 30 


Change in Temperature (Value of W Remaining Constant). 
Given a condition of sag and span. From Curve No. 1 find 
the length of arc and from Curve No. 2 find the (average) stress. 
Assume hypothetically that the stress in the wire be removed; 
that the wire contracts to its original length as when unstressed. 
Find length of arc by applying formula (9). For a given change 
of temperature, find length of arc as it would be changed from 
the hypothetical length by applying formula (8), and find the 
sag corresponding to this length of arc from Curve No. 1. Now 
assume hypothetically that the wire is again stressed. Plot a 
curve showing how the sag increases as the stress is gradually 
re-applied. This is done by finding the increased length of arc 
for each value of re-applied stress by formula (9), and the 
corresponding sag from Curve No. 1. Plot the newly found 
curve A B, Fig. 1, and where it cuts the regular curve between 
sag and stress, Curve No. 2, the point of intersection P gives the 
resultant sag O C and stress O B due to a change in temperature. 
In computing the above curve, one must not overlook the fact 
that the stress value must be ex- 
pressed in terms of K Wand the 
sag in terms of K. 

Change in W Value (Tem- 
perature Remaining Constant). 
Given a condition of sag and 
span. From Curve No. 1 find _ 
the length of arc, and from Curve 
No. 2 the (average) stress, the 
value of W being normal. Assume hypothetically as before 
that the wire becomes unstressed and find new length of are by 
formula (9), and the corresponding sag from Curve No. 1. 
Now assume hypothetically that the stress be resumed, but this 
time consider the new value of W, plot a curve between stress 
and sag as before, remembering to properly express the ordinates 
in terms of K W and K, and find the resultant sag and stress in 
the same manner. 

The curves and formulas are further adaptable to finding re- 
sultant sag and stress when the length of span changes, due to 
poles bending or swaying and crossarms twisting. 


STRESS 


PROBLEM 


Given a 100-ft. span of No, 4 hard drawn copper wire (three 
braids weatherproof) strung in summer at 90 deg. fahr. with a 


1911] ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2225 


sag of six in. Find (1) the resultant sag and stress in winter 
at 10 deg. below zero, and (2) with 4-in. covering of ice. 


Normal W =0.164 Ib. per ft.. a .From Plate No. 3 
St) VE 0 VOR. ey ote e oe SE (11) on Plate No. 2 
Normal sag=6in. =0.5.K.........-.. ae formula (11) on Plate No. 2 
Normal stress =2,220 K W=364 lb.. Oe See Jor Cm INGE 2 
Normal stress =11,200 lb. per sq. in. F ......From Curve No. 3 
Normal length of are = 100.0068 K = 100. 0068 he ...From Curve No. 1 
First. Length of arc (hypothetically unstressed) 

= 99.9368 ft. =99.9368 K.. bes Ee we . By formula (9) 
Length of arc (decreased by a in temperature) 

=99.8409 ft. =99.8409 K.. UES Popa aie By formula (8) 


Hypothetical curve ‘as follows oe eda 


Assumed stress values 
Lb. per Length of arc Corresponding sag 
sq. in, Total lb. by formula (9) from Curve No. 
0 0 99.8409 = 99.8409 K Hypothetical 
11000 = 99.9087 = 99.9087 K . 
22000 — 99.9747 = 99.9747 K : 
26250 860 =5240 K W 100.0005 =100.0005 K 0.090 K 
27000 880 =5360 K W 100.0051 =100.0051 &K 0.420 K 
28000 920 =5610 K W 100.0112 =100.0112 K 0.655 K 


OT ed a Sa a a ve ee 
Plotting this curve on Curve No. 2 (Section B), using 
the same ordinates, it is found to intersect at the point P, giving: 


Resultant sag =0.240 K =0.240 ft. or 2.9 in. 
Resultant stress =5300 K W=870 lb. =26,600 lb. per sq. in. 


Second. New value of W=0.750 lb. per ft. .From Plate No. 3 
Length of arc (hypothetically unstressed, eenat Ww and decreased by 
changes in temperature) =99.8409 = 99. 8409 K as given above. 


Hypothetical curve (stress resumed, W=0.750 lb. per ft.) as 
follows: 


Assumed stress values | 
Lbs per Length of arc Corresponding sag 
sq. in. Total Ib. by formula (9) | from Curve No. 
0 : 0 99.8409 = 99.8409 K Hypothetical 
27000 880 =1170 K W 100.0051 =100.0051 K 0.420 K 
28009 920 =1230 K W 100.0112 =100.0112 K 0.655 K 
31000 1030 =1380 K W 100.0294 =100 0294 K 1.050 K 


a 


2226 ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


Plotting curve on Curve No. 2 (Section B), as before, the 
point of intersection is P, giving: 


Resultant sag =0.950 K =0.950 ft. or 11.4 in. 
Resultant stress =0.1350 K W=1000 1b. =30,000 lb. per sq. in. 


SUPPORTS ON DIFFERENT LEVELS 


In dealing with level supports it seemed unnecessary to define 
sag, but in the case of supports at different levels, it is important 
to consider this function of spans. There are certain other 
conditions which must also be understood. 

Sag may be defined as the difference in height between the 
lowest point, or vertex, of the curve, and the point of support. 
With level supports, the vertex of the curve is at the center of 
the span, but with supports at different levels, this is not the 
case. Hereafter, in dealing with supports at different levels, 
the sag will be reckoned from the higher support. The con- 
ditions can best be illustrated in Fig. 2. Here a series of curves, 
A, B, C, Dand E, are shown, representing a single span of wire 
drawn up at various degrees of tautness between two supports. 
The curves are produced beyond the lower support in order to 
complete the catenary curve. Starting with curve E and 
drawing the wire tighter, the sag represented by S2 decreases and 
the vertex moves away from the upper and over toward the lower 
support. When the vertex reaches the lower support, the sag 
equals the difference in height between the supports, and if the 
wire is further tightened, the vertex of the curve moves away 
from both supports and the sag again increases. 

To obtain the relations between sag, stress and length of arc 
for supports at different levels involves further complex mathe- 
matics. However, a semi-graphical solution may be obtained 
in conjunction with the data and curves already supplied for 
level supports. 

In Fig. 2, take any curve HE. It may be considered as made 
up of two parts, one corresponding to x1, and the other to xo. 
Each part in itself may be considered as half of a separate and 
independent span having level supports, one half having L; for 
given span value and the other having Ly. Each span will have 
the same a value. By the proper manipulation of the K factor, 
all values of sag, stress and length of arc may be obtained for 
each span from the curves already given for level supports; and 
then, knowing these values, the relations between difference in 
height of supports, sag based on higher support, length of arc 


1911] ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS 2227 


and stress may be readily computed for the span suspended by 
the supports on different levels. ; 5 

To establish a series of curves between the above relations, 
the following method was employed: 

Assume various a values. For each a value select various 
sets of x, and x2 values (Fig. 2) whose sum is always constant 
and equal to 100 ft. For each x; and xz value, determine first 
the ratio between x; and x2 and then the value of h. . From this 
plot a series of curves, one for each a value, plotted between the 
ratio of x; to x2 and the value of h. 

From these curves the ratio x1 to x, may be obtained for any 
selected even value of h. 

Select a series of h values. For each value of h obtain from 
the curves the ratio x1 to x2 corresponding to each of the already 
chosen series of a values. In each case, determine the values for 
x, and x2, sag, length of arc and stress. 


= 4 
me tan 
ttt | 
ip ip =bo=t=pes oto Es 
fat i rh 
hh . hi i 
| 
+ 
Sy a | I 
Ic iP <p bel - 4-06 py == 
ie 7 Ser Ct 
OLVERTEX OF CURVE : 


Fic. 2 Fic. 3 


A series of curves can then be plotted between sag and length 
of arc, one curve for each value of h. In the same manner, a 
series of curves can be plotted between sag and stress, one curve 
for each value of h. 

Such sets of curves will be found included with the curves 
given for level supports. Problems involving the effect of tem- 
perature and stress changes may be solved from these curves in 
the same manner as is done with level supports. 

Fig. 3 illustrates a discrepancy which enters into previous 
solutions offered in sags and spans when considering the effect 
of temperature and stress changes with non-level supports. 
They produce the portion of the curve between the supports 
represented by Li, until it may be considered as a span on level 
supports represented by Ls, and solution is made accordingly. 


—" 


2228 ROBERTSON: SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


When the effects of temperature and stress changes are consid- 
ered, the sag may increase or decrease, and the difference in 
height of supports is altered by an amount represented by Q in 
Fig. 3. If the supports are fixed, this discrepancy enters. 

An interesting feature of spans on supports at different levels 
is that when the vertex of the curve lies outside of the two sup- 
ports, there is a small vertical force exerted on the lower support 
tending to lift the support. This may be demonstrated by 
inserting a third support between any two level supports which 
suspend a span of wire. The third support, which should be 
movable, must be placed lower than the lowest point in the 
original span. The condition represents two spans of wire 
where the center support is the lowest and where in each span 
the vertex of the curve lies outside of its two supports. If the 
lower support is of material light enough in weight, it will rise. 

At first, it might be supposed that when the difference in 
height of supports increases, the stress values in the span would 
decrease. Upon inspection of the curves, it is found that very 
high stress values exist when the vertex of the curve lies outside 
of both poles. In fact, the stress values approach infinity as 
the curve of the span approaches a straight line, due to being 
drawn taut. 


ee ae dliras 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers,Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


SAG -CALCULATIONS FOR SUSPENDED WIRES 


BY PERCY H. THOMAS 


The method here described for calculating sags and strains 
in suspended wires was devised to shorten the process of the 
transmission line computations, especially where the effect of 
temperature is to be considered. The method isa semi-graphical 
one and involves no numerical operations other than may be 
performed by the simplest slide rule manipulation. The method 
is based on the assumption that the suspended conductor con- 
forms to the catenary, which is generally considered to be the 
actual fact, although as far as the writer is informed no scientifi- 
cally accurate verification on a large scale under practical con- 
ditions has been attempted. The results obtained by the use 
of the catenary basis will not differ from those derived from the 
usual parabola formulas more than 10 per cent in the strain 
for a sag of 7.5 per cent. For larger sags, however, the dif- 
ference rapidly increases. A description of the use of the method 
will be given, followed by a brief statement of the mathematical 
justification therefor. 


Meruop or Maxinc NuMERICAL DETERMINATIONS 


The problem is the determination of the various quanti- 
ties sag, span, strain and angle of wire at support under any 
definite conditions, and also the effect on these quantities of 
change in load or change in temperature after the wire has been 
secured in position. 

Imagine the given span to be reduced in size, without changing 
the shape of the curve, until the span is one foot. . The sag will 
then be reduced in direct proportion to the reduction of span, 
in other words the percentage of sag will remnain the same. The 

2229 


2230 THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS [June 30 


stress in the wire and the length of wire, also, will be reduced 
in the same ratio. Again, the stress in the wire for a given span 
for a definite sag is directly proportional to the weight per foot of 


the wire or the combined effect of weight of wire and ice or of . 


the combined effect of the weight of wire and ice and of wind 
pressure. 

In Plate I the curve marked ‘‘ Sag” shows the relation be- 
tween the strain in the wire at the point of support, and the sag, 
in a one-foot span with the total load on the wire of one pound 
per foot. 

From this curve the sag in any span can be found when the 
length of span, the total load per foot, and the stress to be al- 


60 t 
ro 
50 H —- 
| 
| | 
40 
Cor 
I 
2 fo) im L ! 
w 30 ui | 
co - SAG rt 
lo 
cS \ | | 
20 lena r ia 
LENGT = ct CI RRS I 
AiG fs ii | e 
1 ao Ait Aras AT ASAT 


0 
P, Po Ps Pi PhP PE 
LENGTH1,000 1.0004 1.0008 1.0012 1.0016 1.0020 1.0024 1.0028 1.0032 1.0036 1.0040 LENGTH 
sac 0 002 OL 006 008 ~—-.010 012 Ol 016 018 020 .022 024 = 026 


PLATE I.—Sag calculations for suspended wires 


lowed in the wire are given. Divide this allowable stress in 
pounds by the span in feet and by the load per foot on the wire. 
This will give the stress at the support on a span one foot long, of 
the same shape, having a loading of one pound per foot. From 
the sag curve on Plate I then read the sag (abscissa) correspond- 
ing to this stress (ordinate), which is the actual sag for the one- 
foot span. This sag multiplied by the span will be the sag in 
feet of the actual span. 

In case the sag is given instead of the stress, the corresponding 
sag for the one-foot span may be obtained by dividing the given 
sag by the span, both in feet, and the stress for a one-foot span 
may be obtained from the sag curve. From this the stress in the 


1911] THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS 2231 


actual conductor may be obtained by multiplying by the span 
in feet and the load on the wire in pounds per foot. 

To determine the effect of change in temperature, find the 
length of the wire in the one-foot span (abscissa) shown on the 
length curve on Plate I as corresponding with the stress in the 
wire (ordinate). It should be noted that the sag and the length 
curves in Plate I have the same ordinates, namely, the stress 
values. Since the wire may be assumed to be fastened at the 
supports at the original temperature and sag chosen, no subse- 
quent slipping will occur, and any subsequent change in tem- 
perature will tend to change the length of the wire by expansion, 
and consequently to change the sag. Since the sag is extremely 
sensitive to the length of the wire, even the very small changes 
in length resulting from changes in temperature will be. im- 
portant. But with every change in sag there is an important 
change in stress, which will change the amount of stretch in the 
wire due to the stress. These two effects are simultaneous’and 
are closely interrelated, and must be considered together. Hav- 

-ing given the stress and having found the length of wire for the 
corresponding one-foot span, the length of wire without stress 
may be calculated from the modulus of elasticity M, viz., by the 


formula, the elongation or stretch = a“ . If this unstressed 


length be marked on the axis of X in Plate I as at P,,a straight 
line connecting this point with the point on the length curve 
corresponding to the actual stress, as already determined, will be 
the stretch curve of the wire with stress. Such a line is marked A. 

On the other hand, if it be assumed that the stress remain 
constant and the temperature change, the wire will change in 
length proportionally with the temperature change, in ac- 
cordance with its proper coefficient of expansion. If it be as- 
sumed that the sag be desired for every 20 deg. above or below 
the initial temperature, the length of conductor unstressed may 
be calculated for these several temperatures, and these lengths 
marked on the chart on the axis X as Ps, Ps, Pa, etc. These 
points do not represent actual lengths of wire as hung in the 
span, since they are unstressed lengths, but the actual lengths 
taken by the conductor for the different temperatures can be 
obtained by drawing lines, as Ae, As, Au, etc., through the several 
points P;, P;, Ps, etc., parallel to the line A, the stretch curve of 
the wire at the initial temperature, which lines will be the stretch 
curves for their respective temperatures. The points of inter- 


2232 THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS [June 30 


section of these stretch lines with the length curve will give the 
stresses which the suspended wire will actually have at the 
several temperatures; the sag corresponding for the one-foot 
span can be read on the sag curve from the stress values. The 
sags of the actual span can then be obtained as before by multi- 
plying by the span. 

. In some cases where the sag is small the length of wire un- 
stressed will be less than one foot, and so will fall off the plot. 
In Plate I, for example this would occur on copper wire in a 
one-foot span stressed to 12. In such a case the stretch line can 
be found by computing the stresses required to produce any two 
suitable lengths (as for example, the length under maximum 
stress and the one-foot length) and drawing the stretch line 
therethrough. 

Such a stretch line is shown at O,, in Plate I. 

The effect of the accumulation of ice and sleet introduces a 
new condition, since it increases the load per foot on the wire. 
The former stretch curve becomes inapplicable, since it is based 
on a different number of pounds per foot, or load on the wire. 
The stress in the actual wire represented by a given ordinate, 
if produced by a new condition of loading, other things being 
constant, will be changed from that represented by the old 
loading in the ratio of the change of loading. That is, if the 
load per foot be doubled, a given ordinate will represent twice 
as great a stress in the actual wire. Therefore the stretch under 
the heavier load can be obtained on Plate I by changing the 
stretch, that is, the increase of length, at any given ordinate, 
or by changing the stress for any given length in the same pro- 
portion as the change in loading. This will give a second 
stretch line, making a different angle with the axis of X, and repre- 
senting the new condition. Such a line for a double loading is 
shown at B, Plate I. The point where this line intersects the 
length curve will, as before, give the stress in the one-foot wire 
corresponding to the new temperature. Similar stretch lines 
for the changed loading may be drawn for any temperatures. 
The new stretch line corresponding to the line O,, for the same 
case of new loading is Oz. 

Plate II is similar to Plate I, but is intended for actual numeri- 
cal determinations and is drawn to three scales suited to different 
classes of work. The curves of sag and stress on Plate II are 
plotted from accurate equations and contain no approximations. 
The expansion of metals with temperature and their stretch with 


—— 


1911] THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS 2233 


stress do not follow the straight line law exactly, and introduce 
a certain error in this as in any method of calculation. 

The middle curves are intended for sags up to about 2 per 
cent, the left-hand curves from about 2 per cent to 15 per cent, 
and the smaller curves in the upper right-hand corner are useful 
in special cases to show the effect of very large sags. It is clear 
from these curves that after the sag has reached 15 to 20 per cent 
there is little reduction of stress by further increase of sag and an 
actual increase of stress soon results. These smaller curves will 
give an indication of the conditions where a wire has to be 
taken down a precipitous place, giving the equivalent of an 
abnormally large sag. 

Where the height of the two supports is unequal, the length 
of the wire on the two sides of the lowest point of the span is not 
equal. However, the form of the curve and the stresses in each 
part will be the same as if the other part were symmetrical with 


- it. If, then, the horizontal distance from the higher support to 


the lowest point of the wire is known, the stress and sag in this 
portion can be determined as though the whole span were equal 
to twice this distance. If desired, the lesser strain in the other 
portion can be determined in the same manner. The following 
formulas give the horizontal distance from the higher support to 
the lowest point of the wire, x1: 


ee es 
erage lw ho Necat B) 


X is the span in feet. 
x, is the horizontal distance in feet from the higher support 
to the lowest point of the wire. 
t is the difference in height of the two supports in feet. 
S is the stress in pounds in the wire at the highest support, 


with one pound per foot load on the conductor. 


d is the sag in feet measured from the higher point of support. 
Formula (A) is useful when the span and the stress to be al- 
lowed in the wire are given, and formula (B) when the span and 


the sag are given. La 
These formulas are approximate; formula A is correct within 


2 to 4 per cent when neither sag nor difference in heights of 


2234 THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS [June 30 


supports exceeds 15 per cent of the span. Formula B has an 
error of less than 1 per cent under these conditions. 
The following examples will make the use of the curves clear. 
Assume the given conditions to be: 
Size wire No. 00 B. & S. copper. 
Span 500 ft. 
Safe strength of wire 3140 Ib. 
Worst conditions, } in. of ice all around the wire, at 0 deg. 
fahr., and wind pressure of 8 lb. per square foot. 
Weight of wire and ice per foot, 0.940 Ib.; wind pressure 
per foot, 0.910 lb.; resultant force per foot 1.308 lb. 
Then the stress on a one-foot span, for use on Plate II, 
eet 
~ 1.308500 
From the curve the sag for the one-foot span is 0.028, and 
the sag in the actual span 0.026 X500=18 ft. 
The length of the wire in the one-foot span under these 
worst conditions is 1.001938. The length unstressed is 
30,000 


1 -00193 — 76 000,000 =1.000055, where the modulus of 


elasticity is taken as 16,000,000—a usual value for copper. 
This is the length that would be taken by the actual wire 
as it lies tied on the insulators were it unstressed at this 
temperature, viz., 0 deg. fahr. 

No determine the sags for various conditions when the ice 
is removed and no wind exists, determine the load per foot on the 
conductor under the new condition. If the weight of the wire 
only is to be taken, giving 0.403 pounds per foot, the ratio of this 


to the ice and wind condition above is ane = 3t- Therefore, 
the stretch, when plotted on the curve at the same ordinate as 
for the ice and wind condition, would be reduced in the 
same proportion, giving a length 1.000632 instead of 1.00193 as 
before. The new line showing the stretch curve of the wire for 
the no-ice or wind condition must now be drawn from the point 
P, on the axis of X to the new length at the stress 4.8. This 
intersects the length curve at the stress 6.8, the sag for which is 
the value sought, viz., 0.018 for the one-foot span. 

The effect of temperature can be obtained as follows: 

Twenty degrees temperature change will mean a change in 
length of copper wire, other things remaining the same, of 


=4.8. 


7" 


1911] THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS 2235 


0.0000096 X20 = 0.000192 feet on Plate II, using the coefficient 
of expansion 0.0000096. Therefore, the length of wire un- 
stressed for various temperatures will be as follows: 

20 deg., 1.000247; 40 deg., 1.000439; 60 deg., 1.000631; 80 deg., 
1.000823; 100 deg., 1.001015; 120 deg., 1.001207. By drawing 
lines from the several points on the axis of X, parallel to the stretch 
line already determined, (two draftsman’s triangles may very 
conveniently be used for this purpose), a number of points of inter- 
section with the length curve will be obtained, giving the follow- 
ing stress values: for 20 deg., 6.4; for 40 deg., 6.0; 60 deg., 5.7; 
80 deg., 5.3; 100 deg. 5.0; 120 deg., 4.7. The sags: cor- 
responding are, for 20 deg., 0.0195; 40 deg., 0.0207; 60 deg., 
0.022; 80 deg., 0.0235; 100 deg., 0.025; 120 deg., 0.0265 on the 
one-foot curve. Sags on the actual span are obtained by multi- 
plying by the span, 500 feet, vz., for 20 deg., 0.0195 X 500 = 9.75 ft. ; 
for 40 deg., 10.35 ft.; 60 deg., 11:0 ft.; 80° deg., 11.75 ft.; 100 
deg., 12.5 ft.; 120 deg., 13.25 ft.. 

Other conditions of stress, as high wind without ice and high 
‘temperature, may be similarly determined. 

To illustrate a case in which the height of supports is un- 
equal, the following example is added: 

Given, high support 40 ft. above the lower; span 500 ft., 
conductor No. 00 copper, allowable stress 3140 lb. The stress 
allowable, divided by the pounds per foot on the wire, assuming 
that the conditions are the same as the ice conditions of the last 


example, is oe 7 2100- From formula (A) the distance from 


f . . 500 , 4X2400 
the high support to the lowest point of the wire is : + a 


=442 ft. Then the span would be 2x 442 = 884 ft. if the span 
were symmetrical and both sides like the higher side. The 
calculations for the high side can now be made as before, using 
the span as 884 ft. In determining the effect of temperature 
changes with unequal heights of supports, a certain inaccuracy 
is introduced by the assumption that the length of equivalent 
span remains the same, but this can be neglected,.except where 
the conditions require close working. It is evident that the 
effect of temperature changes in such a span will be less than they 
would be in a span twice the value x1; and more. than, would 
be the case with a span twice the length of X —x1; that is, the 
distance from the lower support to the lowest point on the wire. 


2236 THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS [June 30 


Where the span instead of the stress is given, the formula 
(B) may be used and the rest of the computation remains the 
same. 
The sine of the angle made by the wire with the horizontal 
is 3 the length of wire in the span divided by the strain with one 
lb. per ft. weight of wire, and may be obtained from the length 
curve. In Plate I, with the length of wire=1.002, the strain 
1002 

=4.7 and the sine= 2 =0.107, and the angle=6 deg., 7 min. 
AT 

The sag for this point =0.0265 per cent. 


APPENDIX 


The curves of the plates in the present paper are obtained in 
the following manner: 
The equation of the catenary corresponding in position to 


the span wire is 
i} (ct Tat 


where h represents the distance of the lowest point of the catenary 
above the axis of X (not, however, above the ground). 

The sag corresponding to any point x y on this curve is y—h. 
The sine of the angle made by the tangent of the curve at this 
2 2 
point with the verticle is od rs i The length of the curve 
from the lowest point to the point («x y) is Vy?—h?=4 the 
‘length shown on the curves. The stress along the wire at the 
point x y is the total weight (one lb. per ft. assumed) divided 
by the sine of the angle the tangent makes with the vertical, = 
Vy? — f+ a so =y. This is a very simple and interesting 
relation. These equations give the basis for all the necessary 
data for the curve. In the actual calculations a number of 
suitable values of h and x were assumed and the other quan- 
tities calculated from these equations. These values were re- 
duced, of course, to a one-foot span by dividing in each case 
(except for total length of wire) by 2x. In the case of tota] 

length of wire the length 2 V y?—h? must be divided by 2 x. 
The formulas for supports of uneven height are derived as fol- 
lows: 


Ek aban ~~“ 


1911] THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS 2237 


Let J, and I. respectively be the lengths of wire from the 
lowest point of the conductor to the higher and the lower points 
of support, and L the total length of the wire. As_ before 
x1 1 and x2 ye are the coérdinates of the wire respectively at the 
higher and the lower points of support, and / equals the dif- 
ference in height of supports. 

From the general formula for length on the catenary, l= 
Vy2—h? and y1= V12+h; lya=V y2—h? and yo=V (L —1;)?+h? 
but y:—t=y2, then VIp-+h? —t=V (L—h)?P +i? 


—2:Vil2 +H=L?-21,L (C) 
But S=y1= VL2+h? 
Therefore 2—-2¢S=L?—21, L and 


L t t 
-+7(S-) 


Since 5 will be small compared with S it may usually be 


= 


omitted. Also, since J and L respectively nearly equal x and X 
for prevalent values of sag, the latter values may be substituted 
for the former, giving formula (A) above, vz., 


Xx ES 
Ce hoki LEED (A) 


Again: sag=yi—h=d. Combining this with the equation for 


length J? =y’—l’, n=" ae combining this with equation 


(C) above, 


and 


2238 THOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS [June 30 


In this equation only the negative sign of the radical meets the 
conditions of the problem. The quantity ?/L? will always 
be small in practical transmission work, and may be omitted, 
since t/d will always be less than 1. The same substitution of 
x for 1 and X for L may be made as in the case of formula (A) 
and we then have formula (B), viz., 


Paras ® 


which, by an algebraic transformation, equals 
Vd 
Vd—t+Vd 
It is interesting to note that this latter form is the formula 
derived from the parabolic curve for determining the same 
quantity. 
By the formula already given, the sine of the angle with the 


2 P2 
horizontal made by the wire at the point x y is sae ¢ as de- 


rived from the catenary equation. But Vy?—A? is the length of 
wire from the lowest point to the point x y, and y is the total 
strain in the wire with one lb. per ft. load. Therefore, the 
angle can be readily calculated from the plotted length curve 
in the one-foot span, taking for V y?—h? one-half the length on 
the length curve. 


The values from which the curves are plotted are as follows: 


Length Sag Strain 

UH 

} Ne 

Ls , 

de ; 

ae : 

1 ‘ 

Le . 

Jy , 

Ls : 

Ds ; 

are F 

d. (GOOU2E Ts ac arenis aiecs cic ata tect eer ENE OOS ES siicrccctist ttc, San ard dented aah ter: 40.0031 
U SO0O0S 7 Zia Farge scout ire Vee tome O 00ST. ei tes bate Certain aks aoe 33.3371 
. OOCOBLI1 yah tee ten Gee Melee 0, 00438 Fea. tote tte aia Sesto tauns 28.5758 
L MUQ0OG OF Ranss-pan emilee ns Meta mete 0 \QO0S00 2 de crnemnns tha Sapciacicnt rene 25.0050 
Ls OOOLO4 55 3 ci Tk Soe eae oe an 000625. Faisal stunk hice rice 20.0063 
1. OO BO aah tri, cies emia ae ere OL00730L Freire ethos eee ee bee ae 16.6742 
J OO0268 sie odessa aya earache ae 0 .OL000: care cc aot bic ote tees 12.5100 
1 O004T7 oie As ages <r ctedh athards Oy OREO Me te enn nen 10.0125 
L O00G9S Mk. car. teat eee 0.01500... cnc pole oe ae een ee 8.3483 


i 2 >. = . ‘ - . ’ 
1911) _ mE HOMAS: SAG CALCULATIONS 2239 
“Length Sag Strain 
MOOS Geert Pee testa cerca cook OR Oto erento erect eae Weis gene =. ¢.1604 
PROMO G Guna e ere cies suis revere a) 3st) OPOZOOL Ge Gates cies ene ee 6.2700 
HL CO) eh Sab te ete te arses aoe, esas sis 6,00 e OSO2Z2 5 Da eecie sheesisrsiate custen aime seek 5.5781 
_ es OOT OOS ape ieee stents. te letansie fiat’ alls, o.r0 OHOZB OD eter msuse rare hates nstesters neni 5.0250 
Te TROOQOUT: cere ence et atenehs eirces seas ORO 27 DSi ck Merce Gore rerstenegt ome exe 4.5730 
a I OODLO MS sci is orca en NEEiis sayoraecs O}O3004 20... «0 <5 Aion bo Onaga Clore oct 4.1967 
oF OORT Oe tere area, tetee ete aise es areas OST SE Cesear rae, 1 cesronite e suteees teeta ce 3.3709 
~iie A OOGESOk oicres cperebeweericus eaten Se sole (OU EU nly Ree ate ON iey rea as career ae Ges He 2.5502 
é SUN (OUOAS OMe -I6 spa ego et tesyrire) e= tele he eae OHOGER ES amos a trenctne yce« skatertisyeus.cis soos 2.0628 
FS MNOS DOGS gente ere ryeg eel Soe eum slie sie) oe OOD OO mee ructre eran mimo ae caer aavcashereyott 1.7422 
: iL ORV SY Oa ag Anta cac apen amomro-2e OO SSA O Mee tercte, icc ts nicune ria teverod cbonvoisiene 1.5170 
- | TACRGERIE | Saeed sodos ed Pee Oe LOSS oe nae Pierre se Vener esas ele cna SE 1.3513 
ys EASA Oe eee cme ome ches uss siete OGVE AAA teen were arematon crouse sie mncle 1.2255 
- NEOA2 UG Heri ya hae pres ihe suteso OUST OS ra cesar er lakaietsae deena tac. bass 1.1276 
. TROD SHue ees cre ter se craatermehe erates OSIAOORS Gareseretia tt write ra stens ote esa 1.0501 
ov: PE OGIO reser te ae core ene WUE See oe Be ation eet ceils & Check aero ae ae 0.9879 
a MROSSO SE Gace tletste ccs stars eras as ne BOE S226 ser teractse orsonctnamicusispeois= cde masa 0.8965 
Ree —_ 
> 


‘cA? 

Py 
i] 

tA 


-“y a tes 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


: THE MECHANICAL AND ELECTRIC 
CHARACTERISTICS OF TRANSMISSION LINES 


BY HAROLD PENDER AND H. F. THOMSON 


The object of this paper is to present in compact form the 
data and formulas, together with their derivations, required for the 
determination of the mechanical and electric characteristics of 
transmission lines, together with a set of charts whereby the 
various mathematical operations involved may be accomplished 
rapidly and with the minimum effort. The treatment naturally 
falls under two headings, A—Mechanical Characteristics, and 
B—Electric Characteristics. Summaries of the working sym- 


- bols and equations for Part A and Part B follow the general 


discussion under these heads. 


A. MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The following discussion will be limited to the consideration 
of the characteristics of a perfectly flexible wire suspended from 
two fixed points of support. Actual wire spans closely approxi- 


mate this condition, particularly when the successive spans are 


all of the same length, whether the supporting insulators be of 
the pin or of the suspension type. In the case of successive spans 
of unequal length the change in tension in the various spans, 
due to the variation of temperature and the mechanical load on 
the wire, will not be the same in each span and consequently 
such changes will produce a resultant force on the insulator, caus- 
ing thereby a slight deflection of the top of the tower; or a de- 
flection of the insulator only, if the latter is of the suspension 
type. This motion of the points of support will tend to equalize 
the tensions in the various spans. 

2241 


2242 PENDER AND THOMSON: - [June 30 


In the design of a wire span two problems must be solved: 
1. At what tension (or sag) must the wire be strung in order 
that the tension in the span may not exceed a definite limit 
under the worst conditions of temperature and of mechanical 
loading (due to ice and wind)?; and 2. What will be the maximum 
vertical sag of the wire for a given variation in loading and tem- 
perature? The factors which enter into these two problems are 
the following: 

1. The length of the span. 

2. The material of the wire. 

3. The size of the wire. 

4. The coefficient of linear expansion of the wire. For copper 
this coefficient is 9.6X10-* and for aluminum 12.8X10~, the 
temperature in each case being expressed in deg. fahr. 

5. The modulus of elasticity of the wire. The modulus of 
elasticity for copper or aluminum is not strictly a constant, but 
may be assumed as such as a first approximation. For copper 
this modulus varies from 12X10® to 1610°, depending upon 
the quality of the wire and upon whether the wire is stranded or 
solid. The former figure is generally used for stranded copper 
wires. For aluminum wire, which is always stranded when used 
for’ transmission lines, the modulus is equal to 9X10°. The 
modulus M is equal to the increase of tension (A JT) in pounds 
per square inch required to produce an elongation (A X) of a 
given length of wire (A) divided by the ratio of the elongation 
to the original length, 7.e., 


~ATr AA VAL 
M=AT+"=) 55 


6. The maximum tension in pounds per square inch to which 
the wire should be subjected. This maximum allowable tension 
is usually taken at one-half the ultimate tensile strength of the 
wire, about 30,000 lb. per sq. in. for copper and 13,000 lb. per 
sq. in. for aluminum. 

7. The maximum external load to which the wire may be 
subjected due to the collection of sleet on the wire and the 
pressure ‘of the wind against it. This, of course, will depend 
upon climatic conditions, but even for a given section of the 
country, there is considerable difference of opinion as to what ~ 
should be assumed as a reasonable external load. The Joint 
Committee on Overhead Line Construction has recently recom- 


a 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2243 


mended that the maximum loading for high-tension crossings 
be taken as that due to an ice coating 0.5-in. thick all around the 
wire, plus a wind pressure of eight lb. per sq. ft. of the projected 
area of this ice cylinder. To meet this requirement on a long 
span, especially with aluminum wire, would require a relatively 
large sag, from 30 to 100 ft., depending on the length of span 


- and size of wire. This would require a prohibitive height of 


tower, at least for level country work. For cross country spans 


it would, therefore, seem advisable to assume a less heavy load- 


ing, particularly as an ice coating of 0.5-in. and a wind velocity 
of 60 miles per hr. (corresponding approximately to eight lb. 
wind pressure) will seldom, if ever, exist simultaneously. 

8. The minimum temperature at which the maximum ex- 
ternal load occurs. Here again there is considerable difference 
of opinion, even for given climatic conditions. The Joint Com- 
mittee on Overhead Line Construction recommends the assump- 
tion of a minimum temperature of — 20 deg. fahr. for lines situated 
in the northern part of this country. For cross country spans 
the assumption of a higher temperature would seem more rea- 
sonable, in view of the fact that sleet seldom exists on a wire 
when the temperature is much below freezing. 

9. The temperature at which the wire is to be strung. As 
an average stringing temperature 70 deg. fahr. is a reasonable 
assumption. 

10. The maximum temperature to which the wire may be 
subjected. For lines located in the northern part of this country 
a maximum temperature of 120 deg. fahr. is reasonable. It 
should be noted that the temperature of a wire exposed to the 
sun is considerably higher than the temperature of the surround- 
ing air. 

The interrelation of these various quantities in the case of a 
wire suspended from two fixed points of support will be consid- 
ered in detail. 


DETERMINATION OF THE RATIO (K) OF THE RESULTANT FORCE 
ON THE WIRE TO THE WEIGHT OF THE WIRE 

The total force on a span of wire under any condition of me- 
chanical loading consists in general of three components: 1, 
its own weight, 2, the weight of the ice coating, and 3, the force 
acting on it due to wind pressure. It is usual to‘assume that the 
wind pressure is horizontal, although it may have a considerable 
vertical component, particularly if the span is parallel to the 


2244 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


base of a steep hill. The other two components of the re- 
sultant force on the wire are vertical. 
Let w=weight in pounds of one foot of the wire. 
d=diameter of wire in inches. 
i=thickness of ice coating in inches. 
v=wind pressure in pounds per square foot perpendicular 
to the wire. 
K =ratio of total force on the wire to weight of wire under 
these same conditions. 
The vertical force in pounds on one foot length of the wire 
under a given mechanical load is then 


57 


T eg hile Binh 
wig 7 @420) a | TON (dts) 


where the weight of ice is taken as 57 lb. per cu. ft. (Tests 
show that the sleet formed on a wire weighs less than this, due 
probably to air bubbles in it—this figure is, however, on the safe 
side.) The horizontal force acting on one foot of the wire is 


v : 
— 2 
19 (¢ +24) 
The resultant force acting on one foot of the wire is then 


\ (w128icd +i)) + (ate ay 


and therefore the value of the ratio K is 


Ke \ (14024 sera), (uate (1) 


The values of this ratio K for the various sizes of wire between 
1,000,000 circular mils and No. 6, B. & 5. gage, for both copper 
and aluminum, for no ice and for ice thicknesses of }, 3 and ?in., 
and for wind pressures from 0 to 12 lb. per sq. ft., are plotted 
on Chart No. 1. On this chart is also given a short table showing 
the relation between indicated wind velocity and pressure per 
square foot. The latter is deduced from the formula given by 
H. W. Buck in the Transactions of the International Electric 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2245 


Congress, 1904; this formula is that the wind pressure in pounds 
per square foot of projected area of a round cylinder of diameter 
d, produced by an actual wind velocity of V miles per hour is 
0.00021 V? di. 


THE EQUATIONS OF A WIRE SPAN 

In the following discussion the wind pressure will be assumed 
perpendicular to the vertical plane through the two points of 
support and the pressure per foot of wire in the direction of the 
wind will be assumed constant at all points irrespective of the 
angle between the wire and the direction of the wind. This 
assumption is not strictly realized, since the wire near the points 
of support will make an angle of less than 90 deg. with the direc- 
tion of the wind, and therefore to obtain an exact solution the 
wind pressure should be resolved into its two components, one 
acting in the direction of, and the other perpendicular to, the 
wind. Since the angle between the wire and the direction of 
the wire is in general very nearly 90 deg., the assumption that 
the wind pressure actually exerted on the wire is equal to the 
pressure which would be exerted were the wire in a vertical 
plane normal to the wind will not introduce an appreciable error, 
in comparison with the variations in the wind pressure which 
will occur due to the actual variation in wind velocity at dif- 
ferent parts of the span. 

The general case of the points of support at different elevations 
will also be considered, and the wire will be assumed to lie ina 
plane through the two points of support parallel to the direction 
of the resultant force. This assumption is not strictly realized 
when there exists a combination of wind pressure with the two 
points of support at different elevations, but is strictly true in all 
cases when the points of support are at the same elevation, and 
in the former case gives a solution as nearly correct as can be 
obtained without an elaborate analysis. 

Fig. 1 is a diagram of a span of wire in perspective. This 
diagram shows the general case when the points of support are 
at different elevations and when there is a horizontal component 
of the force (wind pressure) acting on the wire. Fig. 2 shows 
only the plane A E F B, which is the plane in which the wire lies. 
When there is no wind this plane is vertical. 

The plane A E F B is determined by the line A B and the di- 
rection of the resultant external force. The planes A E R and 
B FU are determined by the two components of the resultant 


22.46 PENDER AND THOMSON: ‘ [June 30 


force. AG is drawn in the plane A EFB through A per- 
pendicular to the resultant force. EO Fis drawn in the plane 
AE FB perpendicular to the resultant force and through the 
point O where the wire is also perpendicular to the resultant force. 
Let f=tension in pounds at any point P of the wire. 

a=angle between the tangent to the wire at this point 
and the line A G drawn perpendicular to the re- 

sultant external force. 


’ Fie. 1 


F=tension in pounds at the point O where the wire is 
perpendicular to the resultant force. 
«=the horizontal distance between the point P and the 
point O- 
y=perpendicular distance from P to the line O X. 
\=length of wire in feet from O to P. 
d \=an elementary length of the wire in feet at the point P. 
K w=resultant force in pounds acting on a one-foot length of 
the wire due to its own weight, the weight of the ice 
coating and wind pressure. 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2247 


m=weight in pounds of a bar of the conductor material 
one foot long and one square inch in cross section. 
(For copper m=3.85; for aluminum m=1.16). 

T =tension in wire in thousands of pounds per square inch 
at the point O. 


Acting on the elementary length d X are three forces in the 
directions indicated. The resultant of these three forces must be 
zero. Hence, resolving these forces parallel to OX and OY 
respectively, we have 


(ft+df) cos (a+d a)—f cos a=0 
(ft+df) sin (a+d a)—fsina—Kwdh=0 


hy 


----}- giro pono 


Fic. 2 


But since d a@ is an infinitesimal angle its cosine is unity and its 
sine is equal to da. Hence, 


cos (a+d a)=cosa—sinada 

sin (a+d a) =sin ebebs ada 

which, substituted in the above equations, give 

cosadf—fsinada=0 
sinadf+fcosada=Kwdx 
which may in turn be written 

d (f cos a) =0 (2) 
d(fsina)=KwdxX (3) 


2248 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


Integrating these two equations, we get 
fcosa=F (4) 


and 
fsina=Kw Xd (5) 


Equation (4) shows that the component of the tension per- 
pendicular to the resultant force is the same at all points of the 
wire. Equation (5) shows that the component of the tension at 
any point of the wire in the direction of the resultant force on the 
wire due to its own weight and external load is equal to the value 
of this force acting on that portion of the wire between this 
point and point O at which the wire is perpendicular to the re- 
sultant force. The ratio of (5) and (4) gives 


tan a= <2 A (6) 


This equation involves only the constants K, w and F and the 
angle aw and distance \; the two latter depend only on the shape 
of the curve in which the wire hangs. By substituting for @ 
and X their values in terms of the coérdinates x and y, we can 
obtain the equation of this curve in rectangular coérdinates. 
In (6) substitute g=tan @ and differentiate with respect to x; 
this gives 


The integral of this equation is* 
5 Kwex 
qg=sinh FF (7) 


*For any argument uw the hyperbolic sine is 


pt 


2 


sinh “= 
and the hyperbolic cosine is 


e@+e—¥ 
cosh 4 = 


Chart No. 5 shows the relation between u, sinh , and cosh 1. 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2249 


Substitute for g its value tana= a and integrate; this gives 


ee. Kwx 
Hela ee [ cosh = aga | (8) 


This is the equation of the curve in which the wire hangs; it is 
the equation of the catenary. 
The substitution in (6) of the value of g=tan @ given by (7) 
gives 
F Kwx 


hes sinh (9) 


which is an expression for the length of wire \ from O to the point 
P in terms of the corresponding distance x measured along the 
line OX. 

Since the weight w of the wire per foot is equal to its cross 
section multiplied by the weight m of a rod one foot long and one 
square inch in cross section, and since the tension in pounds F 
is equal to the cross section of the wire multiplied by 1000 times 
the tension JT in thousands of pounds per square inch, 


Hence equation (8) may be written 


_ 1000 T Kmx\_ | 
v= "Km- [ cosh ianas A) 440) 


and equation (9) may be written 


X= 1000 Fos ah (557) (11) 
Km 


The hyperbolic cosine of an argument “ may be expanded 
into the series 


ete ree 7 tte tec 


2250 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


and the hyperbolic sine into the series 


. us u® nu? 
sinh w=u-+ 31 + BI -- 71 ee eerste 
Therefore 
U2 uz us ) 
cosh ae ae oe (1+ 2 +360 7 Sh tear las 
c u? oe ) 
sinh u=u (14-5 +499 + Meiers 


Hence, for 1 <0.48, we may write, with an error of less than 2 per 
cent, 


2 
cosh u—1= = - 


Also, with an error of less than 0.05 per cent, 


; uw 
sinh u=u (1+ 6 


Hence for 


K mx<480 T (12) 


equation (10) may be written, with an error of less than 2 per 
Cent: 
_K m x? 


*~ 9000 T (13) 


ls 


which is the equation of a parabola. In all practical cases, 
except for extreme conditions of loading or for very long spans, 
the condition (12) is satisfied, and therefore for practical work 
the equation of a span of wire may be represented with sufficient 
accuracy by the parabola (18). 

Under the same conditions, equation (11) for the length of 
wire between O and P may be written, with an error of less than 


0.05 per cent, 
Kmx\2 
As 1 
Ang [uta (isan r) ] 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2251 


But from (13) 


2 
hextz 2 (14) 


DEFLECTION AND SAG. 


From the above equations the deflection and vertical sag of 
the wire for a given tension T and loading factor K may be 
deduced readily. In addition to the above symbols, let (see 
Figs. 1 and 2) 

J=length of span in feet; 1.e., the horizontal distance be- 
tween the points of support. 
j,=distance A G in feet. 
lp>=distance E O in feet. 
D=deflection in feet of the point O from the horizontal line 
through the two points of support when points of 
support are on the same level. 


pais =percentage deflection when points of support are 


on. the same level. 
- K'=ratio of vertical component of external force to weight of 
wire (K’ is the value of K when there is no wind). 


, 
g- KP 


—vertical sag corresponding to the deflection D. 


h=difference in elevation in feet between the two points 
of support. 
h,=the distance BG. 
D,=deflection in feet of the point O from the line A G (Figs. 
1 and 2.) 
S,=vertical sag in feet corresponding to the deflection Dj. 


From equation (13) and Fig. 2, 


K m Ly? 
Va dD, 2000 i 5 (15) 
and 
yo=Dithy Boge (ish) (15) 


2252 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


Subtracting we get 


Km 
hi=o000 TF (1; 2 ly Io) 
or 
By stm tet) 
l= fie a (16) 


The relations between /; and / and between h, and h may be 
deduced from Fig. 1. The plane BCG is perpendicular to 
AC and therefore perpendicular to the plane ACG. Also 
the angle BGA is a right angle. Hence the angle BGC isa 
right angle. Therefore 
i 
<4 


‘= = 


h,=h cos B= 


Also, A C is perpendicular to G C, since A C is perpendicular to 
the plane BG U; therefore 


L=VP+R? sin? B=1 \1+( h.sin ay 


The ratio of A to / in any practical case will not exceed 0.25 
and the angle 6 will not exceed 45 deg. Hence /; will differ from 1 
by less than 2 per cent. Asa first approximation then we may 
write equation (16) 


l 2 
i [1 2000 T K'h (162) 


—K*mP 


For h=0, that is, for the points of support on the same level, 


l ; ; 
lo= >i the point O is then at the center of the span. Hence, - 


for points of support at the same level, 


KmP 
P= 9000 T (17) 


The percentage deflection is then 


Kml 


P= 30 T- (18) 


‘. , 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2253 


Chart No. 2 gives the value of this percentage deflection for both 
copper and aluminum for the various values of (K 1) and T which 
are likely to arise in practise. The vertical sag corresponding 
to D is 


K'D 
K 


For a difference of elevation h we then have, from (16a) and 
(17), 
mY Kh 
seas | agen (19) 


D is the deflection corresponding to the same length of span, 
same tension, and same loading but the two points of support at 
the same elevation. Substituting (19) in (15) gives 


ToaNe 
aheen (1- ; =) (20) 
and the vertical sag corresponding to D, will not exceed 
Zeke D, 
Say (a) 


(An inspection of Fig. 1 will show that the vertical sag may be 
slightly less than this; formula (21), however, is on the safe side.) 

From equation (19) it is seen that the distance of the point O 
to the lower point of support becomes negative when 


4K D 


h < ob Gar 


This means that when h< : a the point O lies outside of the 


span; 7.e., the wire has a continuous upward slope from the lower 
to the higher support. This condition is illustrated in Fig. 3. 
Since the vertical force downward on the insulator due to the 
wire between A and B is equal to K’ w lp, if lo is negative there 
will be an upward pull at A. 

If this force is greater than the downward pull due to the span 
on the other side of this support, the resultant force on the 


2254 PENDER AND THOMSON: {June 30 


insulator will be upward. In laying out a line this condition 
should of course be avoided by relocating the poles. 

When the point O coincides with the lower point of support, 
lo=0, and the horizontal distance between O and the higher 
point of support is equal to the length of the span /. Hence the 
x 


m , . 
greatest value of 1000 T (see equations 10 and 12) for any point 


and this in turn is equal to 


: : Kml 
in the span is equal to 1000 T 


ms where # is the per cent deflection which would be produced 


by the same tension and loading were the points of support on 


B 


the same level (see equation 18). Hence the condition that 
the approximate equations (13) and (14) may be applied is that 


p<6 per cent 


Hence the maximum error which can arise from the use of 
Chart No. 2 for the determination of deflection and sag is less 
than 2 per. cent. 


EFFECT OF VARIATIONS IN TEMPERATURE AND MECHANICAL. 
LOADING 


We wish next to determine how the tension and deflection of 
a span of wire varies when the temperature of the wire changes 
and when the mechanical load on the wire changes (due to the 
formation or melting of the sleet and changes in wind pressure.) 
We shall assume that the points of support remain rigidly fixed. 


:- 
s 
‘a 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2255 


Let 
t=temperature in deg. fahr. under any given set of con- 
ditions. 
T=tension at O in thousands of pounds per square inch 
under these same conditions. 
K=ratio of resultant force on wire to weight of wire under 
these same conditions. 
K' =ratio of vertical component of resultant force to weight of 
wire under these same conditions. 
\,=length of the wire in feet under these same conditions. 
to, To, Ko, Ko’, Ao designate the same quantities for any other 
set of conditions. 
a=coefficient of linear expansion of the wire per deg. fahr. 
M=modulus of elasticity of the wire in (pounds per square 
inch) units. i 
Other symbols as above. 
From equations (14) and (15) and Figs. 1 and 2 we have that 
the length of the wire in the span under any conditions of tem- 
perature and loading is 


i 


: 2 D,+h 
Ar =h+F a +1— Io+3 Or 


2 
=iat (saaorr) [B—3 1] U—b)h ..- 


4 pow 


From equation (16a) 


take saad Pr 2000 TK 
mal ae 
2000 Th K! 

a Siler chao Kim P 


whence 


Km \2 2000 Th K’ \? 
matte (A) a [t44(Peem 


2256 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


or 
Kmi\ fe ay 
es 1 ce 1 =“ 
From (18) 
Ko mise p 
2000 T 25 


where is the per cent deflection for the same condition of tem- 
perature, loading and tension, but for points of support on the 
same level. Hence the expression for \y may be written 


et [14545013 (> | 7 (22) 


Similarly, for any other conditions of temperature and loading 
the length of the wire is 


oe o=1[1 +eet a (ay 


Hence the change of length due to the change in temperature 
and loading is 


di dowd [ Bree 3750. +4 (5 r) - : a = ; y] 3 


If the points of support remain fixed this change of length can 
result only from a stretching (or contraction) of the wire due to 
change in tension and to an expansion (or contraction) of the 
wire due to change in temperature. This change in length may, 
therefore, also be expressed in terms of the temperature coeffi- 
cient a, the difference of temperature t—to, the modulus of elas- 
ticity M, and the change in the resultant tension in the wire. 

The resultant tension in the wire, at any point a distance \ 
measured along the wire from the point O, is equal to 


'=Vfe+(K w \)?= ra] 1+(Km dy 


See equations (4) and (5). 


ah Oe — 
‘ 
¥. ’ 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2257 


The maximum value of 7” for a given value of T will occur at 
the higher point of support, 1.e., for 


h=1—b= 5 1+ fey 


See Fig. 1 and equation (19). Also, from equation (18) 


Kml _ ?: 
2000 T 25 


whence the maximum value of J” is 
rer it E(- T4KD 24) 


The maximum value of p likely to arise in practise is 6 per cent, 


ae, 


and the maximum value of h is ce - (lowest point of the wire 


coinciding with lower point of support), and hence the maximum 
value of T’ likely to arise in practise is 


T’=1.11T 


The limiting case of a 6 per cent deflection rarely occurs, and 
even in this case the resultant tension is equal to the higher value, 
1.11 T only at the higher point of support; for the greater part 
of the length of the wire the resultant tension is sensibly equal 
to the tension T at the point O. Hence in calculating the stretch- 
ing of the wire by the resultant tension we may take, as a close 
approximation, the resultant tension at every point equal 
to the tension at O. 

The change in length due to a change of temperature from 


ty to ¢ is 
a (t—to) Ai 


and the change in length due to a change in tension from 7 
tof 4s 
M 


But since the coefficient of expansion a is a very small quantity 
(of the order of 10°) the term a (t—to) may be neglected in 


2258 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


comparison with unity for any value of t—¢o likely to arise in 
practise (¢—tp will never be greater than 150 deg. fahr.). Hence 
the total change in length (A1— Ao) may be written 


-r=[« Gaye) x 


Again, for p<6 per cent, A, will differ from / by less than one per 
cent (see equation 23); hence, with an error of less than one per 
cent, 


1000 ee mo |) 


M—do=[a (t—to) + (25) 


Equating (23) and (25) we have 


3.75X108 T » 3.75X108 ae 
(oS OT) oe ST) 


rive fe-0- BSTC] 00 


For the points of support on the same level (A=0) or for no 
Rigs: ei KE 

Ko Kk} 2 Par 
ticular instance of which is no wind pressure, in which case the 
plane of the 3 remains vertical), this equation reduces to 


change in the position of the plane of the span ( 


3.75 X10°'T 3.75 X 10° T 

ae 2 See )- (e: en rt) 3750 a (t—to) (27) 
‘Hence, when the tension 7) at temperature f) and the loading 
factor Ky are known, the tension T at any other temperature f¢ 
and loading factor K may be determined by solving this equation 
for T, after substituting for » and po their values 


_Kmil Kom l 
=“g9 7 and bo= "e097 


This,equation, however, is a cubic in T, and,its solution by alge- 
braic, methods is- extremely difficult. By making, use of Chart 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2259 


No. 2, however, its solution may be obtained without any 
arithmetical computations whatever other than a simple multi- 
plication.* 

The curved lines on this chart give p? as ordinates (actual 
vertical distances equal p?; the scale on the left of the chart gives 
p, which is the square root of the vertical distances) against T as 
abscissas. The numbers on the curves give the corresponding 
value of (K 1). Two scales for the tension T are given,’one for 
copper and one for aluminum, this arrangement making possible 
the use of the same set of curves for both materials. The three 
heavy straight lines at the base of the chart are drawn so that 
the ordinate (actual distance) of any point on any one of these 
lines is equal to 

3.75 X10° T 
teat 


where T is the abscissa of this point on the proper tension scale 
and M is the modulus of elasticity of the wire.t 

The small vertical scales in the lower left hand corner of the 
chart marked ‘‘ Temperature Correction ”’ are laid off so that the 
vertical distance between any two temperature marks ¢ and fo 


is equal to 3750 a (t—to) 


SUMMARY 
The method of solving equation (27) by means of Chart No. 2 
is given below. First, however, a summary of the working 
symbols will be convenient: 


l=length of span in feet. 
h=difference in elevation of points of support in feet. 


*The physical constants for copper-clad steel wire whose conductivity 
is 40 per cent of that for the same size of copper wire are: 
a =6.7 X 10-® per deg. fahr.; M = 22 X 10° lb. per square in.; m = 
3.58 lb. per ft. The additions to Chart No. 2 for operating with this wire 
are as follows: 

1. Tension scale equal to 0.93 of copper tension scal2 per in. 

2. Modulus guide line through the origin and the point p = 2.8, 
Tcopper = 50. 

3. Temperature correction scale equal to 1.48 of that per in. for copper. 

tA serious objection to another graphical solution for calculations of 
this sort which was published by one of the authors in the Electrical World, 
Sept. 28, 1907, was the necessity of a separate guide line for every length 
of span. This difficulty has been obviated in the above method. The 
angular location of the tension axis in the present form of chart was sug- 
gested by Mr. R. S. Brown of Telluride, Colo. 


2260 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


Ty =the tension at the point O (Figs. 1 and 2) in thousands of 
pounds per square inch under any given condition of 
temperature and loading. 

to = temperature in deg. fahr. when the tension is 7». 

Ko=ratio of resultant force due to weight of wire, weight of 
ice and wind pressure, to weight of wire (Chart No. 1) 
when the tension is 7. 

Ko’ =ratio of the vertical component of this force to weight of 
wire when the tension is T (K’)= value of K from Chart 
No. 1 corresponding to the given size of wire and the 
given thickness of ice, but no wind.) 

T =tension in thousands of pounds per square inch for any 
other condition of temperature and loading. 

t=temperature in deg. fahr. when the tension is T. 

K=ratio of resultant force due to weight of wire, weight 
of ice and wind pressure, to weight of wire when the 
tension is J. (For no ice and no wind K =1.) 

K’'=ratio of the vertical component of this force to weight of 
wire when tension is 7. (For no ice and no wind 
K’'=1). 

D=deflection in feet of the lowest point of the wire from 
the line through the points of support when the tension 
is T and the points of support are on the same level. 
D is measured in the plane of the curve in which the 
wire hangs. 


pat? =per cent deflection corresponding to D. 


S=vertical sag in feet of the lowest point of wire below the 
points of support when the tension is T and the points 
of support are on the same level. 

D,=deflection in feet of the point O from the line A G (see 
Figs. 1 and 2) when the tension is T and the points 
of support are not on the same level. (For h= 


4KD : : : 
Ticts the lower point of support is the lowest point of 


the wire.) 

S,=vertical sag in feet of the lowest point of the wire below 
the lower point of support. 

a=temperature coefficient of wire when temperature is 
expressed in deg. fahr. (for copper a=9.6X10-*, for 
aluminum a=12.8X10-). 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2261 


To find the tension T and the corresponding deflection and 
sag when I, h, To, to, Ko, Ko’, t, K and K’ are given, Chart No. 2 
: . a eH 
is used as follows, when — cha Oa 

1. On a straight strip of paper mark a reference point A 
and vertically above this point mark a second point B such that 
the distance A B is equal to t—¢) measured on the temperature 
scale. 

2. Next place the strip of paper with its edge along the ordinate 
passing through the tension JT) and make the point A coincide 
with the intersection of the edge of the strip and the curve marked 
with the number equal to (Ko/)._ Mark on the strip the point C 
where the heavy straight line marked with the proper modulus 
M intersects the edge of the strip. 

3. Keep the strip of paper vertical and slide the point C along 
the modulus line until the edge of the strip at B intersects the 
curve marked with the number equal to (K/).- The abscissa 
of the point B is then equal to the tension T corresponding 
to the temperature ¢ and loading factor K. 

The ordinate of the point B (read on the vertical scale on the 
left) is the per cent deflection corresponding to this tension dy 
and loading factor K when the points of support are on the same 
level. Then the corresponding deflection in feet is 


reg 
Pe 100 (28) 
and the vertical sag is 
KOD 
S=—— (29) 


If the difference in elevation of the two points of support is h, 
the deflection of the lowest point of the wire is 


y/ 
TD ibs tiv)’ (30) 


and the vertical deflection is 


s=s (1- es ) (31) 


4K D 


2262 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


The deflection and sag corresponding to Ty) are calculated 
in exactly the same manner from the per cent deflection po 
corresponding to the tension TJ) and the loading factor Ko; 
whether the sag corresponding to T will be greater than that cor- 
responding to 7) will depend upon the temperatures and loading 
factors. 

In case the points of support are not on the same level and 
there is a change in the direction of the plane of the wire, (7.e., 


/ 
Ka #~— so), the new tension T must be found by solving equa- 


tion (26). ‘This can also be done by means of Chart No. 2, for» 
the term 
oF Ce) - (Ge) ] 
2aP [( oe ( Ks 


is equivalent to a decrease of temperature numerically equal to 
this expression. Hence the only change in the procedure de- 
scribed above is to consider the temperature rise not as t—fo, 


but as 
Ie Rey teat ] 
Lomi Sear yer. [( K ) (a 


The rest of the procedure is exactly the same as before. This 


, / 


; ‘ K 
correction due to the difference between = - and — KR may be 
0 


important, particularly in passing from the condition of no ice 


and no wind to the condition of ice and wind, for in the latter 
2 


/ 
case (3 ) may be as great as 4 (45 deg. deflection of the plane 
0 / 


of the wire from the vertical) whereas for the former <= 4; 


Similarly, in the reverse problem of passing from the condition 
of ice and wind to the condition of no ice and no wind there will 
be a like correction, but the formula without this correction 
factor will give results on the safe side. 

It should also be noted that the maximum resultant tension 
in the span under any condition of temperature and loading is 
not equal to the tension Tat the point O but in general is equal to 


AE 


rer i+ ee 625 (isthe (38) 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2263 


(see equation 24). Similarly, the maximum resultant tension 


under the “ zero ”’ conditions is 
2. h Kot 2 
rental ie Be ES) 
0 =Toa| 1+ Ze (1+ sae (38a) 
EXAMPLE 


Given a No.0 B &S aluminum wire;_/ = 200 ft:; 7) = 13; 
(t — to.) = 70 deg. fahr. for $ in. of ice and 8 lb. per sq. ft. of 
wind Ko = 11.6: K,’ = 6.7; forno ice nor wind K = K’ = 1. 


Then b=0.0.£t. h=10,0 ft. 
h? ” 2 / 2 \ 
@-1)- sen [(4-) -(ee) | 4.9 
«Ser iat: | eats Big ro A ae 2320 2320 
TR eeaeT ET on RAW EN VARS St 200 200 
EE De ge I Mites eee Er Bee? 2.58 %G 2.58 % ° 
fp OR cert Bee DeLO tte 2 OSAt; 
Eh OLN tn, tei wee Sr 2.98 ft. 155716. 
I OR SS RGR Sep GO 1.28thou- 1.92thou- 
sand lb. sand lb. 

tA cS Ss SRO ee ee eee Df He 0.49 % 
VOR. ORAL a eee eras 4.54 ft. 0 eae 8 
C15, Ohba SROUP J RRR Ry 4.54 ft. 0.9 ft. 


B. ELECTRIC CHARACTERISTICS 

When a given amount of electric power is transmitted over a 
transmission line to a substation or other receiver, a certain 
amount of power is lost in the line. There isin general a difference 
in the voltage between wires at the two ends of the line, and the 
power factor at the sending and receiving ends will be dif- 
ferent. The power loss, voltage loss, and change in power 
factor in general depend upon the following factors: 
. The amount of power delivered. 
The voltage at which the power is delivered. 
. The power factor at the receiving end. 
The frequency of the system. 
The kind of line—three-phase or single-phase. 
The length of the line. 
The size of the wires. 
. The material of the wires. 


eee tee oS Boa 


2264 4 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


9. The temperature of the wires. 
10. The arrangement of the wires on the poles; particularly 
their distance apart. 


The interrelation of these various factors will be considered | 


in detail. 


RESISTANCE, REACTANCE AND CAPACITY, SUSCEPTANCE AND 
LEAKAGE 

For wires of the size ordinarily used in practise and for any 
frequency up to 60 cycles, the resistance of a solid wire per unit 
length depends solely upon the material of the wire and its cross 
section. A stranded cable has a slightly greater resistance than 
a solid wire, due to the spiralling of the individual wires which 
made up the cable. In the table on Chart No. 3 are given the 
resistance and weight per mile of both copper and aluminum 
for the various sizes between a No. 16 and 1,000,000 circular 
mils. This table is calculated for a temperature of 20 deg. cent. 
(=68 deg. fahr.), assuming a temperature coefficient of 0.42 per 
cent per degree centigrade; the conductivity of copper is taken 
as 98 per cent and the conductivity of aluminum as 62 per cent 
of Matthiessen’s standard; and the resistance and the weight of 
the stranded wires are taken one per cent greater than for solid 
wire of the same cross section. 

The reactance of a wire in ohms is equal to 27f LX10%, 
where f is the frequency and L the self-induction in millihenrys. 
The self-induction of a round solid wire of radius a inches when 
the return wire is parallel to it and at a distance D inches from it 
(center to center) is 


p) = : 
L =0.7411 logio ? 40.0805 millihenrys per mile. 


This formula applies also when the return circuit consists of two 
wires each of which is at a distance D from the wire in ques- 
tion; that is, the above formula gives the inductance per mile of 
each wire whether the system is single-phase or three-phase, pro- 
vided in the latter case the wires are arranged symmetrically 
(i.e., form the three edges of an equilateral prism). The in- 
ductance of a stranded wire is practically equal to that of a 
solid wire of the same cross section of conducting material; 
for a given number on the B. & S. gage or for a given area 


in circular mils the inductance is therefore independent of | 


whether the wire is solid or stranded. 


IM ona BTWATEMOO FVII 


| 
$80.0 


ge S0msiq 

atl ott Hr gat 
ee odt dtiw beausor ot) 
>. dtiw beduso onil Ietaosin 
bedt-bas 2193090 199N) 

glo 19qo1g ont 4 


Wo 9104 
-ono01 bag domsjoubAl 
| bobas: 132 bas biloe ror eons 10 sonBIalb B48 9" 
Isoitaebi Visoitosig eo1w ; ai someioubai 5 
jootasqeasise bar (tiosgso ER6L0,0 Tiosgse g| 
If iloe tot 2o1rw bobastta sot agloyo 00-d8 SOMBTD) 
pO tefginedt oF. N WN sonsteib 6 golay%o.00. ¢R somKety 
pa dargnibaogesTi09 edt fot 


PUA lATIMOUODIAT 


—— 


aid 


(tare . alo. | | ne Ho | 
} Tt | ad Ai 
=a [tio ; L 7 seh aaa 
@!0 
(°08) 
20/9 


agizar botodosid heot enottoaut botoxos1d 40% 


+ ; 


space 


{2 


i ai asceail’ 


f rf ‘pana 


ir ai | sonniqsoa wioaqed) | 
Hy - godenotoil 
aaIOYo 


laa | { eqaroy' 
eardO ati gonsiosas Y 


ebavod) amdO 
oliM 19q | oli M 19q 


mk out oniarieieb oT 
1 2/10 SOMRIOLO'S UWiosqso 
aqacis 10 Siw osia YH8 10% 
Isaogsib. alt to noitosztotat 
if ond ditive otiw. to oxia novia 
od oot to rod mit novig-odt. ~— 
‘hacomteeae ovods ‘Uleokisoy 


‘% “. ~ gaaMAxa tf 
ou rods eB 10'L 
oe wee 
a iM [ 
ocd 2 thar ‘nog absra'toroisn 
soften r9q-ento TS.0 
Kins you 6 ea 80.0 ~~ 


0/707 (Sine) 


(OB) 9°) ( Axgle) 
08 gigs | 


ap Ie 01,0 (Sine) 5 2ar 


F bee 
» Pee 


ye * . y 
¥ me tes a) ad ’ iy? 'Pandoc Re eae 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2265 


The value of the inductance per mile of wire for various sizes 
of wire and for various spacings is given on Chart No. 3. This 
particular form of chart arises from the fact that the inductance 


err? 
depends only upon the ratio Pas consequently, all combinations 


of sizes and spacings for which this ratio is constant give the 
same value of the inductance. The reactance for both 25 and 
60 cycles is also given on Chart No. 3. 

The capacity susceptance of a wire in ohms is equal to 2 mf C 
<10-*, where f is the frequency and C the capacity in micro- 
farads of the wire to neutral; the susceptance of a wire is the 
ratio of the charging current to the volts to neutral. The ca- 
pacity to neutral of a round wire of radius a inches when the 
return wire is parallel to it and at a distance D inches from it 
(center to center) is 

0.03883 _. : 
prea y i microfarads per mile, 
logio yp 


provided = is greater than 12* and the distance from the wire 


to all other conductors is large compared with D. This formula 
applies also when the return conductor consists of two wires 
each of which is at a distance D from the wire in question. That 
is, the above formula gives the capacity per mile of each wire 
whether the system is single-phase or three-phase, provided the 
wires are at a great distance, compared with D, from all other 
conductors (t.e., overhead lines) and provided that in the case 
of a three-phase system the wires are arranged symmetrically 
(i.e., from the three edges of an equilateral prism.) The ca- 
pacity of a stranded wire is greater than that of a solid wire, 
since its radius is greater. The above formula is not strictly 
applicable to a stranded wire, since the latter is not round, but 
as a first approximation it may be used. 

In Chart No. 3 is given the capacity of the various sizes of 


*When cae 12, the exact formula for the capacity, when the two wires 
a 


are at a great distance from all other conductors, is 
0.08941 
C=——_ 


hb 1— 
cos. he 


2266 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


wire on various spacings. In calculating the capacity scale the 
diameter of the wire in each case was taken 15 per cent greater 
than the diameter of a solid wire of the same cross section; 
the ratio of the diameter of a stranded wire to a solid wire is 
approximately 1.15. The proper correction to obtain the ca- 
pacity of a solid wire is indicated on the chart. The chart 
also gives the capacity susceptance at 25 and 60 cycles. 

The leakage current between wires under ordinary working 
conditions is negligible. The leakage need be taken into account 
only in the case the voltage is sufficiently high to produce the 
so-called ‘corona effect’’. This effect appears only when 
extra high voltages are used and the wires are comparatively 
small. 

THE EQUATIONS OF A TRANSMISSION LINE. 


Fig. 4 is a diagrammatic representation of a section of a 
transmission line. Each wire of the line, whether single- or three- 


I+dl Ss ral adil @ 


TO SENDING END 


Fic. 4 


phase, may be considered separately, and the return for each wire 
may be represented by a fictitious neutral of zero resistance 
and zero reactance. Let 
P=average watts transmitted past the point Q by all of the 
wires. 
E=effective volts between wires at any point Q. 
V=effective volts between any one of the line wires and 
neutral at the point Q. (For a single-phase line 


chek i E 
(Pes a? for a three-phase line V= =z) 
y=power factor angle at Q‘(¢ taken positive for lagging 
current). 


I=effective amperes at the point Q. (For a single-phase 


f I W 
line [= — ———; for a three-ph ine J —=——_ 
ore ree-phase line Ce -) 


\: 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES’ 2267 


The same symbols with the subscript “‘ 1”’ refer to the receiver. 
The same symbols with the subscript ‘0”’ refer to the sending 
end. 
1=distance in miles of this point Q from receiver. 
_d1=elementary length of line between Q and S. 
=length of line in miles. 
y=resistance of wire in ohms per mile. 
x =reactance of wire in ohms per mile. 
g=leakage conductance, one wire to neutral in mhos per 


mile. 

b=capacity susceptance, one wire to neutral, in mhos ae 
mile. 

g=VP+x 

yaV e+)? 

e=tan — 

n=tan-’ — 


For the voltage and ‘current’ sine ‘functions of ‘the time we 
may use the symbolic method. Let V and I be the symbolic 
expressions for the voltage and current respectively. The 
symbolic expression for the impedance per unit length of line is 


z=2 (cos €+j sin €) =z e/* (1) 


and the symbolic expression for .the admittance of the leakage 
circuit per mile of line is 


y=y (cos n+j sin Ae = (2) 
Applying Kirchoff’s laws ‘to-the element d lof the line, we get 


dV 

iron ee 3 

dl 23 (3) 
at 

aT Ve ep aee OE (4) 


Differentiating (3) with respect to / and substituting the value 


aul, ; 
of ie from (4) gives 


Saye | (5) 


‘ 


2268 PENDER AND THOMSON: 


The integral of this equation is 
V=A sinh (Vy z1+6) 


where A and ba are constants of integration. 


[June 30 


(6) 


Substituting (6) in (4), and integrating with respect to /, we 


get 


ran 2 A cosh (Vy21+6) 


(7) 


Both A and 6 may be complex; let their symbolic expressions 


be 
A=A (cos a+j sin a) =A e7* 


6=B+j7 
From (1) and (2) 


Vy a= Vyze? i() a= \ (ye cos ("5 *)-+i sin 


Veal ter@) 


Put 


s 


m= yz cos (54) 


bo 


Akay oes (255) 
2 
Then (6) and (7) become 


y=A sinh [(8-+-m 1) +i (y+n 1) 


pat A cosh ((8-+m 1) +i (y+nD)] 


(8) 


(12) 


(13) 


(14) 


(15) 


(16) 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2269 


But 
sinh [(8+m 1) +j (y+n))] 
=sinh (8+m 1) cos (y+n1)+j cosh (8-+m 1) sin (y+m 1) 
= MVM eu 
where : ou 


M= VN sinh? (B+m I) cos? (y-+n 1) +cosh? (B+ m 1) sin? (y+nl) 
and 


tan (y+n 1) 


| tan M= tanh (B-+m 1) 


Making use of the relations that, for any argument u, 


sinh? 4a cosh 2u—1 
2 
cosh? ya cosh 2u+1 
2 
ats 1—cos2 
2 
ere 1+ cos 2 u 
A 2 


the above expression for M may be written — 


= cosh 2 (B--m 1) —cos 2 (yn) (18) 


Whence, substituting for A its value from (8) and the relation 
(17), the expression (15) for the voltage at any point along the 
line becomes 


V=A Meet) (19) 
In an exactly similar manner, we may write 


cosh [(B-+m']) +3 (yt+n DI=N e* 


-3 V cosh 2 (Bm 1) +cos 2 (y-+nl) (20) 


2270 . PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


tan v=tan (y+ 1) tanh (6+ 1) (21) 


Whence the current at any point along the line is 
I=J 2A N ei(aty+a) (22) 


Hence the effective value of the voltage at any point is A M or 


V=Ap> V cosh 2 (8+m 1) —cos 2 (y+n1) (23) 


and the effective value of the current at this point is 


Ne \ 2 Ay Vcosh 2 (8+m 1) +cos 2 (y+n 1) (24) 


where Ao, which is a constant yet to be determined, is put 


for oe The angle by which the current lags behind the 


voltage, or the power factor angle ¢, is 
g=atu—(atrv+A). 
- b—v—A 


A simple expression for the angle (u—v) may be derived by mak- 
ing use of the trigonometric relation 


_,y__ tan w—tan v 
naka wel 1+tan pw tan v 

for, substituting for tan w and tan v their values from (17) and 
(21), we get 

_.. + Bit 2Cy=bn J) 

MA OBB 


Whence the power factor angle at any point along the line is 


2 voy) Pigbitee {ck Dh 
Pree [ sinh 2 (+m) 1? ) 


ae 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2271 


The power per phase at any point is then 


P= V cos ¢ 


a4) 2 A,2 cos g V cosh? 2 (B+m Ll) —cos? 2 (vy +nl) 
Making use of the relations 
cosh? u=1-++sinh? u 
~ cos? w=1—sin® u 


we may write this expression 


le 2 A, cos g Vsinh? 2 (8+m 1) +sin? 2 (y+n1) 


From (25), making use of the trigonometric formula for the 
cosine of the difference of two angles, 


sinh 2 (8+m 1) cos A+sin 2 (y+n 1) sin 
V sinh? 2 (8-+m 1) +sin? 2 (y+n 1) 


Cos 


Whence 
P’= “= A [sinh 2 (B+ 1) cos \+sin 2 (y-+m 1) sin d] (26) 
At the receiver 1=0; and at the sending end /=/. Hence, 


from (23), we have that the ratio of the volts Ey at the sending 
end. to the volts E, at the receiver is 


eee eV 6 re. cosh 2 (B-+-m Io) —cos 2 (y+n ly) 
(op eae “Vv cosh 2 B—cos 2 Y 20) 


From (24) the ratio of the current Jo at the sending end to 
current J, at the receiver is 


To _A/ cosh 2 (B-+m lo) -+cos 2 (y+ lo)_ 
is -V . cosh 2 B+cos 2 3 oe 


From (26) the ratio of the power Po at the sending end to the 
power P, at the receiver is 


Py _ Po’ _ sinh2 (B+ lo) cos A+sin 2 (y+n Io) sin r (29) 
FA ie ae ~ sinh 2 B cos A+sin 2 ¥ sin A 


2272 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


We have now to determine the two constants 6 and y. From ; 
(25), putting /=0, we have 


sin2y _ 
inh 26 =tan (gi +A) (30) 
and from (23) and (24), putting /=0, and squaring, we have 


Vi2=A,? (cosh 2 B—cos 2 ¥) 
= I2=A,? (cosh 2 B+cos 2 ) 


Adding and subtracting these two expressions and taking. 
the ratio of the results gives 


cosh28  zI’+yV? 
cos2y 2z12—y Vz? 


Put 
Zz lo Tq; : ; ‘ 
P= ay =ratio of total line impedance volts to volts de- 
1 
livered. 
ayy, lo V; Nae ; . : ; 
= 7, etatio of total line admittance current to current 
delivered. 
Then 
Le eas BE WOM Dk 
z Iv-—y Vi? yO Koel oe 
whence 
Po) g Ane Ron Oe se. 
cosh 2 8 — cos 2 y (31) 
From (30) 
sinh 2 B= = gS aye 
B tan (¢:+A) (31a) 


Squaring and subtracting we get 


is ete y ‘ pi sin? 2 
( =o aera tan? (gi+A) 


. 
4 
. 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2273 


Making use of the trigonometric relations 


1 
Di inp, eas 
Saeed 1+tan? 2 y 
3 watiees y 
2 ro ae ede a ee 
ey 1+tan? 2 y 
and solving for tan 2 y, we get 


2 Vv posin (git)) (32) 
p-—o 


tan 2y= 


Note that, from (31) and (81a), sin 2 y and cos 2 ¥ have 
respectively the same algebraic signs as the numerator and 
denominator of this fraction. This is important since the 


. algebraic sign of the tangent alone does not fix the quadrant in 


which an angle lies. The value of 2 y may be taken directly 
from the trigonometric scale on Chart No. 3. (If the second 
member of (32) is greater than unity, use the reciprocal which is 
equal to the cot 2). From (30) we then have 


ene Ye 
sinh 2 B= atone (33) 


from which 2 6 may be obtained from Chart No. 5. 


APPROXIMATE EQUATIONS FOR ORDINARY LINES. 


In case the length of the line does not exceed 100 miles when 
the frequency is 60 cycles or 200 miles when the frequency is 25 
cycles the above equations may be greatly simplified by making 
use of an approximation which will not introduce an appreci- 
able error in any case likely to arise in practise. 

The simplification results from the following substitutions in 
equations (27) to (29) 
~ cosh 2m1=1+4+2 m? P 

sinh 2m1l=2 m1 
(34) 
cos 2n)=1-2n°P 


sin2nl=2nl 


2274 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


where n/ is expressed in radians. These approximations are 
accurate to within 2 per cent for 2 m/ less than 0.35 and for 
2nl1 less than 0.35 radians or 20 deg. 

From equations (31), (81a) and (32) we have 


sinh 2 pe V pa cos (gi +A) cos 2 ¥ 


(35) 
p-—o 
Se 
cosh 2 B= ae cos 2 Y (36) 
aoe = 2 Vpasin (¢:+A) cos 2 y (37) 


p—o 


Fic. 5 


Substituting equations (34) to (37) in (27) to (29) we get, for no 
leakage, 


a= V1+2 pcos (e—g;)+p?—b x li? | (38) ~ 
= V1+2 0 cos (90—g1) +0? —b'x 1,2 © (39) 
oni Weg fe 2 Cee Sb eho tau | 2 (40) 
3 cos ~ 4 e 


It is interesting to note that these last three equations, when 
b is put equal to zero, are identical with the relations which 
follow immediately from the vector diagram, Fig. 5, of the line 
and load when the capacity of the line is neglected. 


yo 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2275 


SUMMARY 


In the working formulas given below, the symbols for voltage, 
current, etc., at the receiver will be written without the sub- 
scripts, and J will be used to designate the length of the line from 
receiver to sending end. The power will also be expressed in 
kilowatts. The leakage will be assumed zero. 


P=kilowatts delivered to receiver. 
E=volts between wires at receiver. 
K=power factor of receiver. 
¢g=cos~’ K =power factor angle of receiver (see Chart No. 3.) 
I=amperes taken by receiver. (For a three-phase line 
_PX1000 PX1000 ) 
V3 EK Ee 
The same symbols with the subscript zero refer to the sending 
end. 


- for a single-phase line [= 


J=distance of transmission in miles. 

y=resistance of wire in ohms per mile (see Chart No. 3). 

x =reactance of wire in ohms per mile (see Chart No. 3). 

b=capacity susceptance, one wire to neutral, in mhos per 
mile. (See Chart No. 3). 


é=tan~’ = = power factor angle of the line (see Chart No. 3). 


Z=equivalent impedance of receiver terminal to neutral, 
per mile of line. ; 


E : 
— —*— for a three-phase line; 
V311 


E 
211 


for a single-phase line. 


Exact Method. Since the leakage is assumed zero, the ad- 
mittance y is equal to b and the power factor angle of the leakage 
circuit is 90 deg. Hence to determine the voltage, current,’ 
etc., at the sending end proceed as follows: 

First calculate the constants 


90—e 
zt 41 
N= (41) 
yaoi 58 sin , (42) 
: sin € 


2276 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 
#=114.61 fbx cos \ (43) 
sin € 
ele  =per cent ratio of impedance volts to volts de- 
Z COS € 
livered (44) 
d’=100b Z P=per cent ratio of charging current to current 
delivered. (45) 
Vdd’ si 
0) =tan-’ i genet a (46) 


The algebraic signs of sin 0) and cos 6) are respectively the 
same as the numerator and denominator of this fraction; this 
fixes the quadrant in which p lies. 


csr sin 0 
Uo = sinh ES (+2) (47) 
Then 
Fo __A/ cosh (wot+u) —cos (0+8) 
‘ey Vv cosh uw—cos Oy (48) 
ot Wade cosh (wo+) +cos (8)+6) 
pie Vv cosh u+cos Oo (49) 
Po _ sinh (w+) cos \+sin (69+6) sin X 50 
Pe sinh 2% cos A+sin 6 sin (60) 


The power factor angle ¢ at the sending end may also be de- 
termined directly from the formula 


sin (09+6) 


yes eoy [ sinh (ao-+u) oie (oy 


An excellent check on the results obtained is to compare 
the value of cos go determined from this formula with the 
value of the power factor calculated from the voltage Eo, cur- 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2277 


rent Jy, and power P» determined from the three preceding 
1000 Po 


formulas. (For a three-phase line cos gy = [~=_——; for 
V3 Eo Lo 
single-phase line cos go = a mt), 
0 Lo 


Approximate Method, Neglecting Line Capacity. In the case of 
a short line (i.e., 10> x 2 negligible compared with d) the rela- 
tions between the voltage, current and power at the two ends of 
the line are as follows. Let 
E,—E 


p= 100 et =the per cent ratio of the difference in volts 


at the two ends to the volts delivered, 1.e., the 
per cent ‘‘ volts drop ”’ 


Pes, 


g= 100 ie ste ae te per cent ratio of power lost in line to 
power delivered, i.e., the per cent ‘‘ power loss dat 
Then 

p= ¥10!+200 d cos (e—¢) +4?—100 (52) 

dcose 1007 
eae Pea OD) 

_ 00s a. 

Ko= 100-+p | K (54) 


Chart No. 4 gives a graphical solution of equation (52). The 
ordinate scale of this chart gives directly the value of the per 
cent volts drop when the per cent impedance drop d and the 
difference in the power factor angles of the line and load are 
known. The method of using the chart is described in detail 
on the chart itself. Each of the curves on the chart was drawn 
by plotting the values of 


200 d cos (e—¢) +@? 


as actual vertical distance against d as abscissas; the numbers on 
the curves give the corresponding values of (e—¢). The scale 
of ordinates marked on the left is a square root scale, the num- 
bers giving the value of 


/10!-+200 d cos (e—¢) +d’— 100 


2278 PENDER AND THOMSON: [June 30 


Note that since cos (€—g)=cos (g—e), the algebraic sign of 
the resultant angle (e—qg) is immaterial. The curve marked 
with a given number, say 50, is to be used whether e—g= +50 
or €—g=—50. 

Approximate Method when Line Capacity is Taken into Account. 
For longer lines (i.e., when 104bx/? is not negligible in com- 
parison with d), the following close approximations hold, pro- 
vided the length of the line is not over 100 miles for 60 cycles or 
over 200 miles for 25 cycles. Let 

p’ =true value of the per cent volts drop when corrected for 

capacity effect. 
q’ =true value of the per cent power loss when corrected for 
capacity effect. 
In-I 


p’;=100 iy a per cent ratio of the difference in the 


current at the two ends of the line to the current 
delivered; 12.e., the per cent “current loss’ (p; 
will in general be negative for a lagging current at 
the receiver). : 


ei 


Then 


pb’ = V 10'+200 d cos (e—y) +d?—10! b x 2—100 (55) 


pi’ = V10°+-200 d’ cos (90+) +(d’)?—10'bx 2-100 (56) 
q’=q—100 bri tan ~ (57) 


(100+q’) K 


ie (100+ p’) (100+ ’;) 


(58) 


Equations (55) and (56) may be solved graphically by the use 
of Chart No. 4. Distances on the “ capacity correction scale ”’ 
in the upper left hand corner of this chart are laid off equal to 
10'b xf, the number on this scale giving the corresponding 
value of bx/?. The method of making this correction is de- 
scribed on the chart itself. 

Chart No. 4 may also be used to calculate the regulation in 
any case where the voltage drop is due to the impedance of the 
apparatus. For example, it may be used to calculate the regula- 
tion of a transformer when € is taken equal to the power factor 
angle of the equivalent impedance of the transformer and d is 
taken equal to the per cent ratio of the equivalent impedance of 


1911] TRANSMISSION LINES 2279 


the transformer to the equivalent impedance (V/J) of the load, 
or to calculate the regulation ofa generator when € is taken equal 
to the power factor angle of the equivalent impedance of the 
generator and d is taken equal to the per cent ratio of the syn- 
chronous impedance of the generator to the impedance of the 
load (V/Z). 
EXAMPLE 
Given the same example as noted on Chart No. 4, namely: 


E = 60,000 volts [. »=2100 mules b =6.03 X 10-0hms 
ieee 00 amperes r = 0.267 ohms € = 69.83 deg. 
K = 0.95 lag x = 0.727 ohms’ cos € = 0.3447 
Then, Z = 10.083 Ge 2230 
= A008 Ce = 20.59 
u = 0.07567 Go. = 85: 89 
@- = 924.38 uy = 1.378 
Whence, 
Exact method Approximate method 
(See Chart No. 4) 
p” = 13.01 per cent .p’ = 18.6 per cent 
g” = 6.43 percent gq’ =-6.7 percent 


K", = 96.68 K's = 96.5 


2280 SAGS AND SPANS [Tune 30 


Discusston ON ‘‘ SOLUTION TO PROBLEMS IN SAGS AND SPANS,”’ 
“ Sac CALCULATIONS FOR SUSPENDED WIRES,” AND “ ME- 
CHANICAL AND ELrcrric CHARACTERISTICS OF TRANS- 
MISSION LinEs.”’ CuHiIcaGo, JUNE 30, 1911. 


Paul M. Lincoln: In the paper by Messrs. Pender and 
Thomson, I notice they lead us through quite a number of equa- 
tions containing hyperbolic functions, and finally come to our 
good old friend, the parabola, as representing the curve which a 
transmission line assumes when it is extended between two sup- 
porting structures. The result is one we all recognize, although 
I must say for myself I do not recognize the process by which 
it was derived. It is perfectly true that the parabola can be 
taken as the curve which a transmission line will assume and 
the error due to this assumption is very small in the ordinary 
case. The sag must be large in proportion to the span, 
before the error in making this assumption needs to be taken 
seriously. 

I also notice that Messrs. Pender and Thomson have arrived 
at results that show that our old and well known method of cal- 
culating line drops is perfectly correct for 60 cycle lines up to one 
hundred miles, and 25-cycle lines up to two hundred miles, and 
it is not necessary to add the refinements which they have worked 
out for lines below that length. 

In regard to Mr. Thomas’s paper, I have been impressed and 
delighted with the way he has worked the thing out. However, 
I would like to ask one question. Mr. Thomas has assumed that 
the metal constituting the line has a certain amount of stretch 
when it is loaded by wind, ice, or in any other manner. It seems 
evident, however, that he has assumed in his calculations that 
the supports of the transmission line ‘are absolutely rigid, that 
they do not give. Now, I do not believe that this assumption 
is justified, because the bending of the supports, particularly 
when there are angles in the line, will, I believe, aggregate nearly 
as much as the stretch in the metal of the conductor. There- 
fore any results which are deduced from the stretch of the con- 
ductor only, would not necessarily hold in an actual trans- 
mission line, particularly when there are angles in the line. We 
all know that the assumption that the supports of the trans- 
mission line are absolutely rigid is far from being a correct one. 
I ask Mr. Thomas if he has taken any cognizance of this matter 
of rigidity of supports in working out his theory? 

L. C. Nicholson: Those of us who are in the habit of calcu- 
lating sags will be glad to have such a short-cut and accurate 
method as Mr. Thomas points out. 

There is a point which I wish to mention in connection with 
the sag and spacing of wires. The ordinary understanding 
that the distance between conductors should be determined 
largely by the operating voltage is not entirely rational. For 
such other factors as span, sag, size, weight and material of 


— 
my 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2281 


conductor should be given consideration, and I believe have more 
direct bearing upon the problem of properly spacing the con- 
ductors than has the operating voltage. In the case of extra 
high voltage lines electrical considerations of course become 
important. 

N. J. Neall: This subject has made a special appeal to me, 
for I happen to have had actual experience with the problem 
which the theoretical presentation this morning relates to. 
I was particularly impressed in this connection by what Dr. 
Pender said in Boston when he presented in advance the paper 
written by Mr. Thomson and himself, in explaining that it was all 
well enough to have rules and methods, but that most engineers 
use these rules and methods so infrequently that when they 
came back to the work again they had to brush up on all the facts 
connected with that method, and waste considerable time in 
getting started, so therefore I consider admirable the degree 
to which Messrs. Pender and Thomson have taken their paper, 
in finishing the calculations, and giving the one reliable result 
which may be selected with confidence. 

Whereas the papers presented today treat this as a the- 
oretical problem, I think the practical problem necessitates, 
although it has not been so expressly stated, that every span 
shall be a self-contained one, irrespective of its shape, that is to 
say, we do not want to have a span when points of support are 
at such different levels that the lower support is just at the lower 
end of the span or perhaps inside of it, even though it might be 
argued along the lines suggested yesterday by Mr. Thomas that 
such procedure might be intended to prevent oscillations. 

It is highly important to know where the low point of the span 
will come with respect to the lower point of support. As a 
practical proposition you are obliged to limit this to a’ distance 
of, say, 50 to 75 feet, as a minimum just to save yourself. There 
may be line constructions of grades of excellence which will give 
up to all theoretical requirements, but I doubt it, and it is the 
practical margin you must be guided by in laying out these data 
for use. Now, the difficulty is also enhanced by the fact that if 
your line is 500 miles long, or even 100 miles long, you have a 
variable topography to accommodate the line to, and it is no 
uncommon thing to get a very irregular profile. A very useful 
method of laying out transmission lines is by use of a template. 
One template is used for the minimum sag without wind and 
another for maximum sag without wind. Both are of great 
importance in determining respectively the distance of the 
bottom of span from the lower point of support, and the least 
clearance above ground. We ; 

Another point that has been touched on in these papers is the 
effect of adjacent spans of unequal length. On the principle 
that the line is to have self-contained spans with a uniform stress 
in the conductor throughout, you must carefully allow for the 
short span adjacent to long ones; and on downhill work the 


2282 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


effect is to take away from the top spans and increase the sag 
of the bottom ones because of the total gravity effect. 

There is, however, one point in this matter of spans which is of 
great importance to our engineers. This relates to railroad 
and telephone crossings where requirements may call for con- 
struction much in excess of what is theoretically necessary for 
the line as a whole. Lastly, the imperfections introduced by 
construction may further seriously impair your line—such for 
example as bad surface cuts due to improper use of line tools. 

The cost of spans and of the various details entering. into 
these, is a very serious item. It is almost impossible to combine 
a result theoretically, by means of a formula, which will tie cost 
to the other considerations; but there are modifications, even in 
these methods, which will be necessary, and the exception which 
will prove the rule. But, broadly speaking, the literature which 
has been created in these papers is invaluable, and those who have 
to deal with these problems should study carefully each of the 
methods presented, and decide which will be the most useful for 
his particular purpose. 

Jean Bart Balcomb: I very much appreciate the practical 
remarks made by the last speaker, also the idea of elasticity of 
support, especially of the towers. I believe these enter into the 
problem of wire tension more largely than most of us have 
realized in the past. Referring to the papers specifically, the 
last sentence of Mr. Robertson’s paper reads: “‘In fact, the stress 
values approach infinity as the curve of the span approaches a 
straight line, due to being drawn taut.’’ I wish simply to call 
attention to-the fact that this is universal, whether the sup- 
ports are level, or one is higher than the other. 

While it is always disagreeable to adversely criticize a paper, 
there is one statement contained in the paper by Messrs. Pender 

-and Thomson which I would like to mention. In speaking of 
the deflection, the paper says: “‘ To meet this requirement on a 
long span, especially with aluminum wire, would require a rela- 
tively large sag, from 30 to 100 ft., depending on the length of 
span and size of wire.’ The paper then goes on to say: “‘ This 
would require a prohibitive height of tower, at least for level 
country work, and therefore we should not use it.” To my 
mind, since we are trying to be scientifically exact, we should 
live up to the facts, even though they are not satisfactory. If 
we can prove the supposed facts to be wrong, they are no longer 
facts. I wish to congratulate the authors, not only on the ex- 
cellence of their exact treatment of the subject, but also for the 
finished thought they give, and an approximation that will 
answer in most cases. I think both exact and approximate 
solutions should be included in scientific papers generally. 

My work in the mountains and on the Nevada desert has espec- 
ially impressed me with problems like these, that are not met with 
so much in the level country and under ordinary conditions. Going 
into places where the maximum temperature reaches 140 deg. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2283 


and where at times the worst conditions of sleet and ice are en- 
countered, these problems are pressed home to one very closely. 
I might call attention to this—in my experience I have noticed 
that the maximum sag, wherever there are sleet conditions, is 
not caused by the maximum temperature, but by the maximum 
ice conditions at the highest temperature in which sleet will 
form; so that is the point we need especially to bear in mind 
when considering how low our wire, will hang; also that the 
maximum stress will be induced by the greatest wind and 
lowest temperature conditions combined. In approaching 
these problems I always find it worth while to select a few points 
that are determinative, then work with these in mind. 

A point which has not been touched thus far, I think, is the 
stress that is produced by the oscillations of the wire while the 
-wind is blowing. ©In our mathematical determinations, we too © 
often assume that when wind conditions prevail, the wire swings 

over with the wind and remains at a certain angle; yet the wire 
instead of doing this, swings back and forth, sometimes with con- 
siderable violence. How to arrive at this stress, | am unable to 
say, but I think the matter deserves very careful study. 

As a closing thought—there are some excellent determinations 
among those offered here this morning, and I would like very 

much if this Institute another year could have these different 
formulas compared with the large amount of data, gathered 
throughout the country, showing actual conditions. It seems to 
me if some one at the present time could be asked to prepare a 
paper and present it a year from now, or possibly two years from 
now, it would be worth while and would be greatly appreciated 
by engineers. 

The above applies to the mechanical side especially. Re- 
garding the electrical end of the work, I think we are in a transi- 
tional period and the next, few years will show large develop- 
ment—so we are in position to study, but not to determine, these 
electrical factorg for perhaps a, number of years to come. 

W. L. R. Robertson: I have studied Mr. T homas’ paper 
carefully and with much interest. «He is to be commended for 
the introduction of the so-called stretch curves. ‘They)-curves’’ 
are nominally straight and parallel lines, they can be readily 

computed and: plotted, therefore shortening somewhat the pro- 
cess of calculation when temperature and stress are considered. 

As a matter of fact, this stretch curve is in principle identical 
with the so-called hypothetical curve given in my paper; the 

| only difference being in the selection of codrdinates. When 
; plotted between stress and length of arc, the curve is the nominal 
straight line. When plotted between stress and sag it is a curved 
line. In theory the stretch curves. plotted between stress and 
length of arc are not entirely straight nor parallel. I would like 
to ask Mr. Thomas whether there are any conditions where the 
-use of perfectly straight parallel stretch curves would introduce 
‘undesirable error? When the stress passes the elastic limit, the 


2284 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


stretch curve is decidedly a curved line, especially for annealed 
copper. 

I have heard of a method of erecting wires which may, or may 
not have merit, namely, the use of annealed copper wire erected 
more or less taut and allowing the weather conditions to stretch 
the wire until it has sufficient sag to withstand all conditions of 
load, and never taking up the sag. As the wire stretches it 
probably increases in tensile strength. 

For investigating or determining the extent of the merit of 
such a method as this, or for investigating any other condition 
where it is required to calculate beyond the elastic limit, the 
straight line stretch curve is of no value. 

If one-half of the ultimate strength or 1,700 lb. per sq. in. is 
the allowable stress for annealed copper and this is finally con- 
sidered to be good engineering, then calculations must be made 
beyond the elastic limit and it is only the true hypothetical curve 
that can be used. 

Further after one becomes an adept in the use of these solu- 
tions he will really find that the application of the true hy- 
pothetical curve involves but very little more calculation than 
the straight line stretch curve, especially if very closely approxi- 
mate results are all that are desired. 

It seems to me that the most vital point to be consideredin 
sag and span is the behavior of the material used in the span. 
By behavior I mean the relation between strain and stretch, 
permanent set, tendency to increase in tensile strength upon 
stretching, temperature changes, etc. That is why more data 
on wires than we have today are desirable. 

Problems involving all of these properties can only be investi- 
gated by so-called true stretch or hypothetical curves. 

There are a few emphases which I would like to make relative 
to the claims set forth in my paper, namely, the solutions are 
intended to be universal, to apply to abnormal as well as normal 
conditions; to apply to any material; to take’care of any such 
conditions as poles swaying, cross-arms twisting, etc., and to give 
mathematically correct results with a minimum of additional 
calculation. 

H.F.Thomson: I would like to refer merely to the point made 
by Mr. Neall in the discussion. We have endeavored to 
indicate the method of the solution on the charts them- 
selves. The discussion which accompanies is more of a 
justification than anything else; that is, an engineer could cut 
out the charts included in the paper, and with the suggestions 
made on them, could work out a complete example without any 
additional help from the paper itself, and the discussion 
merely goes to broaden out the points which are included. 

H. V. Carpenter: In adapting tower construction to the use 
of suspension insulators convenience has probably been the 
reason for arranging the three conductors of a circuit in a vertical 
plane as has been done in a number of prominent cases, Ex- 


: 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2285 


perience has brought out the fact that this construction must be 
used carefully in localities where sleet forms, as it has been found 
that when a heavy load of sleet suddenly falls from one span 
while the adjacent spans retain their loads the lightened span 
may rise into contact with the wire above it. 

If we remember that the vertical load on any insulator is 
only 4 to 3 of the tension on the cable, it is clear that a small 
percentage of unbalance in the tensions on either side of an 
insulator may deflect it considerably. Since a small change 
in the position of the end supports of a span causes a very large 
change in the sag it can be seen that the trouble described above 
will be more likely to occur than would be anticipated. 

A simple example will show what may be expected. Assume 
a circuit of 0000 copper strung with 600-ft. spans and 8-ft. vertical 
spacing, hung on suspension insulators 21 in. long. If the sag 
is 3 per cent when loaded with 4 in. of sleet (no wind), the tension 
will be about 3200 lb. total. If all the sleet on one span should 
fall before any on adjacent spans, the sag of the lightened span 
will decrease to approximately 1.6 per cent or the middle of the 
cable will rise about 8.4 ft., giving a permanent short-circuit 
with the cableabove. This involves a deflection of each insulator 
of about 33 deg. from its normal vertical position. 

On account of the elastic character of the entire structure 
much smaller disturbances than that assumed would be suffi- 
cient to cause a momentary throw of a cable that would cause 
trouble. 

Hugh Pastoriza: The chart given by Mr. Thomas offers a 
very easy method for computing line stringing curves but it may 
also be applied conveniently to other mechanical problems of 
transmission lines. 

For example, certain types of line crossing embody an auxiliary 
guy which catches and supports the span wire when it breaks at 
either insulator. In order to get proper clearances under the | 
broken span wire, its final sag after breaking must be determined. 
Here Mr. Thomas’s chart is of considerable assistance. From the 
mechanical construction of the crossing span, the increase in 
length of wire between supports, when the span wire breaks, can 
be found. Expressing the new length in per cent of the span, 
the new tension and deflection may be read from the chart. 
This neglects change in length due to reduction in tension, but an 
approximate correction may easily be made for this. 

Problems connected with flexible transmission structures 
require the use of a curve between tension in span wire and de- 
flection of support. This curve may be found for any given 
case from Mr. Thomas’ chart. Starting with normal tension 
and deflection and span length, the new tension and deflection, as 
supports approach each other by 0.1 per cent of span, for example, 
may be found approximately by obtaining from the curves the 
tension and deflection which would obtain on the original span 
but with a length of span wire 100.0/99.9 of the original. A 


2286 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


correction may also be applied here for change in wire length due 
to change in tension. 

R.S. Brown: The calculation of the long transmission line 
may be simplified considerably by the use of the relation between 
inductance and capacity: 


where V is the velocity of light. This would be rigidly true were 


it not for the effect of the magnetic flux within the wire. In the. 


actual case the approximation is very close if a reduced value of 
the velocity of light is used, (183,000 miles per second). Within 
the range of commercial sizes of nonmagnetic wire, the maximum 
error thus introduced in the value of capacity is one per cent. 
By the use of this relation one variable, line capacity, may be 
eliminated from the problem. 

The following symbols are used: 

P =the real power at the receiver. 

Ey) =the receiver voltage (taken as standard phase). 
=the generator voltage. 
=the load current. 
= power factor angle of load. 
=27 frequency. 
=length of line, miles. 
=resistance per mile of line. 
=capacity per mile of line. 
=inductance per mile of line. 
=reactance per mile of line. 
=impedance per mile of line. 
=admittance per mile of line. 
=Ilr X=1% Z=lz Y=ly 

Dotted letters represent vectors. 

Undotted letters represent reals. 

The general equation of the long transmission line as given in 
Steinmetz’s ‘‘ Engineering Mathematics”’ is: 

(1) 


bye. R OW MEG by 


-E=E,A+1, BZ 


Where A and B are vector functions of line constants as follows:"’ 


reve geo HD? tT coh 
z vy (ZY) 
Be 1+—— 120 shen. Tie al 


ah 


pa) 
zs 
= 


4 


VOLTAGE DROP IN 
3 B 


CALCULATE THE VALUE OF 


P= GIVEN POWER IN WATTS. 

E = GIVEN VOLTAGE BETWEEN WIRES, 

F= GIVEN POWER FACTOR. 
LAY THIS VALUE OFF FROM THE CENTER ALONG A 
RADIAL LINE PASSING THROUGH THE INTERSECTION 
OF THE GIVEN 4 LINE WITH THE ARC CORRESPONDING 
TO THE LENGTH OF LINE, LAY OFF IN THE FIRST QUAD- 
RANT IF THE CONDITIONS ARE GIVEN AT THE LOAD END 
AND IN THE THIRD IF THEY ARE GIVEN AT THE GENERA- 


8 FIND A POINT ON THE GROUP OF LINES AT THE LEFT 

® Mire CORRESPONDING TO THE GIVEN POWER FACTOR AND LINE, 
THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE TWO POINTS THUS FOUND 
READ ALONG THE HORIZONTAL SCALE BY MEANS OF 
DIVIDERS HAVING ONE POINT SET AT “C” WILL GIVE 
THE REQUIRED! DROP. 


q 


78 OF GIVEN Eg 
S > 
=H 


38 

ECR MESA 
TTL 
Ans HTT LES 
eee 


Sa EY ta pans eat 
1) LES — 3 


Te 
= 


| 0% PF % 


IX 


VOLTAGE DROP IN % OF GIVEN Ey 9 | 
Rc tors THIS CHART 18.” 
_ CONSTRUCTED’ FOR A ~ 


iu TT] rreauency of 6o cyctes | 
.99 _— ee | FOR ANY OTHER FREQUENCY |, 
2 Tit T itt | Tt) Use A LENGTH OF LINE 
a 98 PSEA equacto. times tHe 
a TUTEINNSERT EET tue, ‘LENGTH. THUS. 
L 97 PNET ET FOR A 200° MILE LINE 
P Or INCIUTTTIT] ar 26 crctes proceep 
Tle pe Ban NUTT as ror a 200x=83.3 
ehr 2) - -| MILE LINE AT 60 — 
anes + BYOB ES ye is 
40 ; Aeaneee suet 
2 ee ie ISFORMERS- 
‘= peta: Tatars ATORS 
> th ; A 
: 98 Sen ee, ENCED 
RENGTH OF WING, MILES i ic ay ee AM 
CALCULATOR: «73 
6 FORFINDINGTHE —, 
VOLTAGE REGULATION | 
TRANSMISSION LINES 4“ | 
GENERATORS, 20 a 7 


TRANSFORMERS, 
ETO, 


eLearn re eg 


DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2287 


— £V=P (rt jx)joc 
=P? Gr—x) we 


This assumes y =j oc, that is, zero leakage. 
By means of the relation 


Dividing equation (1) by Eo | 


E . 
= yee nate B Zz 
sp ae ea egre ae 
Eo Selene? Ey (+3 tang) BZ 
- a pape 
a: Ltd ee ee 


eb. at 
cos @ 
teat b. APB D7 ZB 
= p = = ot a 1 
Aai a Egcospe 


‘ 


2288 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


, E-E E F 
The regulation is defined as ° =—~ —1 and the magni- 
Eo Eo 

tude of == i , is the length of the vector E, Ce, 

This length is the distance between the termini of the two vectors 
ee PORIZ 
—Ao-i¢ 2 
Aaj? and Tiktoeo 


The terminus of —A o-4? is plotted at the left of the chart, 
it being a function of ¢g, x/r, and I. 
The second vector is 


PBZ ; nad a 7 tan > 
Ecos g E,? cos 


The part ns Zo is real and it must be multiplied by the 
Eo? cos @ 


han 
vector part B a’ * whose terminus is plotted in the first 
Pig: 
quadrant on the chart. The length of vector B o’“"" can 
be scaled from the chart but is most easily found from the small 
curve in the fourth quadrant, it being practically independent 


of on It is designated by x. 


KZP 
Ey cos ~ 


determined by a lirie joining the origin with the intersection of 
appropriate curves in the first quadrant, and the distance from 
the terminus of this vector to that of vector — A o-/* is found 
by means of dividers. 

This length laid off along the horizontal scale will give the 
required value of voltage regulation. 

Frank F. Fowle: The most important problem in the me- 
chanical design of wire spans and structures is the choice of a safe 
assumption as to loads. In the recent joint report covering 
specifications for overhead crossings of electric light and power 
lines, prepared by a joint committee of the National Electric 
Light Association, American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
American Electric Railway Association, Association of Railway 
Telegraph Superintendents, and American Railway Engineering 
and Maintenance of Way Association, the subject of loading has 
been considered with great care. Three classes of loading are 
there defined, as follows: 


The length is laid off in the proper direction as 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2289 


Loads 
Class of Vertical Horizontal 
loading component component Temperature 
ie A Dead 15 lb. per sq. ft. 
B Dead plus } inch of ice.| 8 lb. per sq. ft. O deg. fahr. 
Cc Dead plus ? inch of ice.| 11 1b. per sq. ft. 


Class B loading is the stated requirement in the specifications 
proper and the ordinary temperature range is given as — 20 deg. 
to +120 deg. fahr. The weight of ice is given as 57 lb. per cu. ft. 
or 0.033 lb. per cu. in. The wind pressure requirement on poles 
or towers is 13 lb. per sq. ft. on the projected area of closed or 
solid structures and one and one-half (13) times the projected 
area of latticed structures. . 

Mr. Thomas, who was a member of the joint committee, em- 
ploys the Class B loading in the example of span calculations 
given in his paper. Mr. Robertson also employs substantially 
the same loading. But Professor Pender takes exception to 
loading as heavy as this and says that the combination of 3 inch 
of ice and 60 miles per hr. wind velocity will seldom if ever exist 
simultaneously; he also says that sleet will seldom exist on a 
wire when the temperature is much below freezing. 

Probably no one will dispute that sleet accumulates to thick- 
nesses exceeding 3 inch, or that wind velocities (corrected) some- 
times exceed 60 miles per hr., or again that temperatures fall 
lower. than 20 deg. fahr. below zero. How much sleet or how 
much wind, or how low a temperature will really occur, are 
matters of probability, only to be determined with some approach 
to accuracy by studies of weather phenomena extending over 
long periods. It will be generally admitted that the extremes 
of wind, sleet and temperature do not occur simultaneously. 
What we wish to know is how far we must go in assuming simul- 
taneous values in order to design spans and structures so as to be 
reasonably safe. 

Fundamentally we ought to define what constitutes reasonable 
safety. Should we build expressly to prevent any failure 
whatever in the light of the most severe combination of loads 
ever known, or should we take a few chances and proceed to build 
so that the line will probably fail once in twenty years, or once in 
ten years—or how often? The question of probability, as ap- 
plied to the occurrence of simultaneous loads of wind and sleet and 
the accompanying temperature, enters the problem at many 
points. Generally speaking, the probability of failure ought 
to be limited by the risks—that is, it ought to be inversely as the 
risk, to some extent. How far we ought to go in the elimination 
of risk is one thing; how far we can go is another. The enginecr 


2290 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


who is radical on the side of safety is likely to be criticized by 
those who pay the bills, and the standard of engineering effi- 
ciency is perhaps judged mainly by construction costs, in some 
cases, when there are other important factors to consider. 

But when the risks are considerable, and particularly when 
human life is involved, it seems proper to reject any assumption 
that failures at stated periods, even at very long intervals, are 
permissible. If this is sound, then we can limit the application 
of probability to the simultaneous values of wind, sleet and 
temperatures. The gathering of data on this question is a work 
of great magnitude, if the results are intended to be comprehen- 
sive and of substantial value. A preliminary effort in this di- 
rection was made by the writer, which consisted of an analysis 
of the records of the Weather Bureau at Chicago and was pub- 
lished in the Electrical World of October 27,1910. The results of 
this study do not uphold Professor Pender’s comments on 
Class B loading, but rather indicate that heavier resultant loads 
would be justified—at least in certain localities. 

In regard to the existence of sleet at temperatures lower than 
freezing, it is a fact, of course, that it will not form at lower tem- 
peratures, but nevertheless the temperature may fall after the 
sleet precipitation ceases—and fall considerably. At the same 
time the wind velocity may increase with the lower temperature, 
although it is generally stated, and apparently true, that ex- 
treme velocities do not occur at the lowest extremes of tem- 
perature. 

In the matter of formulas expressing wind pressure as a func- 
tion of velocity there is some disparity. The original form of 
Mr. Buck's expression, referred to by Professor Pender, is 


P=0.0025 V? 


which expresses the pressure on the projected area of a bare 
stranded cable, in pounds per sq. ft. Mr. Buck’s conclusions 
in relation to wind velocities are also well worth studying in the 
present connection. 

For stranded cables the wind velocities corresponding to pres- 
sures of 8, 11 and 15 lb. per sq. ft. of projected cable, with Mr. 
Buck’s constant and with a constant of 0.002, are as follows: 


Values of V 
Values of P Constant =0.0025 Constant =0.002 
8.0 56.6 63.3 
11.0 66.3 74.2 
15.0 Yi ae) 86.6 


It is worthy of note that the joint committee report permits 
an allowable safe stress in hard drawn copper of 50 per cent of the 
ultimate, or approximately at the elastic limit as determined by 


POLL) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2291 


the ordinary tests. For sustained loads copper has not as high 
an elastic limit as this percentage gives; the stretching which 
will take place, when copper is loaded up to its ordinary elastic 
limit, will produce considerable increase in the sag when the 
original span is tightly drawn. On that account it seems con- 
servative to employ a larger factor of safety than two. 

Another reason for increasing the factor of safety lies in the 
fact that the stresses due to swaying, and the resultant shocks, 
are not taken account of in the usual'span calculations. Failures 
do not ordinarily occur under steady loads, but during the varia- 
ble conditions which occur in a storm—when the wind is prob- 
ably coming in gusts. At the same time any yielding of the 
poles, towers, or guys may throw additional stresses on the 
spans. 

In the papers on high-tension operation at 100,000 volts, by 
Messrs. Jollyman, Lee and Hebgen, it is interesting to note that 
sleet has been experienced on such lines, although it has caused 
no extensive trouble. Mr. F. W. Peek, Jr., in his paper on 
“The Law of Corona and the Dielectric Strength of Non gee 
_ gives some interesting information in relation to sleet. He 
says, ‘‘Sleet had already started to form on the conductors, 
and was still falling when the tests were started. Fig. 57, (of 
his paper), shows the loss curve. After the curves were taken 
the line was kept at 200 kilovolts for over an hour with no ap- 
parent diminution of sleet. This seems to show that sleet will 
form on high-voltage transmission lines. The day after these 
tests were made was bright and clear and the conductors were 
still coated with sleet. A set of readings were taken, and it is 
interesting to note that the excess loss here is as great as when 
sleet was falling.’’ These results seem to clear up any doubt 
as to the occurrence of sleet on high-tension lines, with copper 
conductors. 

Mr. Buck, in his 1904 International Congress paper on “The 
Use of Aluminum as an Electrical Conductor,” before alluded 
to, says: that ‘ aluminum wire gathers much less sleet than 
copper. This is due perhaps to the grease which is absorbed 
in the aluminum, due to its porous qualities, in the process of 
wire drawing or from some other physical condition of its sur- 
face.’ Beyond this statement the writer has seen no definite 
or comparative data on the behavior of copper and alumi- 
num in sleet storms. 

During the winter of 1910-1911 the writer exposed several 
short spans of copper, iron and aluminum, in different sizes, to 
observe the effects of sleet precipitation. However, the op- 
portunities for observation proved to be very limited and sleet 
occurred but once, and then as a trace only. This happened 
at night, when observations were necessarily hampered, but it 
was definitely learned that sleet commenced to accumulate on 
copper, iron and aluminum alike. It did not progress suffi- 
ciently, however, to reveal quantitative results for comparison. 


2292 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


R. C. Darraw: In the paper presented by Mr. Thomas a 
solution is given for the problem of finding the sag of transmis- 
sion wires at different temperatures when the initial load condi- 
tions are given. This method will be found a short and con- 
venient one and all the calculations can be made on a slide rule 
with sufficient accuracy for practical use. The method is 
based on the equations of the catenary and it may be interesting 
to compare the results obtained using this method with those 
obtained by some method in which the tension is given by the 


@2 
l 


8 
formula T= and the length by the formula L= lt 


wi 
8d’ 


t 


13 MATERIAL MODULUS OF (COEFFICIENT OF UNIT ELONGATION 

16 80 ELASTICITY — EXPANSION (F,) PER 20°F. 
COPPER HARD DRAWN 6000 000 0.0000096 0.000192 

Mu 7 COPPER SOFT 12000000 0.0000096 0.000192 
ALUMINUM 9000000 0.00001 28 0.000256 


STEEL 29000000 0.0000064 0.000128 


L — 


EHH 
AACE: Bae 
4 20 LUNA curves For DETERMINING 


SAG OF WIRES 
ON TRANSMISSION LINES 


2 10 : = S) eek 
SS 
00 SRS RD a oe ae et a ee oe 
Te 7, $1001 002 ,003 004 .005 .006 007 008 .009 010 011 012 013 014 .015 .016 ,017 018 019 .020 S) 
L 1.0002 1.0004 1.0006 1.0008 1,v010 1.0012 1.0014 1,016 1.0018 1,0020L4 
So .01 .02 .03 .0f 05 .06 07 .08 .09 10 11 ,12 13 .1f .15 016 417.18 119 .20 Se 
Lo 1,002 1.004 1,006 1,008 1,010 1.012 1.014 1.016 1,018 1.020 Lo 
PLATE I 


where T equals the safe tension in the wire, w the weight per 
foot along the wire, / the span, and d the sag. Reference is 
made in Mr. Robertson’s paper to an error introduced by con- 
sidering the tension along the wire as constant and equal to the 
tension at the point of support. Following out this suggestion 
a curve has been determined giving a correction factor where 
greater accuracy is desired. 

A set of curves which will be found to cover a wide range of 
problems and which check those of Mr. Thomas are shown on 
Plate I. The points (Table I) on this curve have been de- 
termined with a ten place logarithm table, except those where 
the tension for the unit span is greater than one hundred. In 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2293 


. . 2 
getting these points the formula, T= = cy was used for the 
: : 8 , } 
unit tension and / AES i for the unit length, experience 


showing that this would be accurate enough for practical prob- 


TABLE I 
| 
Tension for unit span Sag for unit span Length for unit span 
156.25 0.000800 1.000001707 © 
138.88 0.000900 1.000002160 
125.00 0.001000 1.000002667 
113.63 0.001100 1.000003227 
100.001250 0.001250 1.000004212 
90 .910466 0.001375 1.000005104 
83 .334833 0.001500 1.000006058 
76 .924702 0.001625 1.000007110 
71.430321 0.001750 1.000008223 
66 .668542 0.001875 1,000009441 
62.502000 0.002000 1,000010742 
58 .825654 0.002125 1.000012115 
55 .557806 0.002250 1.000013571 
52.633954 0.002375 1.000015102 
50.002500 0.002500 1.000016725 
40.003125 0.003125 1.000026072 
33 .337083 0.003750 1.000037516 
28 .575804 0.004375 1.00005106 
25 .005000 0.005000 1.00006667 
20.006250 0.006250 1.00010418 
16 .674167 0.007501 1.00015003 
12.510001 0.010001 1.00026669 
10.012503 0.012503 1.00041673 
8.348337 0.015003 1.00059808 
7.160364 0.017507 1.00081687 
, 6.270011 0.020011 1.00106701 
5.578071 0.022515 1.00135055 
5.025021 0.025021 1,00166751 
4.572982 0.027528 1,00201789 
4.196703 0.030036 1.00240173 
3.370904 0.037570 1.0037542 
2.550167 0.050167 1.0066801 
2.062833 0.062833 1.0104352 
1.742231 0.075564 1.0150676 
1.516968 0.088397 1.0205421 
1.351340 0.101340° 1.0268808 
1, 225522 0.114411 1.0340934 
1.127626 0.127626 1.0421906 
1.050092 0.141001 1.0511847 
0.987888 0.154554 1.0610893 
0.896549 | 0. 182264 1.0836910 


lems. This portion of the curve will seldom be used except for 
very short spans or sizes of wire such as No. 12 or No. 14 N. B.5. 
copper, or a twisted pair of insulated No. 17 B. & S. steel 
wire. 

Comparison of this Method with One Using Equations Based on 
the Parabola. In the determination of a temperature-sag 


2294 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


curve the initial conditions at worst load are known, together 
with the tension to be allowed in the conductor, the first step 
in the solution of the problem being to get the sag at the min1- 


mum temperature with the weight of the wire only. Curves, 


given in Fig. 1 show the results for the original conditions ob- 


' : w PP 
tained from the catenary curves and from the formula, d rate Wit 


using a tension of one thousand pounds and a weight per foot of 
one pound. ‘These curves illustrate the variation in sags as the 
length of span increases and show that the difference in sags 
determined by the two methods is quite marked when the 
per cent sag is increased, quite an error being introduced at the be- 

ginning of the problem by the 


7 lor w 2 
is CAT. use of the formula d= a7: 

: 40. ar ; 
30 | Curves in Figs. 2, 3 and 4 
A PAR. show some comparisons be- 
ba _ tween temperaturé-sag curves 

ie | | V for various sizes of wire and 
ne tA different spans computed by 

ie ten —} two methods, those marked 1 

w }s0_|__| being figured from a method 

5 {70 | f based on the formulas 

2 

SI. f Panis T= aa for tension and 
40 Ie s/s ait os 
ig fr ae L=l+— —— -for, Jength, 
90. 3 l 
0 | | and those marked 2 being 

ah ek OT Se oo figured from the catenary 

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 curves. The variations in the 
SPAN-FEET two methods is brought out 

Fic. 1 very distinctly by these figures 


~ which show that for a 100-ft. 
span and No. 0000 B. & S. stranded copper. wire the 
curves coincide, while for the larger spans the difference 


increases as the per cent sag is increased, those figured from the» 
catenary curves giving larger results for the sag at the same. 


temperature. In working out these problems, when the larger 
spans are used and greater per cent sags result, the points de- 
termined will not lie exactly on a smooth curve when the catenary 
curves shown on Plate I are used, but the discrepancy is so small 


that a smooth curve can be easily drawn through the points: 


giving satisfactory results, and if more accurate results are de- 
sired the curves where the unit tension is small can be drawn on a 
larger scale. This refinement will not be necessary in practical 
work because of the inconsistency in the constants used for the 


ee DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 5 2295 


material. and_ the, inaccuracies arising from the assumptions 
made in the solution of the problem, one of these being that the 
tension along the conductor is constant. 


120. an ee 
; . | 19 
1110. | | <a 
1&2 ni 
; 1100. | 4 aa 
a 
= {90 | 
=a 100 FT. SPAN 
pay Igoe chee No. 4/0 COPPER STRAND = 
Gi 8 LB, PER SQ.FT. WIND. 
W |e Y21N, ICE 
a — 
= 60 at 
=) 
Ee |50, 
ws 
= 40. 
eS 30_ Le ad i 
iz 600 FT. SPAN 
20. No. 4/0 COPPER STRAND, 
8 LB. FER SQ.FT. WIND. 
10 Y2IN. ICE 
0 | 
1 FS sm 6 LOPS 120518; 22 16 
SAG-INCHES SAG-FEET 


Fic. 2 


Variation. of the Tension along a Conductor. It may be of 
interest to develop a curve giving a correction factor for various 
values of tension at the point of support which may be used where 


120 


100 


weg 
25 = = 
=e 
uy} 
Gi 80 
Lu 
a —— 
fa 60 
2 600 FT. SPAN 
ar NO.4 B & S COPPER STRAND 
ea ia PER 80.6. WWNO, 
2 IN, 1 
2 w 140 2 | ‘ 
= i 
uw 1 = 
le 
20 hi 
LO. : 
° 4142 43 (22 45 (26--47 48 49 50 
| SAG—-FEET 
| Fic. 3 
5 greater refinement is desired. It can be shown that, if the 


average tension along the conductor is used, the contraction of 
the conductor when the stress is removed can be more accurately 
figured, giving a greater contraction than when the tension at 


2296 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


the center of the span is used and a smaller one than that given 
by using the tension at the point of support. This means that 
when the tension at the point of support is used the values of the 
sag at different temperatures will be too small,and when the 
tension at the center of the span is used the values will be too 
large. The following method is developed so that the as- 
sumptions made may be clearly 
understood. 

Let A’ equal the contraction 
of any cord of length x, and let 


as the length, such that t=f (x). 
Then d \=kf (x) dx, and the 


total contraction, A=x | f (x) dx. 


0 


The term | f (x) dx will be the 
0 


area between the chord as the x 
axis and the curve representing 
the tension, t=f (x). This area 
can also be expressed by the 
length («) times the average 
tension (av. t), so that X=kx 


1 
(ait). Oly Ok er Bs where ee 
equals the cross-sectional area of 
the chord and E-is the modulus 
of elasticity of the material, the 


x (av. t) 
A Le 


Fic. 4.—Curve for determining If x is unity and the average 


average tension along a transmis- . (av. t) 
sion wire fibre stress (av. f) is —, the 
T, =Tension at point of support for unit A 


A ots yp equation becomes A= 


span ‘ - 

K =Average tension + tension at point of Contraction for unit length (A,) 
support 

Average tension =T, X K Xw XI f 


av. , 
Contraction for unit span ater becomes di ars oe Fe a which, sub- 
tracted from the unit length, 
gives the unstressed unit length. The problem now becomes 
one of finding the average tension along a catenary when the 
tension at the point of support or center of the span is 
given. The equation for the catenary is y=c/2 (e*/“+e-*/), 
and the length is s=c/2 (e*/“—e-*/), The values of y along 
the curve represent the values of the tension and the average 


the tension along the chord vary 


° 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2297 


value of y will represent the average tension. The average 
value of y along the length s is given by the equation 


Ay 
foes 


av. y=" 


Ss 


; c 
Since y= a (e*/¢-+- e-*/¢) and s = 5 (ex/¢—e*/°), the equation 


becomes, 
*C a m6 
= (pare ~%/C)2 elias Oveah a 
[Se +e*/e)? dx of foot c dx 
0 0 
av. y= = - = 
“ GC Sk Es Aimee S 
a fe (2 ) sinh Gi 
2 C Cr ok aye 
sinh 


Since the length of a span equals 2x, the average tension 
per unit span is given by the formula 


C 
4x 


x 1 
C 


av. Wi= 


: x 
(cosh 4 + 


: x 
sinh —; 
Cc 


a [tte ee 
rte 3) C (e*/¢—e-*/¢) 


If x/c has the same values as are used in determining the cate- 
nary curves, then for every value of the tension at the point of 
support, the equation will give a corresponding value of the 
average tension, or for every value of the tension at center of the 
unit span which equals the tension for unit span at the point of 
support minus the sag for unit span, we will have a value for the 
average tension. The value of the average tension divided by 
the tension at the point of support, will give a factor which may 
be plotted as absissas with the corresponding tension for unit 


span as ordinates, Fig. 4. The values used in plotting this 


2298 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


curve ate given in Table II. From this curve we can get the 
correction factor for any tension which may be used in deter- 
mining the contraction from the formula \,=a f/E, where fis 
the fibre stress at the point of support. An examination of this 
curve shows that the factor is negligible except where the tension 
for unit span is low, and these conditions will be found when the 
per cent sag is large. It must beremembered, however, that if 
this refinement is desired a new set of catenary curves must be 
drawn using average tension as ordinates in place of the tension 
values given in Table I. These ordinates can be found by multi- 
plying the values of tension in this table by the proper factor. 
Also average tension should be used throughout the solution 
of the problem. 


TABLE II 
Tension for unit span 
a 

Factor = 
At point At center Average Sag for column 3 

of support of span tension unit span 
column 1 
5.0250 5.0000 5.0083 0.02502 0.9967 
4.5730 4.5455 4.5546 0.02753 0.9960 
4.1967 4.1667 4.1767 0.03004 0.9952 
3.3709 3.3333 3.3459 0.03757 0.9926 
2.5502 2.5000 2.5168 0.05017 0.9865 
2.0628 2.0000 2.0211 0.06283 0.9797 
1.7422 1.6667 1.6921 0.07556 0.9712 
1.5170 1.4286 1.4584 0.08840 0.9614 
1.3513 1.2500 1.2843 0.10134 0.9504 
-1,2255 Be BN 1.1500 0.11441 0.9384 
1.1276 1.0000 1.0436 0.12763 0.9255 
1.0501 0.9091 0.9573 0.14100 0.9116 
0.9879 0.8333 0.8866 0.15455 » 0.8975 
0.8965 0.7143 0.7778 0.18226 0.8676 


A value of one pound per foot of conductor was used in determining the above table. 


P. H. Thomas: In answer to Mr. Lincoln’s question, I will 
say that it is manifestly impossible to tell in a general statement 
how much a pole or pin will yield and it is impossible to take 
mathematical account of a lot of the varying conditions, and if 
we, by our papers, have enabled you to understand what the 
result of the known factors is, you can more easily make allow- 
ance for the others. 

In regard to the effect of flexibility of supports, I think we 
will have to consider that two cases are likely to arise. There 
will be times on a long tangent, 7.e., a long straight line, where 
the supports will be only slightly deflected, since the spans 
support one another. If we havea general increase in tension in 
the line the cross-arm cannot yield in either direction, because 
it is pulled in both directions. On the other hand, where we 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2299 


have bends in the line, or where one conductor burns off, or 
some other unsymmetrical condition arises, we may have a 
great deflection in the tower, in which case the strains calculated 
by this formula will be wide of the fact. 

I have spoken of broken conductors as a very important case. 
Assume that all the conductors are burned off on one side of the 
pole—not only do we have thereafter the strain that results from 
the tension on one side only, but we have a sudden shock as 
the wires due to the swing reach the lowest point. With sus- 
pension insulators the wire forms a sort of toggle joint and will 
produce a considerable strain as the maximum of the swing. 
In practise I have known no trouble on this score. 

I wish to add one word to what Mr. Nicholson has said in re- 
gard to the proper spacing between wires, that proper spacing 
depends on other things than the voltage. This matter deserves 
a great deal of emphasis. I would add to the variables Mr. 
Nicholson named, the question as to whether the type of insu- 
lator is pin or suspension, for the suspension insulator, having a 
free swinging motion sidewise, requires a much wider spacing of 
conductors than the pin type of insulator. ; 

Mr. Robertson’s statements about the ‘‘ stretch curves on 
my diagram are perfectly just. They are true, I think, within all 
ordinary ranges; if you go beyond the elastic limit they are not 
true, but it is true that you can get the exact result by plotting, 
instead of the straight line, the actual stretch curve, whatever 
it may be. If you know you are going beyond the elastic 
limit, and know what the curve of the material is, plot it on the 
diagram. 

I consider the method Mr. Robertson says has been suggested 
to him, that of stretching soft wire tighter than the ultimate 
condition will allow, and letting it stretch when the strain ex- 
ceeds the elastic limit, is a dangerous, proceeding. If the wire 
is perfect, and you know it will stretch uniformly, there is much 
to be said in favor of the idea. If, however, there are any 
joints in the wire, or there is any danger of its being kinked, 
or nicked, the stretching will come at some one point rather than 
uniformly throughout the wire, and you do not know what 
condition will result. 

W. L. R. Robertson: In Mr. Fowle’s discussion, he has very 
appropriately considered the assumption of proper loading and 
the proper safety factor. In the 1911 overhead line report of the 
Pennsylvania Electric Association, the writer makes a few 


- suggestions that are closely in accord with Mr. Fowle’s ideas. It 


seems that in overhead line construction the tendency is to base 
calculations on very narrow margins of safety. In other engi- 
neering problems such as building construction, etc., we assume 
loads on our structures up to the extreme limits, and in addition 
to this we employ safety factors up to 5 and larger. We are, 
indeed, handicapped in our calculations by not having definite 
conclusives in these matters. 


2300 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


In regard to wind pressures, on wires, up to the present time 
Mr. Buck’s expression: 


P=0.0025 V? 


is generally conceded to be correct, but in conjunction with the 
study of Mr. Buck’s conclusions, attention should also be given 
to an article in the Journal of Electricity, Power and Gas, July 29, 
1911, by Messrs. Piatt, Lane and Kistler, wherein they claim 
very much higher wind pressures than given by the above ex- 
pression, especially for the smaller wires. 

In answer to Mr. Thomas, when he criticizes the stretching of 
annealed copper as a dangerous proceeding, the writer has not 
recommended the stretching of any wire beyond the ultimate 
conditions. If stretching is carried on too far, it most assuredly 
is dangerous, but if soft copper is to be used at all in overhead 
lines and to be erected with reasonably small sag values then a 
certain amount of stretching cannot be avoided. If 17,000 lb. 
per sq. in. or 4} the ultimate strength is the proper allowable 
stress, as recommended in the overhead report of the National 
Electric Lighting Association, June, 1911, then the stretching 
of soft copper is considerable. In fact the elastic limit of an- 
nealed copper is very low and indeterminate, and it would be 
impracticable to use annealed copper without stretching. 
Further, on this basis satisfactory calculations cannot be made 
for annealed copper unless data on permanent set, increase in 
tensile strength due to stretching, etc., are available. 

P. H. Thomas: Attention should be called to the ingenious 
method of Mr. R. S. Brown, found in the discussion of these 
papers, in which he has simplified line calculations. It is 
well known that in any transmission wire not containing loops 
there is an inherent relation between inductance and capacity, 
so that one property bears a definite numerical relation to the 
other property, this relation being expressed by the equation 


1 , : 
Lce= yp? where V is a constant approximately equal to the 


velocity of light. The relationship is as a matter of actual fact, 
somewhat disturbed by conditions within the conductor, but 
presumably not sufficiently to interfere with its practical ac- 
curacy for general work. While this relation has been well 
known, as far as I am aware it has not previously been directly 
applied to the simplification of equations containing both in- 
ductance and capacity as apparently independent variables. 
Considering Mr. Fowle’s discussion of the choice of maximum 
conditions to be met by any particular structure, I would like to 
call attention to one saving fact, namely: that, should a strain 
appear on the wire greater than the elastic limit, the result will 
not ordinarily be the rupture of the wire but merely a certain 
stretch which will greatly relieve the tension in the span. This 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2301 


condition serves practically to greatly extend the extreme con- 
ditions under which an actual rupture and falling of a line con- 
ductor would be expected. This favorable situation exists, of 
course, only with regard to the wires or cables strung along the 
poles and does not extend to the line poles, except as against 
such strains as are produced by the toggle effect of the sus- 
pending wire. In the case of a stretched wire it will of course 
sometimes be necessary to take up slack afterwards. 

I should like to call attention to Mr. Darrow’s communication 
on my paper as representing a very careful study of the method 
and its relation to the present ordinary methods. Mr. Darrow 
has given the values upon which the curves of Chart No. 2 of my 
paper are drawn, but has extended the computations to more 
significant figures in such a way as to permit the application of 
the curves to much tighter spans, such as are frequently used in 
telephone and relatively low voltage distribution work. 

Harold Pender and H.F. Thomson: The object in presenting 
the detailed derivation of the formulas in our paper was to put 
in a readily accessible place a complete discussion of the limita- 
tions of the approximate formulas used in practise. We should 
have been no more surprised than Mr. Lincoln had we found that 
for short spans the assumption of a parabola introduces a con- 
siderable error and that in the case of short transmission lines 
the simple method of calculation ordinarily used gives er- 
roneous results. In view of the fact that long spans and long 
lines are becoming more and more frequent it is important that 
the limitations be recognized. We wish to point out again that 
the complete rules for the use of the charts are given on the charts 
and that it is therefore unnecessary in using them to refer to the 
detailed deductions in the text. . 

The method of solving the wire span given by Mr. Thomas is 
exceedingly simple in theory, but requires considerable slide 
rule calculation. Our chart gives the same results but only a 
single slide rule computation, a simple multiplication, is neces- 
sary. To show the graphical portion of our solution we have 
reproduced as Fig. 6 the part of Chart No. 2 necessary for the 
solution of the example of the aluminum wire span given at the 
foot of the chart. The location of the points A, B and C has 
been explained previously. It will be noticed that only two 
of the system of curved lines given on the chart are necessary for 
any single solution. It should be observed also that for a given 
span the tensions and deflections for any series of stringing 
temperatures may be found by locating other points like C 
by means of lines parallel to B C and passing through the cor- 
responding temperature points on A B. A number of such lines 
for the above example are indicated in Fig. 6. The advantage 
of this chart when one has to make a number of calculations for 
different lengths of span or for various temperatures with a given 
span is evident. 


; A: 
It is worth noting that the relation L c= Vr used by Mr. 


2302 SAGS AND SPANS [June 30 


Brown applies only to overhead transmission lines where the 
capacity is not influenced by the presence of other conductors 
or the earth. The relation does not hold for a lead sheathed 
cable, nor does it hold for a loaded telephone line. This also 
applies to the capacities given on our Chart No. 38. 


~ 
aw 
2 


DEFLECTIONS IN PER CENT 


p= 


Fic. 6. 

Location of points A, B, and C for example of aluminum wire given on 
Chart No. 2 For tensions. and deflections at stringing temperatures 
other than 70 deg. fahr., draw lines parallel to B C through points on 
A B corresponding ‘to the respective temperature corrections, as 50 deg., 
60 deg., etc. : 


In the paper the report of the Joint Committee on Overhead 
Line Construction is misquoted. Their recommendation for 
the maximum load is the simultaneous existence of 0.5-in. of 
ice, a wind pressure of 8 lb. per sq. ft. and a temperature of 
0 deg. fahr., not —20 deg. fahr. as statedlin the text. Our atten- 
tion was called to this error by Mr. R. D. Coombs. 

The error pointed out by Mr. Robertson in Fig. 3 in his paper. 
when the points of support are not on the same level, does not 
enter into our formula (81). The phenomenon referred to 
is taken account of by the second term in the parenthesis. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


THE HIGH-EFFICIENCY SUSPENSION INSULATOR 


BY A. O. AUSTIN 


The high-efficiency type of suspension insulator has become 
an important factor in high-tension transmission within the 
last few years, and it is hoped that the considerations which led 
to the design of this type will be of interest. 

A very high potential and small current, with a wide range 
in power factor make quantitative measurements very difficult. 
For this reason the performance of the insulator is based largely 
on visual phenomena or comparative test. 

In service the insulator is subjected to two classes of stress— 


“mechanical and electrical. Mechanically the insulators must 


withstand the stresses necessary to support the conductor, and 
electrically it must prevent failure by the current passing 
through the insulator, over the surface, or through the air from 
conductor to support or ground. To satisfy the electrical 
requirements, dielectric strength, surface resistance and ca- 
pacity are necessary. 

It is not sufficient that these properties be developed for 
laboratory tests only, but for conditions in service where the 
effect of depreciation and its causes must be given due con- 
sideration. L: 

After making a larger number of tests on the different ‘types 
of insulators in 1904, it was decided that if an improvement was 
to be made in the insulator, it would be by improving the 
efficiency rather than by increasing the size or weight of the 
insulator. With this idea, a number of experiments were started 
on different styles of disks to obtain their relative efficiencies 
as insulating members for the high-tension insulators. As it 
was desired to design an insulator for the severe conditions 


2303 


2304 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 
around San Francisco Bay, the effect of surface depreciation 
was of greatest importance, for it was evident that after a few 
years operation, insulators failed through the surface becoming 
coated. 

In photographing the different types, it was noticed that there 
was a difference in the nature of the flashover, the arc in some 
instances following the surface, taking a very long path between 
conductor and pin, while in others the path of the are was through 
the air or partially over surface and through the air. It was 
noticed, however, that the arc followed the surface in the larger 
types excepting where a wooden or porcelain pin was used. The 
reason for this was not at first apparent, but after a study of the 
characteristic it was decided that this was largely due to the 
overstressing of a part, the insulator failing by a cascade action. 
It was well known that certain parts of the insulator were greatly 
overstressed, causing many insulators to puncture on assembled 
test, but the remedy for this had not been advanced. 

Shortly before this time, considerable improvement had been 
made in design to obtain higher flashover of the insulator under 
storm conditions by giving the insulator large striking distances 
between surfaces. This, however, was carried to an extreme in 
some of the designs, for it was readily seen that after the insu- 
lators were in service, that it would not be possible to utilize the 
full striking distance owing to there being a weaker path over 
the surface for the forming of the arc. . 

As the rating or capacity of the insulator is based largely on 
the potential necessary to flash over the insulator under storm 
conditions, it is important that the properties influencing the 
flashing or arcing be given close attention. 

There are two types of insulators shown in Fig. 1; in one, 
the insulator flashed over, the are forming over the surface, 
while in the other one, the arc took the air path. If the arc 
builds up over the surface on the clean insulator, it will follow 
that the potential required to cause flashover will be much lower 
after the insulator surface has depreciated under operating 
conditions. If, however, the arc forms between surfaces through 
the air practically the same potential may be necessary to cause 
flashover even after considerable surface depreciation has set in. 
This latter will be true as long as the path over the surface 
shunting the air path will maintain a drop in potential equal 
to that necessary to rupture the air path. 

The amount of depreciation which an insulator will stand and 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2305 


not lower its rating depends upon the excess in surface insulation 
between the points where the arc forms. In the pin-type insu- 
lator it is very difficult to obtain the same ratio between surface 
resistance and the flashing distance, as a slight change in the 
distance or conditions varies the relative values to a large extent. 
In the suspension insulator, however, there are more nearly 
ideal conditions. 

Owing to the limitations of the pin type insulator, engineers 
were looking for a different type of insulator, and several designs 
of suspension and post types were proposed in 1904. Tests on 


Ere, 1 


some of these showed that they had very good properties, but 
that the efficiency would have to be very much improved before 
they would be of importance. 

In addition to the electrical characteristics, a study of manu- 
facturing methods was made in order to form a basis for practical 
designing. This work all required much time, and it was neces- 
sary to develop not only manufacturing methods for making 
up some of the pieces, but the porcelain body also. It was later 
found that a number of the principles had been used in some of 
the earlier types of insulators with success, but had been practi- 


cally abandoned and forgotten at the time. 


2306 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


SURFACE RESISTANCE 


In service, the insulator must be regarded as a high resistance. 
The drop in potential over the surface will depend upon the 
flow of current and the resistance of the surface. As the surface 
resistance varies greatly with a change in conditions, usually 
the worst conditions are assumed for the purpose of analysis. 

The early telegraph insulators appear to have been very 
carefully designed so as to give high surface resistance. While 
the voltage remains low, no trouble is experienced by the over- 
stressing of air-gaps as they are relatively large and high surface 
resistance may be obtained by providing long leakage paths of 
small diameter. 

When the voltage is increased, larger insulators made along 
the same lines arc between the ends of petticoats and are noisy 


| i] 
SURFACE RESISTANCE 
__|_K= RESISTANCE CF PATH 1 IN. IN LENGTH 
AND 1 IN, IN WIDTH 
a = RADIUS AT POINT IN LEAKAGE PATH 
}-2 7 2 = WIDTH OF LEAKAGE PATH 
7 = LENGTH OF PATH 
or = RESISTANCE OF LEAKAGE PATH 1 IN, IN 
LENGTH, AND WIDTH 27a 


K Sf ll — TOTAL SURFACE RESISTANCE 
27 Jo «x 


2 4 6 8 10 12 it 16 18 = 20 INCHES 
DIAMETER 


Fic. 2 


at potentials considerably below flashover; for if the difference 
in potential between any two points in the leakage path becomes 
equal to the flashing potential for the air distance between the 
points, overstressing develops and an arc forms. 

The insulator does not necessarily flash over, but is likely to 
spit and become very noisy. Large air spaces remedy this fault, 
but if not properly placed low efficiency results. 

As surface resistance not only prevents a serious loss of cur- 
rent but is responsible for the potential gradient over the surface 
of the insulator it is of no little importance. 

The resistance of an insulator must be determined by taking 
the width into account as well as the length of leakage path. 
Surface resistance will vary directly as to length and inversely 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2307 


as to width. The width of the leakage path at any point will be 
2 7 r where r is the radius of the zone at that point. By taking 
as the unit of resistance, a surface one inch (2.54 cm.) in width 
and one inch in length, the resistance may be determined in 
terms of this unit. 

Fig. 2 shows the effect of diameter on resistance and shows 
how very misleading it is to base surface resistance on length 
of leakage path. The area below the curve gives the total re- 
sistance and shows very plainly that a leakage path of large 
diameter furnishes but little resistance compared to a path of 
small diameter. 


‘eet las ale 
18 SURFACE RESISTANCE 
PLAIN DISC «470 K 
16 ] ——| PETTICAATED DISC +804 K 
4 |< ry >\< ve 
| 
12 | 7 
10 + +— ——s 
SS 
a SS 
.08 = ia 
00 5 wis is 
% ~ SN \ 
04 SERS SW S: 
+02 S SS S Ss 
a SS . 
SIE SSNS 
1 2 3 4 5 6 Us 8 11 12 13 If INCHES 
LEAKAGE PATR:CAP TO PIN 
Fie. 3. 


Fig. 3 shows the resistance integral curve for a 10-in. (25.4 cm.) 
high-efficiency disk. The shaded portion represents the resist- 
ance furnished by the petticoats. Fig. 3b shows a detail of a 
unit. 

The petticoat is a very efficient way in which to increase 
surface insulation, for 16 per cent of material added in the 
form. of petticoats increases the resistance of the lower surface 
100 per cent. In this manner a high surface resistance can be 
obtained with a small diameter. 

The resistance integral curve Fig. 2, plainly shows that where 
the diameter of an insulator is made large, very little resistance 
ig gained, for in order to produce an effective drop in potential 
over the lower resistance of a zone of large diameter would re- 
quire a leakage current so large that the zone of small diameter, 
in series, would be a mass of fire.” Where very large diameters 


2308 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


are used for severe conditions it is equivalent to placing a 16-c.p. 
lamp and a 50 c.p. lamp in series on double voltage and expecting 
an efficient combination. 

The petticoat in addition to providing an increase in surface 
resistance reduces the electrostatic capacity of the flange. 
This reduces the charging current and gives the section a 40 per’ 
cent higher flashing potential without increasing the distance 
between cap and pin. 

A high charging current on the surface evaporates the water 
striking the surface, preventing a washing action, and in addition 


5x 


Fic. 3b. 


highly conducting compounds are produced greatly depreciating — 
the surface insulation. 

In an endeavor to reduce the charging current and consequent 
depreciation several all-porcelain types, were developed, shown 
in Fig. 4. 

These insulators had very good properties, but it was found 
that the high-efficiency disk type with low charging current 


gave nearly as good results and had decided mechanical ad- 
vantages. 


THE INCLINATION OR SPACING OF THE SKIRT OR FLANGE 


After conducting a number of tests with fog shields, and oil 
zones in an endeavor to protect insulators against depreciation, 
it was decided that the operation of the insulator could be 
greatly improved by obtaining a better relation between the 
surface gradient and spacing of parts. 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2309 


Where the distance between parts is too small for the stress, 
an arc is established. The arc reduces the potential between the 
parts depending on the current in the arc. In some insulators 
overstressing or arcing starts at a very low potential. The 
insulator does not necessarily arc over, for the current in the 


Fic. 4. 


arc may be limited to the leakage or charging current of the 
insulator or part, there being enough insulation in series to limit 
the current in the arc. 
Since the arc bridging an overstressed air-gap acts as a con- 
a e ductor shunting the sur- 
face resistance, it lowers 
the efficiency of the insu- 
lator and should be pre- 
vented by arranging the 
clearances in proportion to 
the difference in potential ; 
that this is especially im- 
portant where the condi- 
: tions are severe is shown 


elke VY 
ry, = resistance of upper surface by the following: 
ry = hep eee surface Fig. 5 shows <4 simple 


insulator, it being desired 


to find the proper position of the skirt or flange to prevent 
overstressing and give maximum flashing potential. 


2310 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR {June 30 


E=potential necessary to strike arc between e and d. 

s;= potential to strike arc between e and b. 

s2= potential to strike arc between b and d. 

i=leakage current. 

pi=drop in potential over upper surface. 

p2=drop in potential over lower surface. 

The distance between b and ground and 6 and pin is made equal 
or bd=Dbe. 

Since the maximum potential which may be applied to the 
insulator is limited to the flashing potential for E or the shortest 
air path of the insulator, the flashing efficiency will be the ratio 
of potential necessary to flash insulator, to this potential. It is 
evident that for maximum possible efficiency, the following 
equation must be satisfied: 


pPitpfr=E 2 (1) 
Pign. Sty 
po 7 Se (2) 


applying Ohm’s law gives 


Ba Sah 
os aa (3) 
For practical purposes 
Si pele BL. 
SQ 2. bd (4) 
Substituting from (3) and (4) in (2) gives 
Tage Os 
r, . bd (5) 
ees VE ap 
Substituting for Sq Sives 
if 


ro 


=tan 0 (6) 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2311 


Therefore, to obtain maximum striking efficiency the angle with 


the conductor must be such that tan 0= 


2 


Equation (6) shows that for maximum wet striking distance 


corresponding to @=0 that a8 =( which can only be satisfied 
2 


when 7;=0 or r2=. When an insulator is clean and the under 
: : Py. os 
surface dry while the upper is wet, e is very small, and a 
2 


nearly horizontal skirt will give good results. This, however, 
comes far from representing conditions found in practice where 
the upper surface may have more resistance than the lower. If 
the resistance of the upper: surface is higher than the lower, 
then tan 9>1 and @ is greater than 45 deg. : 

That this is no exaggeration in practice is evident when it is 
considered that where conditions are severe the lower protected 
surfaces are continually depreciating due to accumulations of 
conducting material, while the upper surfaces retain a fair state 
of insulation due to the washing by the rain. 

That fogs are likely to give most trouble, is evident when 


"is considered together with the design of the 


the value of 
2 


insulator. 

When the insulator has been in service some time, the upper 
surface is fairly clean compared to the lower, and even in a rain, 
the wet upper surface may have a resistance comparable to the 
dry but dirty lower. surface. During a fog, however, all sur- 
faces are wet, and the resistance of the dirty lower surface is 
very much lower than during a rain storm, greatly increas- 


11 
ro 


ing For this condition @ should be large, but if 6 is small, 
overstressing may develop and a large part of the surface insula- 
tion lost through the shunting or leakage arcs. 

From the above considerations it is seen that in practice 


As may vary from nearly zero to greater than unity and that 


t2 
for a slight change in conditions @ should vary accordingly 


. ee : r 
to give maximum efficiency. It is very desirable to keep Ie 


2312 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


constant forfall conditions so that the inclination of the skirt 
will not have to be changed for a slight variation in conditions, 
in order to maintain efficiency. 


lal 


When 6=0 ~=( for all conditions and efficiency equal 


T2 
100 per cent, but the resistance of the upper surface 7; is lost. 

By making r, large in comparison to 7; will necessitate only 
a slight change in the inclination @ to obtain maximum effi- 
ciency. Furthermore if 2 is large 8 will be small. The increase 
in 72 will reduce the leakage current, and the electrical gradient 
over the surface will be less." Fig. 3, shows that the petticoats 
form a very effective means of increasing ro. 

The insulation of the air may be regarded as constant while 
surface insulation depreciates with time and severe conditions. 
Then by designing the insulator so that the flashing potential 
is limited by the breaking 
down of the air paths, the 
rating or capacity may not 
be affected by surface depre- 
ciation. 

To insure the air charac- 
teristic in the insulator, the 
striking distance between suc- 
cessive sections is made small 
so that the weakest path for 
the forming of the are will be 

Fic. 6. through the air. In providing 

the air characteristic it is im- 

portant that the length efficiency remain high; the following 

example showing the effect of inclination of flange on the 
length efficiency. 

Fig. 6 represents two successive sections having section length 
ac, it being desired to find the effect of inclination of flange on 
the length efficiency. 


e = potential necessary to flash between a and lower insulator. 
E=potential necessary to flash ac. 

p=potential necessary to flash a b. 

d=potential drop from b to c. 


e pb+d 


The efficiency = E 7 (7) 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2318 


If is small, d becomes very small. If the diameter is 


r2 
large, the surface resistance from } to ¢ is very small, even 
compared to 7;,and d may be considered as zero without ma- 
terially affecting results. 
When d=0 


BAitienon =e (8) 


E 
For practical purposes, the potential is proportional to striking 
distance, hence 


Piel 2 
f= (9) 


accos 0 by (10) 


Equation (10) shows that if d=0 the efficiency =cos 0 and 
for maximum efficiency cos 0=1 or 6=0. 

When the diameter of the insulator is large or where the under 
surface of the insulator has a high resistance compared to the 
upper, d becomes very small and equation (10) very nearly 
approximates conditions in practice. 

By consulting the surface resistance curve, it will be seen that 
d will increase as the diameter of the insulator decreases, owing 
to the higher resistance of the zone of smaller diameter. 

From this it follows that in general, the smaller the diameter, 
the greater the permissible inclination for maximum length 
efficiency. It also shows that where insulators of large diameter 
are used, the length efficiency will be lowered greatly with the 
inclination of the skirt or flange. 


DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OR THE ABILITY OF THE INSULATOR TO 
Carry ELECTRICAL STRESS 

In service, the insulator must withstand two classes of stress; 

that of the line at normal frequency and voltage, and that of the 

high frequency surge. The insulator must operate indefinitely 

under the normal line potential, which affects every insulator 


2314 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR {June 30 


on the system. The surge, however, may throw a very high 
stress on a few of the insulators, but only for an extremely short 
space of time. 

For reliable operation, no insulator should puncture or fail 
by flashing or spilling. To produce 100 per cent reliability 
against flashing or puncture, would require a very large invest- 
ment in the line, but it is possible to obtain a high degree of 
reliability at a moderate cost for the line by using the suspension 
insulator. To prevent spillovers would require very large in- 
sulators and the greatly increased cost would not be warranted 
by the small improvement in operation over that afforded by 
ordinary practice. With a spillover, the line may not be ap- 
preciably affected, but when an insulator punctures, the line is 
usually disabled until the faulty insulator is replaced. Since 
dielectric strength does not necessarily require an increase in size 
in the insulator and is of such great importance in affecting re- 
liability, more attention should be given to it in the insulator. 

In order to increase the reliability against puncture, it is 
common practice to test all insulators at a potential several 
times that of the line. This weeds out a number of the weaker 
insulators and improves the reliability, but owing to the time - 
element in effecting breakdown, does not insure absolute re- 
liability nor uniform strength. 

In the ordinary high-tension insulator, the testing stress 
compared to thickness is not high enough to puncture perfect 
material. When insulators of this type are tested, it is found 
that the breakage becomes less as the time of test increases, but 
is never entirely eliminated. 

In order to draw conclusions as to reliability in the insulator 
against puncture, it is necessary to study the time puncture 
curves. These curves are constructed by noting the time that 
each puncture occurs after the potential has been applied and 
plotting the per cent of breakage in respect to time. 

The greater number of pieces on which the curve is based, the 
more valuable will it become. 

Fig. 7 shows the breakage or time puncture curves for an 
insulator or part at two different potentials. When the dif- 
ference in test potential is not very great, a high potential for a 
short time eliminates practically the same material that a lower 
potential would, applied for a longer time, the curves being dis- 
cussed on this basis. 

Curve A shows a breakage of 2.2 per cent after } minute test 


1911 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2315 


at 100 kv. In order to have eliminated the same material at 
85 kv., curve B shows that it would have been necessary to test 
for 4.7 minutes. | 

If the insulators which had received the 100-kv. test were 
tested for another 4 minute at the same potential, there would be 
a loss of 1.2 per cent. If, however, the insulators which had 
received the first half minute test had been tested for 3 minute 
at 85 kv., the loss would have been only 0.2 per cent or about 
1 what it was at the higher voltage. 

The curves show that if the insulators had been tested for 
5 minutes at 100 kv., it would take a very long time at 85 kv. to 
cause a breakage of one per cent. If in place of 85 kv. a potential 
of 50 kv. was applied, it might be a matter of days before one per 
cent had punctured. — 


a 


ao 


a 


o 


o 


- 


PUNCTURES- PER CENT 
eo 


wn 


1 2 3 . 6 6 7 8 9 Mika 125 38 


TIME OF TEST MIN. 


10 14” 15 


BiGad. 


By having the breakage time curves, it is then possible to 
construct the time potential curve which shows the relation be- 
tween time and potential to produce a certain per cent breakage. 

When the time potential curve and the stress carried by the 
different parts in the insulator are known, it is possible to predict 
the number of punctures in the complete or assembled insulator 
for any potential and time. 

By limiting the flashing potential, and having the curves and 
knowing the punctures on the line, some idea as to the relative 
conditions in operation and test may be obtained. 

If a transmission system installed 50,000 insulators shown in 
curve A which had been tested to 100 kv. for one minute and 
the number of punctures were 10 for the year, the breakage 


2316 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


would be 0.02 of one per cent. The stress that would produce 
this breakage would run from the line potential to that of flash- 
_ over, most of the breakage being at the higher stresses during 
lightning storms, as most of the punctures in operation occur at 
near flashing potential of the insulator the time breakage curve 
for this potential should furnish a fair basis of comparison for 
punctures, providing the stress in service can be limited to this 
value. 

Curve A shows that after testing the insulators for one minute 
at 100 kv. the rate of puncture is 1.3 per cent per minute. 
From this it follows that to produce the same number of punc- 
tures at 100 kv. on the 50,000 insulators that occurred on the 
line, the stress would have to be applied until 0.02 of one per cent 


were punctured or for :: "= 0.0157 minutes. 


Reducing the stress 15 per cent from that in curve A gives 
punctures in accordance with curve B. The rate of breakage 
given by the 85-kv. curve on insulators first tested for one 
minute at 100 kv. is 0.18 of one per cent per minute as against 
1.3 per cent per minute on the 100-kv. curve and the breakage 
for the same interval of time might be expected to be reduced 
accordingly. 

From this it would follow that by constructing the insulator 
so that all stresses in practice would be reduced 15 per cent, the 


punctures would be reduced from 10 to “ of 10, or 1.38, esti- 
mated from the time breakage curves. 

In the above example, the possible 86 per cent reduction in 
punctures can be made use of in practice if all stresses are re- 
duced 15 per cent. This can be approximated by the addition 
of a part to the insulator which would take 15 per cent of the 
stress. Up to 100 kv. on the insulator this would be entirely 
satisfactory, but if the addition of the part increased the flash- 
over potential, the stress on the original insulators would not be 
kept down to 85 per cent under heavy surges, and the benefit 
of the added part would be partially, if not totally, lost under 
these conditions. 

By adding the part such that the flashover is not increased 
and 15 per cent of the stress is absorbed, the insulator would 
operate in accordance with curve B, with an 86 per cent re- 
duction in punctures over that when operating in accordance 
with curve A. 


ss anil 


\ 


a 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2317 


To make full use of the 86 per cent reduction in loss in the 
above example, the stress at flashing potential on the insulator 
would not exceed 85 per cent of that which it received on test, 
or in other words, the insulators would have a tested factor of 
100 
85 


This is accomplished in large pin type insulators by designing 
the parts so that they will have a high flashing potential com- 
pared to the stress which they have to carry at flashover on 
the complete insulator, permitting of a tested factor of safety. 
In the suspension insulator, the section length is reduced so 
that the entire insulator flashes before the tested or flashing 
potential for a part is reached. 

If in addition to providing a tested factor of safety at flash- 
over, the test be continued, the reduction in probable punctures 
will be made possible in accordance with the increase in re- 


Of plolio. 


safety of 


* liability shown by the time puncture curves. By testing to 


five minutes at 100 kv. in the above example, the rate of puncture 
is reduced from 1.3 per cent per minute at one minute to + of 
1 per cent per minute, reducing the probability of puncture 
75 per cent or to one puncture about every three years. 

It may be contended that owing to the time lag in the break- 
down of the air, that the impressed potential on surge will be so 
high that time puncture curves made at normal frequency will 


be of little value. While the time puncture curves made at 


different potentials and normal frequency may vary considerably 
from those made at high frequency and short time, the general 
characteristics would probably be the same, and a factor of 
safety based on the curves made at normal frequency would 
apply in general to operating conditions. 

There is such a marked reduction in loss at testing potentials 
by applying a small factor of safety, that it seems reasonable to 
assume that by making the tested factor of safety large and the 
air path over the insulator direct that the insulator may be 
made to withstand even the direct stroke of lightning. 

The chief value derived from the time puncture curves is 
a basis for determining the relation between cost of insulation 
and reliability. 

To give the same degree of reliability against puncture, the 
rate of puncture per minute at end of test should be the same, 
for similar insulators made at different times or by different 
processes or factories. 


2318 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


Fig. 8 shows the time puncture curves made on the same piece 
of ware at different factories. Curve C shows a loss at the 
end of the test at the rate 2.4 per cent per minute at 55 kv. 
Curve D gives for the rate of loss one per cent per minute at the 
end of the test. Some idea as to the effect of the reliability 
of the two lots of insulators may be gained by the performance 
of the aboye on test. If 10,000 of lot-C were again tested 
for 10 seconds they would show approximately 60 punctures. 
While lot D when given the same test would show only 17. 

If the test potential is low compared to the stress which the 
part may receive in service, the time breakage curve may not 
give a proper comparison, for a piece which had a relatively very 
low breakage rate may have at a higher potential a high rate of 
puncture and a higher total loss. 


PUNCTURES -PER CENT 


10 20 30 20 50 60 80 
TIME OF TEST SEC, 


Fic. 8. 


It has been shown that insulators of given reliability may 
have their reliability greatly increased by providing a tested 
factor of safety for severest conditions. When a tested factor of 
safety prevails throughout the insulator the flashing charac- 
teristics are very interesting. 

Fig. 9 shows a four-section insulator flashing from conductor 
to support, the arc forming through the air... As this insulator 
has a tested factor of safety, the air path from conductor to pin 
was broken down before a flashing (or tested potential) was 
reached on any section. If the mechanical limitations would 
permit, the tested factor of safety could be further increased by 
adding another unit without increasing the length. 4 


<a. 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2319 


Fig. 10 shows another four-section insulator of the same 
length as in Fig. 9, but in this instance the arc is seen forming 
over the surface of each part, since the arc picked up over the 
surface in the same way on test, it is reasonable to assume that 
the stress was approximately the same in each case. From this 
it would follow that when an insulator has the surface arcing 
characteristics that it can never have a tested factor of safety 
ereater than one at flashover. If the sections in the insulator 
could be tested in a denser atmosphere permitting of a higher 
test potential than that which would cause flashover in the 


Fic. 9. Fie. 10. 


assembled insulator, a tested factor of safety might be gained 
even though the arc, picked up over the surface in the insulator, 
at flashover. This method, however, is impracticable. 

Any insulator tested at flashover near sea level acquires a 
tested factor of safety when installed at a high altitude, owing 
to the lowered potential necessary to cause flashing at the greater 
altitude. . 

Fig. 11 shows the free arcing characteristic in a pin type insu- 
lator having a tested factor of safety. Fig. 12 shows a pin type 
having the surface arcing characteristics. In this insulator 


2320 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


225 kv. was necessary to flash the insulator while the aggregate 
test potential of the four parts was in excess of 270 kv. That 
the excess in test potential does not provide a tested factor of 
safety for some part, is due to the surface arc being formed by 
flashovers on the parts individually until the arc is formed over 
the series. The insulator really fails at 200 kv. when a small 
shell reaches flashing potential and spills, throwing more stress . 
on the remaining parts. By raising the potential slightly, one 
of the other parts is overstressed, and the arc forms in cascade 
over the entire insulator, thus producing a flashing potential 
on every part equivalent to its test potential. 


Fic, 11. 


Owing to the lack of tested factor of safety and poor reliability 
in the ware, some designs of the disk type have shown up poorly 
at flashover and the dielectric strength of the single-piece disk 
type was unjustly condemned. 


THE. DISTRIBUTION OF STRESS IN THE INSULATOR 


The sections may be regarded as electrostatic condensers in 
series, and if the same flux was carried by the dielectric in each 
member, the distribution of stress would be uniform. 

E=potential applied to the insulator or series. 

t=tested dielectric strength of a member of the series. 
e=drop in potential over or stress on a section. 

q=charging current for a section. 

C=electrostatic capacity of a section. 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2321 


For the electrostatic condenser e= = and for the series 


_ (C2 C3 weeee Cn) +qo(c1 C3 wanes Ch) seeee Qn(C1 C2 eaeee Chai) 


H=e;teotes ...€n 
(12) 


Where there is the same dielectric flux in each insulator 
1=G=G=qi.. equation (12) may be written 


Ee (Co C3..+0Cn) + (C1 C3.+4-Cn) Fone (C1 Con--+-Cn—1) 
; + Ca, Cie aege (13) 


Fie. 12. 


When ¢)=co=C3.-.Cn corresponding to practice. Equation | 
(12) becomes 


1 
B= — (ater gs. Qn) (14) 
If bo h c and g are the same for each member of the series, 


=2 (14141...) | | (15) 


2322 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INS ULATOR [June 30 


From equation (15) we get the stress on each section 


ss 
c 


pig (16) 
nN - 


When n is large enough, e becomes less than ¢ and a tested fac- 


tor of safety is obtained. 


: z 
If E is the stress necessary to flash insulator, for 27h 


the arc strikes through the air from conductor to support, 
otherwise a flashing stress ¢ would be placed on each section, 


and - =1 or a <1, when parts have been tested below flashing 


potential. Tests in the suspension insulator show that e varies 
for different sections and as c is the same for each section, equa- 
tion (14) represents the series. 

The uneven distribution of stress is caused by part of the di- 
electric flux taking an air path. Owing to the position of the 
lower section practically all of the flux must pass through from 
metal to metal, making g larger for this section than any other. 
The upper section would also be expected to carry more stress 
than some of the others. 

Since gq varies on each section, c must vary accordingly in 
order that uniform distribution of stress may result. To obtain 
uniform stress distribution in this manner would be very un- 
desirable for each section would be different from every other, 
and the advantage of interchangeable parts would be lost. 
Although impracticable for. the suspension insulator, this 
method has been found very valuable in distributing stress in 
the pin type insulator. This method was used on some of the 
first high-efficiency disk insulators with good results. 

If the series is represented in equation (14) a uniformly 
tested factor of safety for the series may be had by making ¢ 
proportional to q for each section. This would necessitate 
sections of different size and would be more impracticable than 
varying the electrostatic capacity. 

Since g depends almost entirely on the electrostatic capacity 
of the series, a decrease in the electrostatic capacity of the series 
will produce a decrease in q. 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2323 


The decrease in electrostatic capacity of a given length is 
accomplished by decreasing the length of section so as to include 
more in the series. 

With the limits in practice it is possible to make g so low 


ciate eae : 
that ae will provide a tested factor of safety against puncture. 


Although the tested factor of safety varies for different units in 


Bree 13: 


the series. Satisfactory operation with a flashing stress on the 
insulator depends on providing a sufficiently large factor of 
safety for the end section. 

Owing to too great a section length in some single-piece disk 
suspension insulators, no tested factor of safety was provided 
for any of the units, and when tested to flash over, punctures 
occurred, giving rise to the opinion that the single-piece disk 


suspension insulator was inferior to the two-part disk suspension 


- 


2324 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


insulator, while the opposite was the case with properly designed 
insulators. 

That stress distribution can be controlled by change in ¢ 
equation (13) is shown by the following cases: 

Fig. 13 shows a suspension insulator composed of two sections 
the upper having a small electrostatic capacity compared to 
the lower. In the position shown, 57 kv. was required on the 
small insulator to cause it to arc and a potential of only 62 kv. 
on the series caused the smaller to be stressed to its flashing 
potential. The photograph was taken with 62 kv. on the series 
and shows the charging current of the large insulator forming 
an arc over the smaller. To flash over the series, required 
150 kv. 

Fig. 14 shows an insulator of relatively small electrostatic 
capacity between two sections of larger capacity. When tested 
alone, flashing potential of the small unit was 57 kv. The 
photograph was taken with 97 kv. on the series, this being suffi- 
cient to overstress the small insulator, while 300 kv. was re- 
quired to flashover the series. When it is considered that the 
overstressed member shown in Fig. 14 adds but little to the 
flashover of the rest of the insulator, it is seen why some designs . 
are very inefficient. 

The economic importance of producing reliability by de- 
signing the insulators for a tested factor of safety is apparent 
from the following: 

From the time breakage curve it is seen that the rate of break- 
age decreased very slowly after the knee of the curve is passed 
and it would take a very long time to produce the reliability 
that could be gained by testing for a short time and then pro- 
viding a tested factor of safety. Carrying the test for 15 minutes 
at 100 kv. gives a rate of breakage of 0.18 of one per cent per 
minute and a total loss 8 per cent. The same rate of breakage 
on the 85-kv. curve is obtained after 10 minute test at 85 kv. 
or a one minute test at 100 kv., the breakage being only 3.5 per 
cent. Hence by providing a factor of safety of 100/85 the same 
reliability is obtained with a test only 1/15 as long and a saving 
of 4.5 per cent material is made. 

That it is not necessary to lose any of the valuable charac- 
.teristics in providing a tested factor of safety is seen by com- 
paring two 100-ky. insulators in the following table; 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2325 


TABLE SHOWING COMPARISON OF 100 KV. LINE INSULATORS 


i ieleha cy 
type Type B | 
IN Gina er Mole SEOMONSE tain <tayapete rinses tabla gees wis 6 4, | 
iNumber of, shells ‘per Section: ...0 66.25.2004 1 | 
(eet SEE Le US ys eee 10 in. 144 in, | 
iveugtavoruinsul atom aoe ieee ead ieee 344 in. 41 in, 
EMechonicultsttength fd inuc.chun ait phvet te 10,000 8,000 
PeWeight Of porcelatian.2312)....0h0th5) 4. tai. 30 Ib. 62 Ib. 
PROCAVRWeEreiitts en yeicsoud eye ters Gist oe acls. teri alee e wines 50 Ib. 90 Ib. 
| Number of cemented joints.:.............--- 12 12 | 
Formation of are dry. ... ct. see eg caren es Through air Over surface 
Mrgnimationtof tare -weatynaeheasnemecoulstan ss i Through air Over surface 
Total tested dielectric strength............... 540 kv. 440 kv. | 
Rarraces resistance western tarde dene sisi K 527 | K 440 
Minimum to maximum width of leakage path in | 
} POL ECEL Uaeryerotelisi tl sh sreuaiseariobor slaves Peete cnneatal acer! st 16 10.6 
WE Wictala SLOW Grn creme smerreromere  centey smarocesireten aera (aero 265 235 
Depreciation due to loss of one section.......... 162% 25% | 


Pie 1ob. Pre d5a-. 


The table shows that type A not only has a higher rating but 
has only half the weight of porcelain and a shorter length. 

The efficiency of type B is lowered by the overstressing of the 
small inner shell. The inner shell owing to its smaller electro- 
static capacity spills in the same manner as the small insulator 
in Fig. 13, causing the flashing of the insulator at a comparative 
low potential. 

Fig. 15 shows a comparative test on the two types. The 


2326 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR [June 30 


illustration shows a two-section insulator—diameter 143 in. 
(36.8 cm.) length 203 in. (52 cm.) weight 45 Ib. (20.4 kg.) 
type B, flashing while a three section insulator—diameter 10 in. 
(25.4 cm.) length 17} in. (42.8 cm.) weight 25 lb. (11.3 kg.)— 
of type A, which is in multiple, has not reached flashing potential. 


MECHANICAL STRENGTH 


The cemented suspension insulator would have come into use 
at an earlier date for high-tension work if there had not been 
doubt as to its mechanical reliability. Although some of the 
insulators made over 40 years ago had the iron cap and pin 
cemented to the insulator member much in the same way as the 
modern suspension insulator, the method was practically aban- 
doned. When it was proposed to adopt the type for high-ten- 
sion work, it was considered that an interlocking feature was 
highly desirable. There seemed to be no doubt as to the ability 
to cement porcelain to porcelain successfully, but there was doubt, 
however, in regard to the successful cementing of porcelain to 
metal, as there had been some reported failures of large pin-type 
insulators where a large pin had been cemented into the insu- 
lator. A careful consideration of the relative coefficients of 
temperature and elasticity for porcelain and iron indicated that 
the two could be used together successfully, for the range 
in temperature and mechanical stress to which the insulator 
would be subjected. 

The most feasible mechanical arrangements of parts placed 
the cement in shear and as there was no data at hand, the shear- 
ing stress of cement was computed by estimating the shear from 
cement cubes which failed by shear when tested to compression. 
Designs made as early as 1904 by using this method proved to be 
correct within a very small per cent. 

_ Porcelain has a tensile strength of approximately 2,500 lb. 

(1,183 kg.) per square inch (6.45 sq. cm.), good cement has a 
shearing ultimate of over 1600 lb. per square inch. By making 
the gripping surface of the pin and pin hole efficient, the full 
shearing strength of the cement is developed and a high me- 
chanical ultimate is obtained. Tests on some old insulators of 
this type gave an ultimate of from 10,000 to 12,000 Ib. (4,535 to 
5,443 kg.). 

Fig. 16 shows an insulator which broke at a little over 12,000 lb. 
When stress is applied the pin elongates straining the porcelain, 
and at the ultimate the porcelain fails by combined shear and 
tension, this causes the break in Fig. 16. 


1911] AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR 2327 


The insulator may be designed so that the pin will pull with- 
out breaking the porcelain for the same ultimate, by changing 
the diameters of pin and gripping surface so that the shearing 
strength of the cement is reached before a breaking stress is 
developed in the porcelain. 


hana bey 


Ge n@e 


The mechanical reliability of insulators based on the shearing 
strength of porcelain is well recognized, and insulators used for 
the highest stress are of this type. 


Fic. 17. 


Fig. 17 shows the detail of an insulator of this type used on 
heavy catenary work where a failure would be very serious. 
The insulator is designed for a combined mechanical and elec- 
trical ultimate of 35,000 Ib. (15,875 kg.) and 110 kv. 

In the economic design for high ultimate mechanical strength 


careful consideration must be given the stresses, produced by 


2328 AUSTIN: SUSPENSION INSULATOR ' [June 30 


change in temperature and relative coefficients of elasticity for 
the different materials as well as the shearing stress on the 
‘cement, making the problem rather difficult. 

For the same cost, the cemented type is much more reliable 
than any interlocking type, for its connections may be tested, 
eliminating the personal factor. Practice has shown that unless 
the interlocking parts are large, the arc at puncture may destroy 
the connections, as the interlocking connections do not always 
come in contact. 

The cemented type may blow up on short-circuit, but it is a 
question whether this would not be an advantage in locating a 
fault. 

Reliability in practice depends on testing all insulators and 
connections, eliminating any weak members. Connections 
must be simple and positive, otherwise when installed on the line, 
poor workmanship may lower the mechanical reliability. The 
connections should be such that the replacement of a broken 
section may be quickly and easily made. 

High mechanical strength is obtained in the high- sictdnge 
type by making the gripping surfaces effective and developing 
the full shearing strength of the cement, permitting of very 
small metal parts. This is important as the metal in the insulator 
is a large part of the cost, and to obtain insulation with large 
metal parts it is necessary to increase the size of the porcelain 
for the same amount of insulation. 

The remarkable improvement in efficiency has not been con- 
fined to the suspension insulator alone, great improvement being 
made in the pin type as well. With improved manufacturing 
conditions greater improvements will be possible, reducing the 
cost of reliability in the transmission system. 

The electrical advantages of efficiency in design are greater 
dielectric strength, high surface insulation and lower deprecia- 
tion. The economical advantages are lower cost of production, 
lower weights, resulting in a saving in transportation and erec- 
tion, greater length efficiency, permitting of a saving, in the 
suspension type, in the height of towers and length of cross arm. 

With the increase in the size of the transmission systems relia- 
bility will be more important, and the elements of reliability 
in the insulator will receive more of the attention that they 
deserve. 


1911} DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2329 


Discussion on ‘“‘ THE HiGH EFFICIENCY SUSPENSION 
INSULATOR.” Cuicaco, JuNE 30, 1911. 


E. E. F. Creighton: The fact has been brought out a number 
of times during the past year that the great problem at the present 
time in high tension transmission is really confined to the line, 
and is a matter mostly of protection against lightning on the 
line. Personally I have a great admiration for the work the 
author of this paper has done in perfecting insulators. Although 
the methods used differ from the methods of observation used 
in the lightning arrester laboratory, Mr. Austin gets, apparently 
the same result. I have not had an opportunity to read the 
entire paper, but have personally talked with Mr. Austin about 
his methods of observation, and as I see them, they consist in 
observing the successive flooding of the insulator parts by brush 
discharge when the potential is gradually increased. In that 
way the relative stresses can be observed over the different parts 
of the insulator. In the lightning arrester laboratory the rela- 


CORONA 
Ss 


e PORCELAIN 
S 
eI IRON 


Fic. 1 


tion of potential to puncture and potential to flash around the 
skirts of an insulator is determined by a sudden discharge from 
Leyden jars with a frequency approximating about one million 
cycles per second. 
Since the problem is not dielectric strength for dynamic po- 
tential, but the protection against lightning, it is important to 
have tests that will give an indication of the effect lightning 
will have. The ordinary method of testing insulators, that is, 
gradually applying potential, does not give any indication of what 
the insulator will do under lightning stresses. This point has 
been brought up before. To illustrate, if this is the porcelain 
disk (see accompanying illustration Fig. 1) and the potential 
is applied between the top and the bottom, and is gradually 
increased, the effect is to produce corona streamers which run 
out more or less from the terminals, and before the spark takes 
place the distance between the terminals has been very ma- 
terially reduced, so that one might say that the spark took place 


. 


from some point C out on the skirt of the insulator around to the 


2330 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [June 30 


other terminal. Now, when a high frequency of anywhere from 
500,000 to 3,000,000 cycles is applied to the same insulator, 
the discharge has to jump the entire distance from metal to 
metal around through the air or puncture the porcelain. I have 
made many tests on the pin type of insulator. One example 
will suffice for illustration. By putting on gradually applied 
potential at 60 cycles, an insulator flashed around some 500 
times. An electrostatic charge was then discharged against the 
insulator, and it punctured immediately. The methods used 
by Mr. Austin, watching the gradually growing brush dis- 
charges, makes it possible to observe the weak parts individually 
and to increase the dimensions of the porcelain accordingly, 
so as to prevent puncture. I tested some of these insulators 
recently, and a thousand charges were discharged against a 
single disk, of such a value that they would just not spark 
around. I wanted to see if there was any possibility of fatiguing 
the material, and so far as I could see, there was not. By raising 
the discharge potential slightly, it would spark around the insu- 
lator each application. Unfortunately, we have not been able 
to get enough static potential to spark around a string of these 
insulators in series. 

So far as the surface resistance is concerned, I believe it has 
comparatively little to do with protection from lightning—I 
am speaking of such a thing as a slight accumulation of dirt on 
the surface. Although I have not tested out this particular 
feature, similar tests with high frequencies show there is very 
little decrease in the equivalent-needle-gap by using high re- 
sistance in parallel. There is one other point, and that is re- 
garding the multi-gap effect—it has been commented on many 
times, and has been tested by a number of engineers. 

There is no doubt from the consideration of Dr. Steinmetz’s 
theory, on the multi-gap arrester which was developed in 1906, 
that the same conditions exist to a greater or less extent in the 
suspension type of insulator, and it is quite sure that some 
types of these insulators will spark very much easier on high 
frequency than on low frequency. In regard to this, it seems to 
me that the conditions shown in Fig. 10, would illustrate that 
it is possible to make a design of these suspension type insu- 
lators, in which the multi-gap effect has entirely disappeared. 
Dr. Steinmetz showed at the time he made his investigations 
that the multi-gap effect in a multi-gap arrester depended upon 
the value of the capacity between cylinders relative to the 
capacity of each cylinder to ground. If the capacity from the 
cylinder to ground was diminished, then it was possible to do 
away entirely with the multi-gap effect. The subject was further 
developed by Messrs. Rushmore and DuBois a year later, and 
all that material is available at the present time and might be 
profitably used. In connection with the design of these insula- 
tors, referring to Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, I think it is evident that Fig. 9 
would give less multi-gap effect than the insulators in Fig. 10. 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2331 


In closing, I should like to ask Mr. Austin if he has noted 
any fatigue in insulators, whether there is any possibility that an 
insulator under test will be damaged. It is an important thing 
to decide, in order to be able to test insulators installed on a line 
to eliminate faulty ones at times of service when their failure 
would do the least amount of harm. I know in one case of ap- 
parent fatigue of a 100,000 volt insulator. When it was first 
put on the line, it was entirely quiet, but after it had operated 
for several months, it became noisy and finally broke down. 

Paul M. Lincoln: I have not read this paper carefully but I 
notice that Mr. Austin has devoted considerable attention to 
the question of leakage, leakage current and leakage resistance 
paths of insulators. It becomes important, in the design of 
insulators, to determine whether the equipotential surfaces are 
determined by the question of leakage over ‘the resistance 
paths of an insulator, or whether it is determined by the question 
of condenser capacity. For instance, these suspension insulators 
are in effect conductors which are separated from each other by 
some insulating material. Line potential is applied at one side 
and the ground potential is applied at the other side. Now, 
the total potential is distributed across this whole combination, 
and the ideal insulator is the one in which the potential is equally 
distributed across the various units and the individual sections 
of each unit. When that condition is obtained, we have the 
ideal condition. It becomes important to determine whether 
the potential of the equipotential surfaces is determined by the 
current which leaks across the resistance paths, or whether it is 
determined by the condenser capacity between the equipotential 
surfaces. 

Now, there are some facts which have been observed which to 
my mind indicate that the potential of these surfaces is de- 
termined almost entirely by the static capacity, and very little 
by the leakage over the resistance paths. The main fact that 
50 indicates is that some insulators, and in fact many insulators, 
will have a flash-over voltage wet as nearly as high as when dry. 
What does that mean? A wet insulator undoubtedly has a 
much lower resistance over its surface and consequently a much 
higher leakage current thanadry one. Further, the distribution 
of potential due to these leakage currents must be different 
when wet than when dry, since surfaces previously dry are now 
wet. As a consequence, one would expect to have the distribu- 
tion of potential and the flash over voltage different in a wet 
insulator than in a dry. The fact that there is practically no 
change in the flash over voltage between a wet and a dry insu- 
lator would indicate that the equipotential surfaces are deter- 
mined by static capacity rather than by leakage across resistance 

aths. DP 
: P. H. Thomas: I would like to add one item to Mr. Creigh- 
ton’s explanation of the multigap effect, so called, illustrating 
how important it is. There was a transmission line put up, I 


2332 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [June 30 


think about 1900 in Colorado, in which lightning arresters were 
placed out doors in boxes, the arresters being of the multigap 
type, and they were placed in as small boxes as possible in order 
to economize space. It was a 20,000-volt line. The gaps 
connected in the two line wires, as I remember it, were placed 
in “V” fashion—ground connection being at the point and one line 
being connected to'each leg. For some strange reason, it seemed 
strange then, the arresters would not hold the line voltage, they 
would ‘‘slop-over”’, as it was called, extremely easily, much more 
so than in the laboratory or in other installations. The reason 
for this is clear. The capacity of cylinders connected near 
one line, on account of the proximity of the cylinders connected 
to another line, is much greater than it would have been 
if isolated—that is the minute charging currents were greater. 
This condition makes no trouble in the first cylinder, because it is 
connected directly to the line, but the second cylinder and the 
others have to receive their small charges by drawing sparks from 
these cylinders connected to the line so that the current in these 
gaps is greater, when you have two closely adjacent cylinders con- 
nected to opposite lines. This condition caused a great deal of 
actual trouble. I have forgotten at this time what the solution of 
the difficulty in this case was, but in 1902, I repeated some experi- 
ments to prove the correctness of my theory above stated 
which is substantially the same as outlined by Professor Creigh- 
ton. In the experiment cylinders were taken and arranged in a 
““V” shape upon a board. A very much larger number of 
units would be jumped by a given voltage in this arrangement 
than when the cylinders were arranged in a straight line. I 
think the factor was as great as 2 to 1, the difference between the 
two arrangements being due to the lesser charging current taken 
by the cylinders in the straight line arrangement than in the 
arrangement in the V form. I think this experiment was de- 
scribed in 1905 at the Asheville Convention. It is a matter of 
importance, not only in the cylinders of lightning arresters, but 
in all types of electrical apparatus. If you want to be free from 
sparking trouble, such as jumping over surfaces on bushings, 
and other such conditions, keep your high potentials as far apart 
as possible. 

For instance, in an ordinary insulator where the ground po- 
tential we will say is carried by the pin up pretty close to the 
conductor, there will be a much greater tendency to jump over 
the petticoats than if the insulator were made entirely of porce- 
lain and the ground and line wire widely separated. 

E. M. Hewlett: We investigated this insulator trouble, and 
we found right away that the parties who were interested wanted 
to know a great deal more about the disk insulator than they 
had found out about the pin insulator, in fact, more than they 
have found out as yet. We made practical tests. We assumed 
that if we could get porcelain of the proper dimensions and thick- 
ness to withstand puncture—to flash over rather than to punc- 


eh i =~ 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2333 


ture—that that was the safest line to follow. Since that time 
some insulators have been made larger than they should be, 
that is, they are likely to puncture before they flash over. It 
seems to me that the best design possible is to make them so that 
they flash over rather than puncture, and also to space them 
closely enough together so they will flash over the whole set 
rather than individually, to bring the arc over and around the 
disk. 

In reference to the fatigue of porcelain, a good many persons 
consider there is a fatigue in porcelain, but what is often con- 
sidered to be fatigue, I think is low burning. The porcelain is 
not thoroughly vitrified, and for a time it stands up satis- 
factorily. The dampness is absorbed and then the strength is 
decreased and the insulator will consequently puncture. It 
would seem therefore that the best general plan would be to 
make the disk small enough and of good enough material, high 
enough grade of material, and well enough vitrified, so as to re- 
sist puncture. Shape them so they will stand a maximum 
weather test, and not be reduced too much on the line test, and 
then use enough disks in series to get the desired result. I 
think with a small diameter of disk there is much less likelihood 
of puncture from the lightning as the path of the lightning does 
not deviate so much from a straight line in going to the ground. 

N. J. Neall: Where does the analysis of punctures per 
minute begin, and, further, is the record of a given batch of 
insulators after installation of value in this connection? I 
have seen failures on the test table which seemed to indicate 
imperfect material. I think there would be a point where the 
imperfect material would be dismissed and the criterion Mr. 
Austin selected would begin? 

A. O. Austin: There is probably no appreciable fatigue in 
good porcelain under normal electrical stress. The puncturing 
being due to mechanical defects or poor material. 

When an insulator punctures the effect on operation is the 
same regardless of the cause of failure, and it matters little 
whether there is fatigue in the material; the number of failures 
for a given stress and time, however, is of great importance. 
With an increase in the dielectric strength of insulators the per- 
centage of breakdowns due to stresses above those which may 
be shown on the time breakage curves, diminishes rapidly and 
the time breakage curves become valuable in predicting failure 
when comparing different insulators. 

If a number of insulators are subjected to stress and the rate 
of puncture becomes less with time, the insulators can hardly 
be said to show fatigue for the remaining insulators have 1m- 
proved in reliability. If, however, the rate of puncture increased 
with time, the insulators may be said to show fatigue for the 
reliability has decreased. Then for practical purposes 1t may be 
said that there is no fatigue unless the puncture rate increases 
with time and applied stress. These characteristics can be 


2334 SUSPENSION INSULATORS [June 30 


shown without going out on the line, and should form the basis 
for dielectric strength and reliability. 

The distribution of stress between the several parts of an 
insulator may vary widely for different conditions, and it is 
possible to design an insulator such that the flashing potential is 
higher under storm conditions than when dry. It was found 
that too much space would be required to discuss stress dis- 
tribution, an example, however, will show how the electrostatic 
capacity and the surface resistance may effect the performance 
under different conditions. 


§ FLASHES ORY, E,=70 KV. 
1 C, ( FLASHES WET, Ey=50 KV. 


- FLASHES DRY, E,,=70 KV, 
Tg é, FLASHES WET, Ew=50 KV. 


cen “%,=10 
Pres] 


The accompanying illustration Fig. 1 represents two insulating 
elements in series, each element having an electrostatic capacity 
C surface resistance r and flashing potential equivalent to EF, 
for dry conditions and E. for wet conditions. 

For dry conditions, 7, and r, are very high and the leakage 
current may be neglected the stress distribution being deter- 
mined by the members acting as electrostatic condensers. 

For this condition a carries 9/10 of the stress and flashes when 
the voltage applied to the series reaches 78 kv. 

- When a flashes, the arc forms a shunt reducing the stress on 


—* 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2335 


a and increasing it on 6 and by increasing the stress on the 
series by a few kilovolts, the series flashes. The capacities 
may easily be made large enough so that 85 kv. will cause 
complete flashing. 

When the insulator is wet, the surface resistance may be so 
low that the surface leakage current will determine the stress 
distribution. If the elements have practically the same surface 
resistance the stress would be the same on each part and the 
flash-over of the series would be 100 kv. which is higher than the 
dry flashing potential. 

The electrostatic capacity, surface resistance and flash-over 
vary greatly with a change in conditions. It is difficult to pre- 
dict the performance of an insulator except for limiting cases, 
which is usually sufficient as the intermediate conditions are 
less severe. 

The effect of design on depreciation was given considerable 
attention in 1904 as it was seen that where the surface current 
was large the insulators coated very rapidly. This was largely 
due to the accumulated material left by the water, upon being 
evaporated by the current. Where the evaporation is large the 
washing action of the rain is practically eliminated and the insu- 
lator will depreciate rapidly. 

In some designs the charging current increases very rapidly 
with a slight surface depreciation. To eliminate this, the all 
porcelain designs shown in Fig. 4, were made. Since there was 
a considerable difference in potential between the upper and lower 
surface of the flange it formed a condenser with a comparatively 
large charging current, the performance being considerably 
below that expected until the electrostatic capacity of the flange 
was reduced by the addition of petticoats. By making the in- 
sulator with discs with low electrostatic capacity the presence 
of the metal connection was not so noticeable and compared 
favorably with the best all porcelain types. 

The stress distribution under the high frequency surge may 
be quite different than that at normal frequency, even at flash- 
over of the insulator. Insulators which have a small air path 
for the forming of the arc between line and ground, will be much 
better protected than those having a long air path, although the 
insulators may have the same flashing potential at normal 
frequency. 

It is a question as to how much insulation is needed for the 
extremely severe conditions on the line. A consideration of the 
different characteristics will probably lead to an increase in the 
dielectric strength over what it is at the present time. 


A paper presented at the 28th Annual Conven- 
tion of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers, Chicago, Ill., June 30, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I. E. E. 


TENTATIVE SCHEME OF ORGANIZATION AND 
ADMINISTRATION, FOR A STATE UNIVERSITY 


BY RALPH D. MERSHON 

Some time ago the writer had occasion to look into the matter 
of the organization and conduct of universities, especially state 
universities, with a view to making some suggestions along these 
lines in connection with a state university. A search for printed 
matter bearing upon the subject seemed to indicate a scarcity 
of available information of a specific nature and most of such 
matter as was available bore upon certain phases, only, of the 
subject. It also seemed to indicate that there is considerable 
room for improvement in the present organization and ad- 
ministration of most, if not all, of the state universities. 

After studying such material as an ordinarily careful search re- 
vealed, I undertook to draw up a general scheme for the organiza- 
tion and conduct of a state university. The result of my en- 
deavors, in its final form, is given below. It is limited to a state 
university for the reasons above outlined, since there are certain 
features in connection with a state institution of this sort which 
do not exist in endowed universities and which render difficult, 


if not impossible, some of the methods applicable to the en- 


dowed institution. 

The object in presenting this scheme is to provoke such dis- 
cussion, and consequent elucidation of the subject, as will make 
it possible to draft a thoroughly workable organization scheme 
generally applicable to state universities. Such scheme, to be 
generally applicable, must be very general in its nature, dealing 
mainly, if not entirely, with fundamental matters, since each 
particular case will involve many conditions peculiar to itself 

2337 


2238 MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY [June 30 


necessitating detailed development of the general scheme to fit 
local conditions. 

The scheme as presented herewith was prepared after dis- 
cussing the subject with several persons who have had to do 
with the organization and conduct of large public utility and 
industrial enterprises, but before any discussion had been had 
with anyone connected with university work. Since it was 
drawn up it has been submitted to university workers. Some 
of their criticisms of it strike me as well grounded (especially 
such as apply to portions of the scheme which for the sake of 
discussion I purposely made rather drastic), some as open to 
question, and some as of little weight. In spite of the fact that 
some of the criticisms appear to me fully pertinent I have con- 
cluded to present the scheme as originally drawn up that the 
objections to it may be brought out in open discussion. 


* * * * * * * BS * * * * 
SCHEME OF ORGANIZATION 

The proposed scheme is shown in the Diagram of Organization 
and Administration appended hereto. It will be more readily 
comprehended in connection with the following explanatory 
matter, which, however, does not attempt to go into minute 
detail, but merely to outline the more salient and important 
features. 

President. The President is to be the executive head of the 
university, and is to have the necessary authority to that end. 
He is to be the representative and general executive of the board 
of trustees, in all university affairs, except as otherwise directed 
by the board, and it shall be his duty to enforce all the rules and 
regulations of the board and of the faculty. 

He shall have the right of veto of any action taken by the 
university faculty and of any action, except such as has to do with 
the budget, of the university council. But in case of the exercise 
of such veto power the faculty or council, as the case may be, 
may pass the matter involved over the president’s veto by a two- 
thirds vote of the full membership of the body in question. 
In case the matter is passed over the President’s veto, he may, 
whether it be a matter which would regularly come before the 
board of trustees and the alumni advisory board for their 
approval or not, submit the matter to the board of trustees and 
the alumni advisory board, together with a statement of the 
situation and his recommendations against the action of the 
council or faculty. 


1911] MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY 2339 


The president’s other duties and powers will appear more fully 
from what follows. 

Secretary. The duties of the secretary shall be those usually 
pertaining to such an office, and more particularly as laid down 
in the ‘‘rules and regulations of the board of trustees’’. He 
shall be the financial officer of the university, shall be bursar 
of the university and shall through the purchasing agent make 
all purchases for the university. 

Treasurer. The duties of the treasurer shall be those usually 


BOARD 


OF 
RUSTEES 


a 
a 
a 

Gy 
Ede aa 
IADVISORY-— —--—-{ pres. }-—-—- SECRETAR 

BOARDA ~ 
s 


N 
~ 


Pos 
s 
STUD, IS SUPT. 
DVISORY, REGISTRAR oF 
BOARD aes RROPERT, 
- 


ae fy EN SUPT. ‘suPT.\ 7surr 
7 Il S. BLOGs RIN'DS \buaNT, 
Pee / SA 
rn / 1 N 
a N 
vis DEAN i | DEAN NN DEANS 
eg COL. OF i | COL. OF N. [otner 
ar AGR. 2 (Le ARTS. NS OLLEGES 
a 


\ 
/ 


N 


SCH.OF C 


> 
- 
Z 
2 
(3) 
< 
ins 
co) 
z 
e 
w 
w 
z 
o 
z 
w 


AGRICULTURE FACULTY 
ARTS STUDENTS 
OTHER FACULTIES 
OTHER STUDENTS 


IPRECEPTORS, SCHOOLS & DEPT- 
ARTS FACULTY 


i 
r=) 
2 
a 
S 
S 
S 
x 
S 
& 
ry 
& 
3 
e 
= 
br 
a 
cs 


AGRICULTURE STUDENTS 


3 
a 
a 
3 
L 
° 
a 
[a 
= 
rE 
Cy 
a 
=e 
3 
a 
ta 
= 


ENGINEERING STUDENT! 
PRECEPTOR, SCH.OF AGR> 
PRECEPTOR, DEPT. AGAR. CHEW 


PREC'T'S, OTHER SCH, & DEPT 


i} 
S 
x 
FE 
a 
ui 
°o 
a 
° 
FE 
a. 
ui 
° 
a 
ra 
a 


PRECEPTOR, SCH.OF M. 


i 
° 
i 
a 
w 
° 
o 
c 
o 


Diagram of organization 
Solid lines indicate relations more or less directly subordinate; dotted lines indicate 


relations co-ordinate, or merely advisory, or both. Only the more important relations 
are shown. 


pertaining to such office, and more particularly as laid down 
in the “rules and regulations of the board of trustees ie 

University Faculty. The university faculty shall be the legis- 
lative body of the university in all matters relating to the con- 
duct and control of the student body. The university faculty 
shall be made up of the deans of the various colleges, preceptors 
of the various schools, preceptors of the various departments of 
instruction and all instructors of the university holding the rank 
of professor or associate professor. 

The president of the university shall be, ex officio, chairman 


2340 MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY [June 30 


of the university faculty, and as such shall have no vote except 
in case of tie. 

University Council. The university council shall be made up 
of the deans of the various colleges of the university. 

In consultation with, and through the president, it shall be the 
executive body of the university. 

In consultation with the president, it shall be the coérdinating 
body of the university. 

The president shall be, ex officio, the chairman of the uni- 
versity council, and as such shall have no vote except in case of a 
tie. 

Alumni Advisory Board. The Alumni advisory board shall 
consist of twenty alumni elected by the membership at large of 
the university alumni association. Four members of the 
board shall be elected each year, so that after the board shall have 
been established five years the term of office of each member 
shall be five years. 

In order to be eligible to the alumni advisory board, an in- 
dividual must be an alumnus of at least ten years’ standing, who 
has done at least four years’ work at the university in the acquisi- 
tion of a degree from the university, and who is a member of the 
university alumni association. 

The function of the alumni advisory board shall be to advise 
and, by its influence, aid the president, the board of trustees, 
the university council and the university faculty, in any and all 
matters pertaining to the welfare of theuniversity. 

No appointment to any position in connection with the 
university shall be made without the approval of the alumni 
advisory board. 

The alumni advisory board shall from time to time, through 
visiting committees appointed by it, investigate the various 
departments of the university for the purpose of determining 
their efficiency, and for aiding them, either by suggestion or ad- 
vice, or by using its influence in the matter of financial or other 
aid. 

These visitmg committees may or may not be limited in their 
membership to the members of the alumni advisory board. 
That is, the alumni advisory board may avail itself of the as- 
sistance of specialists in regard to any matters with which none 
of the members of the board are particularly conversant. 

Visiting committees shall report directly to the alumni ad- 
visory board. The reports shall be disposed of in accordance 


. 


1911] MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY 2341 


with the judgment of the alumni advisory board, whether they 
be made public, transmitted to the board of trustees, trans- 
mitted to the president or retained by the board without presenta- 
tion or action. Provided, however, that if any report be trans- 
mitted to the board of trustees there shall be transmitted, at the 
same time, a copy of the report to the president. And provided, 
that if a report be made public, one week prior to its being so 
made public there shall be transmitted a copy to the board of 
trustees and to the president. 

No member of the alumni advisory board shall at the same 
time be a member of the board of trustees, or be in any other 
way connected with the executive, financial or teaching staff 
of the university; or hold any office in the alumni association. 

Any vacancy occurring in the advisory board by death, resig- 
nation, or otherwise, shall be filled by the board until the next 
regular election of the alumni association; at which meeting, 
in addition to the members to be regularly elected, there shal, 
be elected a member to fill the remainder of the unexpired terml 
(See note in regard to alumni advisory board). 

Deans. The deans of the various colleges shall be appointed 
by the president, with the approval of the alumni advisory 
board, under confirmation by the board of trustees, and pre- 
sumably with the advice of the faculties of the respective col- 
leges. 

Each dean shall be responsible to the university council and 
the president for the conduct of his college. 

A dean shall hold office so long as the administration of his 
college is such as is productive of satisfactory results. 

A dean may do as much or as little teaching as he considers 
expedient. Such teaching as he does shall be confined to his own 
college. 

The dean shall, at the proper time, make up a budget for his 
college for presentation to the university council, after the man- 
ner hereinafter described under ‘‘ Budget ’’. In making up the 
college budget, the dean shall consult with the preceptors of the 
various schools of his college and the preceptors of the various 
departments of his college, endeavoring to arrive at a budget 
which shall represent the consensus of opinion of the various 
preceptors and himself. 

Where it is not possible to arrive at a unanimous agreement of 
the preceptors, together with the dean, relative to the budget, 
the dean shall submit the budget he recommends, together 


\ 


2342 MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY [June 30 


with any exceptions to it which any of the preceptors of his 
college may desire to make as individuals or as a group. Such 
exception may take the form of the recommendation of an en- 
tirely different budget. 

College Faculties. The college faculties shall be made up of 
all the instructing force of the college above the grade of in- 
structor. In case of an individual giving instruction in more 
than one college, he shall be considered as a member of the 
faculty of that college to whose work the greater portion of his 
time is devoted. If, however, it seems advisable that he should 
be a member of other college faculties as well, he may, if he so 
elects, serve upon such other college faculties if elected to them 
by the respective faculties in question. 

The college faculty shall have charge of all minor legislation 
relative to its own college not covered by the legislation of the 
university faculty. It shall, through its committees, codrdinate 
the work of its various schools. 

Schools and Departments of Instruction. The work of each 
college shall be grouped into one or more schools, at the head of 
each of which shall be a preceptor, and into one or more de- 
partments, at the head of each of which shall be a preceptor. It 
may follow in some cases that the preceptor of a school will also 
be preceptor of a department. 

Superintendent of Property. The superintendent of property 
shall report directly to the president. He shall be responsible 
for the buildings, the grounds and the power and heating plants, 
through the superintendents of these various departments. 

Student Advisory Board. The student advisory board shall 
be made up of two seniors, two juniors and one sophomore, to 
be elected each year by their respective classes. This board may, 
of its own initiative, bring matters directly to the attention of 
the president. It may, on request of the president, advise with 
the university council, the university faculty or the alumni 
advisory board. It may not, of its own initiative, bring matters 
to the attention of any of these bodies. 

Budget. The president shall, near the end of each year, pre- 
pare and present to the board of trustees a budget based upon 
the estimated income of the university for the next year. This 
budget shall be made up as follows: 

The dean of each college shall prepare a budget, by con- 
sultation with the preceptors of his college, as provided under 
the head of ‘‘dean”’. The university council, consisting of the 


1911] MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY 2343 


deans, shall then meet and in conjunction with the president 
correlate, coordinate and adjust the budgets of the various deans 
to accord with the estimated income of the university, and with 
the university requirements other than those of an instructional 
nature. 

In case a unanimous agreement is arrived at, the result of the 
budget shall be transmitted to the board of trustees by the 
president as the budget of the university council and himself. 

If a unanimous agreement is not arrived at, the president shall 
transmit to the board of trustees, for action by the board, a ma- 
jority report, a minority report and his own recommendation, 
which may or may not agree with either the maj ority or minority, 
together with all the necessary papers, both those having to do 
more particularly with the deliberations of the university council 
and those having to do with the deliberations of the various 
college faculties. 

Amendments. Amendments to the scheme of organization 
and administration will preferably be instituted by the uni- 
versity faculty, with the approval of the alumni advisory board, 
and will be subject to confirmation by the board of trustees; but, 
however the amendments be instituted, they shall not become 
effective unless approved by the alumni advisory board. 


Note IN REGARD TO ALUMNI ADVISORY BOARD 


It is contemplated that the alumni advisory board shall have 
no direct connection with the alumni association and shall per- 
form no function in connection with the association. 

The alumni advisory board will be clothed with a considerable 
amount of power which should be wisely and carefully exercised 
as the result of the deliberations of, as nearly as possible, the 
full board. For this reason, the membership of the board will 
preferably be drawn from those of the older alumni as have had 
wide experience, and who, previous to their election, shall have 
stated their ability and willingness to faithfully attend the 
meetings of the board. 

Failure of the board to act promptly might seriously hamper 
the conduct of the university. In order to insure prompt and 
regular attendance at the meetings of the board, it will be ad- 
visable to penalize tardiness or absence. Provision might be 
made that if a member is either tardy or absent from a meeting 
twice during his term of office, without being excusable, he shall 
automatically cease to be a member of the board; with the 


2344 MERSHON: SCHEME FOR UNIVERSITY [June 30 


further provision that to be excused from attendance or prompt 
attendance, a member must have obtained leave from the board 
meeting immediately preceding the one in question; if the ne- 
cessity for being excused cannot be foreseen in time to obtain 
such leave, the member must have been granted leave by the 
president of the university, which leave shall be valid only if 
confirmed by the meeting to which it applies. 
* * * * * * * * * * * * 
As previously intimated the above scheme is presented, not as 
one which even approaches perfection, but as the basis for dis- 
cussion which it is hoped will lead to a scheme as nearly as pos- 
sible perfect. It is very desirable that the discussion include 
the views of those in responsible charge of large industrial estab- 
lishments as well as those connected with university work. The 
attitude of many of the latter, in the past, seems to have been 
that the problem is one so different from all other administrative 
problems that it occupied a class entirely by itself. And that 
no parallels could be drawn and no lessons of: value 
learned from industrial organization. While the under- 
lying basis for such an attitude is undoubtedly sound when 
properly applied, it does not, it seems to me, apply to the problem 
in its entirety. While there is a wide difference at some points 
of the respective processes, between the problem of turning out 
shoes, for instance, and that of turning out mentally trained men, 
there are other parts of the processes, or their administration at 
least, which seem to me closely parallel, if not identical, and, 
therefore, subject to similar treatment. 


eae 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2345 


Discussion ON ‘‘ TENTATIVE SCHEME OF ORGANIZATION AND 
ADMINISTRATION OF A STATE UNIVERSITY.’’ CHICAGO, 
June 30, 1911. 


A.H.Ford: The Institute is to be congratulated upon having 
a paper of this kind presented to it for consideration. Among 
the papers dealing with educational subjects, presented in the 
past, have been those by practicing engineers indicating the kind 
of training which the young engineers whom they employ should 
have and those by educators saying that it was impossible to give 
such a training. Now there is presented to us a problem of 
organization on which it seems as though the engineers and edu- 
cators might agree, as the problem of organization is essentially 
the same no matter whether the product is electrical energy, 
dynamos or trained men. 

As the scheme of organization presented by Mr. Mershon does 
not differ materially from various schemes now in operation the 
speaker will point out some of the defects of the present systems. 

First: The fixing of authority is indefinite, particularly as to 
distinctions between management and administration; with the 
result that frequently the board of trustees decides on matters of 
administration concerning which it has insufficient knowledge 
to act intelligently. The natural result is that the administra- 
tive officers are unable to maintain a definite policy and conse- 
quently find it difficult to obtain proper codperation of those 
under them. 

Second: The making of the secretary, or other financial officer, 
responsible to the board of trustees instead of to the president 
gives rise to a two headed organization which frequently results 
in the control of the educational policy of the institution by the 
secretary, through his control of the budget. This is because 
the board of trustees naturally looks to the secretary rather than 
the president for advice regarding financial matters and decisions 


regarding the amount to be paid for equipment and professors’ 


salaries have a material affect on the educational policy of an 
institution. 

Third: The activities of the students outside of the class room 
ordinarily receive little attention, with the result that many 
students when freed-from restraint in this way acquire habits 
which make the ordinary routine of business irksome. This is no 
doubt the cause of the frequently repeated remark that a college 
graduate is of not much use in the business world until he has 
been away from college for two years. 

There are two provisions in Mr. Mershon’s paper which stand 


‘out prominently. The alumni advisory board and the method 


of fixing a budget to be presented to the board of trustees. 

An alumni advisory board of the kind contemplated should 
prove very useful; but it should not have the duty of confirming 
appointments to the teaching staff for such appointments fre- 
quently require confirmation with great despatch and cannot wait 


2346 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


for the assembly, on call or at a regular meeting, of such a large 
body as the alumni advisory board. 

The method of fixing a budget to be acted on by the board of 
trustees is admirable and should do much to overcome the bad 
effect of having the secretary report directly to the board of 
trustees. { 

The following plan of organization, shown in Fig. 1, is sug- 
gested as a means for overcoming the defects noted. The 
duties of the various officers are given only where they differ 
from those in the plan proposed by Mr. Mershon. 

Board of Trustees. The board of trustees is the direct repre- 


People 
| Ss eee 
Board of 
Trustees. 
ss, Alumni 
_>Advisory 
_-~ Board 
President University, Treasurer 
Council Registrar 
H Secretary Librarian 
1 
H Purchasing 
: Agent 
! 
H Supt. of 
H Property 
' 
University___| Professors 
Faculty \>e=---2 Department Heads 
Deans Beas Instructors 
Colleges S College Faculty 
Students 
Dean of Head of Dept. of 
Preceptors Military Drill 
Head of Dept. of 
Physical Culture 
Medical Adviser 
Preceptors 
Students 
Solid lines indicate subordinate relations. Dotted lines indicate advisory relations. 


sentative of the people and as such should dictate the general 
policy of the university and represent the university before the 
legislature. Being nearer the people than the members of the 
faculty the members of the board of trustees may see fields which 
could be profitably covered and which have escaped the observa- 
tion of the faculty. It should not burden itself with details of 
administration but should confine its activities to such large 
matters as determining the general policy of the university, 
appointing the president, confirming the appointment of deans 
and other officers of equal grade, passing on the budget and 
approving plans for new buildings. 

President. In addition to the powers and duties named the 


—_ i” > = 


1911) DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2347 


president shall, on the advice of the university council and 
subject to the confirmation of the board of trustees, appoint the 
deans, secretary and treasurer. 

University Council. The university council shall consist of 
the deans, the secretary and the treasurer. The secretary shall 
be secretary of the council. The secretary and the treasurer are 
added to the council in order to have their advice in matters 
which involve the expenditure of money or which require a 
knowledge of the past actions of the council or any of the faculties 

Secretary. The secretary shall have charge of all records of 
the university except those relating to finances and shall be 
secretary of the university council and of all faculties. He shall 
appoint all his subordinates subject to the confirmation of the 
president. 

Treasurer. The treasurer shall have charge of all moneys 
and credits and shall keep a record of all financial transactions. 
He shall be the bursar of the university. 

Deans of Colleges. In addition to those duties mentioned, 
the dean of each college shall appoint, subject to the confirmation 


’ of the president, all officers of instruction in the college. 


Dean of Preceptors. ‘The dean of preceptors shall be re- 
sponsible to the university council and the president for the 
conduct of the students when outside of the classroom. He shall 
have supervision of all student orgerizations and shall see that 
the accouncs of such organizations are audited by the auditor 
of the university. The departments of military diill and 
athletics shall be under the dean of preceptors. 

Coilese of UE i Each college shall be organized 
into departments each of which shall be in charge of a professor 
who shall also be director of research in that department. 
Under him shall be such associate professors, assistant professors 
and instructors as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the 
department. 

Preceptors. A preceptor is a person of the rank of professor 
or assistant professor who has charge of the students at such 
time as they may be outside of the class room. He shall act as 
their confidential adviser and shall give them such advice as to 
methods of study and conduct as may be desirable. There 
shall be at least one preceptor for each 50 students lodged in the 
university dormitory. He shall be head of the house and as 
such shall sze to the proper enforcement of the dormitory rules. 
The different use of the term preceptor from that of Mr. Mershon 
is to be noted. It is not intended to limit the activities of the 
preceptors to such as are concerned with those students who live 
in the dormitories; but each student in the university, 1s to 


have a preceptor who shall be in loco parentis for that student, 


the number of students assigned to a preceptor being small 
enough so that he may become personally acquainted with each. 

Medical Adviser. The medical adviser to students shall have 
the rank of professor and shall be under the dean of preceptors. 


2348 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


His duties shall be the giving of medical advice to students but 
shall not include treatment when ill. He shall also advise the 
dean of preceptors in regard to matters affecting the health of 
the student body. : 

Registrar. The registrar shall keep a record of the academic 
work of all students and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned him by the secretary. 

Librarian. The librarian shall perform such duties as usually 
appertain to that office and in addition shall be superintendent 
of university publications other than announcements and those 
of like nature. 

_ Superintendent of Property. The superintendent of property 
shall have charge of all property of the university except moneys 
and credits and the erection of all buildings. He shall report 
directly to the secretary. 

Purchasing Agent. All purchases made for the university 
shall be made through the office of the purchasing agent. He 
shall report directly to the secretary. 

University Faculty. The university faculty shall consist of 
the members of the university council and all persons on the 
university staff having the rank of professor or associate pro- 
fessor. Assistant professors shall have seats in the university 
faculty but shall not have the right to vote. 

The university facu'ty shall be the legislative body of the 
university in all matters relating to the student body, entrance 
requirements, graduation requirements and such other require- 
ments as affect more than one college. 

College Faculties. Each college faculty shall consist of all 
the members of the college staff above the rank of instructor. 
The instructors shall have seats in the faculty but shall not have 
the right to vote. The college faculty shall be the legislative 
body of the college in all matters of a pedagogic nature and 
shall be the final authority in fixing the courses of study. 

Auditor. The auditor shall be the direct representative of 
the board of trustees and as such shall audit the accounts of the 
treasurer and act in an advisory capacity to that officer. He 
shall also audit the accounts of all student organizations. 

C.F. Harding: For a number of years we have had before the 
Institute and other conventions considerable discussion of the 
technical university and its product—by technical men in 
manufacturing institutions and in the engineering field in general. 
It seems to me that this is a very healthy condition of affairs. 
It would be too bad, if the manufacture of an article should be 
entirely neglected by the consumer of that article, and it is 
equally serious if the output of the technical university is en- 
tirely neglected during the university period by those in charge 
of the corporations to whom the university graduate is going. 
I am particularly pleased, therefore, to congratulate the In- 
stitute, upon the papers which it has had in past years and upon 
the very general discussion, which has been entered into by those 


2 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2349 


in charge of university departments and by the engineering pro- 
fession generally. 

The paper which we have this year I regard as confined largely 
to the organization and administration of the university, and 
not to those points which, it seems to me, are most vital in the 
development of the technical graduate, namely, the curriculum 
and the administration of that curriculum in class room and 
laboratory. I wish, therefore, the discussion could be broadened 
out and not limited to the rather narrow question of university 
organization and administration. If this plan were put in vogue 
and standardized in the various universities we would not be 
benefitting, in my opinion, the output of these universities. 
We would be expediting the business of the university, and 
possibly indirectly, through the alumni advisory board, im- 
proving the output to some extent, but it seems to me that the 
discussion and the resulting changes in the curriculum, and in 
the administration of that curriculum in class room and labora- 
tory, would yield very much greater results. Limited as we are, 
however, to the organization and administration of the uni- 
versity, there are one or two things I wish to say along the lines 
of this paper. 

The university organization could be, in my opinion, quite 
similar to the organization of an industrial corporation. I see 
no reason why it should be materially different from such an 
organization. I do not see, however, how such an organization 
can be standardized for a number of universities, particularly 
state universities, where local and legislative conditions are 
bound to limit such standardization. Nevertheless, if we 
cannot have a standardized organization, as this paper infers 
we may have, I think we can gain from this paper a great num- 
ber of valuable suggestions which can be picked out and applied 
to the organizations of the various universities. 

The most radical departure from the present organization of 
most universities as has been stated, is probably the formation 
of the alumni advisory board, and it seems to me that this is 
directly along the line of codperation between the university 
and engineers and manufacturers in the field, which, as I stated 
at the beginning of my remarks, is of so much value. If the 
alumni ten years out of the university, who have been through 
that university, know its problems, who have been through ten 
years of practical and professional experience, can be brought 
into vital touch with the organization of the university, it seems 
to me that this codperation which I have spoken of so favorably, 
would be greatly enhanced, to the ultimate benefit of the gradu- 
ate of that university not only, but to the prestige of that un1- 
versity as well. 

The formation of such an alumni advisory board as has been 
suggested in this paper, while beneficial, as has been stated, 
would, if carried out in detail as suggested here, greatly cripple, 
to my mind, the business of the university. I believe that such 


2350 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


an advisory board, if organized at all, should be a fairly repre- 
sentative one, should include engineers from all branches of the 
profession, and from all parts of the country, and, therefore, 
with a board of twenty of such men, it would be extremely diffi- 
cult to get them together at a single meeting sufficiently often 
to enable them to carry out the duties which have been imposed 
upon them by an organization such as we have in this paper. 
To reduce these difficulties, without introducing any serious 
disadvantages, it would be possible to reduce the number of 
such an alumni advisory board by a large majority, from twenty 
to four or five, and to limit its jurisdiction to the purely advisory 
duties as suggested here, with the exception that they should 
advise, not with regard to the appointment of all the members 
of the instructional board of the university, but the heads of 
departments, heads of schools, and deans. Now if the alumni 
have an active part in suggesting the heads of departments and 
deans, and if the election or appointment of the subordinate 
instructors is left to the heads of departments and deans, the 
up-to-dateness of the faculty, if I may use that word, will be 
maintained. I assume it is largely that quality which the author 
of the paper wishes to maintain in the faculty—the prevention of 
the faculty from getting into a rut, as is often the case, and be- 
coming out of touch with practice, and therefore becoming a 
detriment to the output of the university. If this alumni ad- 
visory board can be limited in this way, it seems to me it would 
be a great improvement, not only over the present condition, 
but over that set forth in the organization mentioned in this 
paper. 

I regret that there are comparatively few of the engineers 
in the field here today, as I had hoped we would have an active 
discussion from these men. I believe they are the men with 
whom we should coéperate in turning out the best and most 
efficient product from our technical universities. 

B. B. Brackett: I believe thoroughly that the administration 
and management of our universities can be improved, and I 
believe that they can be improved by the advice of those who 
are outside. I have no patience with those who maintain that 
the university is a world by itself, and is subject to its own laws 
and its own rules, methods of management and government. 

We are to be congratulated in having this subject brought up. 
But I do not like the author’s suggestion of an alumni advisory 
board that might be a controlling factor. As I understand it, 
his alumni board must approve all appointments, and in that 
way it would possess real veto powers. To my mind there are 
serious dangers in such a plan. It is possible that it might lead 
to results quite the opposite of those suggested by the last speaker. 
You cannot have an alumni board, unless that alumni board is 
elected by the alumni. Are the representatives of the alumni 
likely to be any more expert in educational or technical lines 
than the average member of the alumni association? Is the 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2351 


average alumnus of our colleges and universities an educational 


expert? Is the average one well enough informed to take part 
in the management of a university, to the extent of saying who 
should be on the faculty or who should not? 

In comparatively recent years, two of our well known uni- 
versities have had radical upheavals in management and internal 
organization. In both cases investigation will show that the 
alumni were with the old order of things and not with the 
progressive element. There is a possibility of an institution 
being away behind the times, in the ability of its faculty, its 
general organization, and the character of its work. And it is 
possible for the mass of the alumni to think that this institution 
is one of the best in the world. In fact, it is quite natural for 


them to think so, and to stand as strongly as they can for the old 


order of affairs. 

An alumni board with such influence in the appointment of 
faculty members might foster excessive inbreeding in the per- 
sonnel of the faculty. In fact there are many possibilities of 
obstruction to real progress in an alumni board with powers 


_ so unusual as those proposed by Mr. Mershon. 


The dangers would be especially great in the case of those 
institutions that have not yet reached true collegiate standing. 

A.S. Langsdorf: This paper brings to mind that the study of 
organization and administration in university work was taken 
up some time ago by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advance- 
ment of Teaching. The investigation, which was made by a 
mechanical engineer, had for its particular purpose the study 
of methods in teaching physics. Attention was confined to one 
subject because of the obvious impossibility of considering the 
entire field in the time allowed for the work. The results have 
been published by the Foundation and are available to all who 
are interested. The report met a rather cool reception and even 
ridicule, especially from college men, because of certain unique 
suggestions which imposed factory methods upon the methods 
of training students. 

Mr. Mershon’s paper seems to be actuated by the same general 
motive which prompted the Carnegie Foundation in its under- 
taking, namely, the conservation of energy in administering 
purely routine affairs of university work. It would seem that 
many of the plans outlined by the author should be self-evident 
to executive officers of reasonable efficiency, always supposing 
that political conditions (in the case of a state institution) are 
what they should be. But the question that is likely to present 
itself to those in the educational field, after reading the paper, 
is: Where is the Faculty? Its functions, which should be of the 
greatest importance in a democratic institution like a university, 
are apparently submerged and made subordinate to those of 
unduly exalted executives. 

I believe with one of the previous speakers that the powers of 
the alumni council as proposed in the paper are too great. 


2352 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


Alumni in general are not well acquainted with college affairs, 
especially after an asbence of ten years or more, and there has 
been a tendency on their part, particularly in the case of state 
institutions, to meddle in certain features which were better 
removed from their influence. I refer to their rather pernicious 
activity in athletics, in which they have frequently exercised a 
decidedly corrupting influence. But granting that an alumni 
council of the best type could be secured, its presence would seem 
to violate a fundamental precept in efficient management by a 
further division of responsibility instead of a concentration. 
Instances could be mentioned—such as student “ strikes ’’— 
in which the interposition of an alumni body between students 
and faculty would have been a real calamity. 

George D. Shepardson: I have tried to orientate this paper 
with reference to the work of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, and I confess difficulty in orientating my own ideas 
with reference to this paper. In attempting to find the relation 
of the electrical department to the proposed organization, I 
confess embarrassment. On the other hand, it seems to me that 
the paper might have begun further back. Considering the 
problems which a state educational institution has to face, we 
find that almost without exception the public resources of the 
state are scattered. In almost every state instead of there 
being one State University, which should be at the head of the 
educational system of the State, there are several institutions. 
Even though the state university is nominally at the head of the 
state public educational institution, in every state certain parts 
of the system are outside. Minnesota, for example, has -been 
pointed to as a state in which the entire educational system has 
been built up symmetrically by having the high schools point 
up towards the State University, and at first sight it looks like 
an ideal situation. There are, however, a number of normal 
schools whose purpose primarily is to train teachers, and which 
have no thoroughly specified connection with the university, 
but which every now and then agitate the question of extending 
their work and granting degrees. There are certain other 
branches of education which are under state auspices, and yet 
which do not quite fit in with the ordinary scheme, such as 
institutions for the blind, or for the deaf, or for the feeble-minded } 
institutions which too frequently are classed along with the 
penal institutions. In almost every state we find several 
governing boards which have to do with educational institutions 
and when it comes to the legislative sessions, whence come the 
appropriations, there are a number of different boards generally 
in sharp competition with one another, or else in some unholy 
alliance which is not of the best order. 

One of the fundamental features which should be included 
in any general scheme of reorganization, is some provision for 
harmonizing all public educational institutions in the State. 
In the State of Ohio, for example, I believe there are four, 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO _ 2353 


certainly three, different institutions for higher education that 
enjoy the receipt of money from the State Treasury, and in 
almost any other state that situation exists to some extent. 
It seems to me the greatest need of our state universities is 
that the entire educational system of the state should be unified. 
This is much more important than that the university organiza- 
tion itself be overhauled. Another difficulty with the proposed 
organization is that in most of the states the universities are 
chartered, which is particularly true of the older institutions. 
It is a matter of very great difficulty to change that form of 
organization. As an illustration, in Minnesota there has been 
no acknowledged arrangement by which the alumni should 
have representation upon the Board of Regents, corresponding 
to the Trustees, although such representation seems to be very 
desirable. Only after several years of agitation was there success 
in getting one or two alumni members upon the Board of Regents, 
and that is done, not by right, but by courtesy. The matter 
was brought up at the psychological moment, before a properly 
disposed Governor, and he agreed to appoint two alumni upon 
. the Board of Regents when a vacancy occurred. Since that 
time the succeeding Governors have been prevailed upon to 
appoint alumni as successors of alumni whose terms expire, 
and so we have an alumni representation upon the Board which 
has proven to be very satisfactory. 

‘As to the official relations between the alumni and the uni- 
versity, it is difficult to make rigid statements which will apply 
everywhere. It seems to me the attitude that has been gen- 
erally expressed here this afternoon is the correct one; that, 
generally speaking, the alumni organization should only have 
advisory power, and not have veto or appointive power. If the 
alumni are assured of representation upon the general governing 
Board of Trustees or Regents, then we may be sure that the 
alumni will be well represented in matters which they desire to 
bring to the notice of the Board of Trustees or the Board of 
Regents, and that these matters will be given proper attention. 

M.C. Beebe: I am sure that all of the members of university 
faculties appreciate suggestions made by engineers in the field 
in fact, we make every effort to get them to codperate to as great 
an extent as is possible. 

I cannot see any reason why a university, cannot be organized 
on the same sound principles which obtain in our best corpora- 
tions. I think there is a chance for decided improvement, es- 
pecially on the business side. The difficulties in the past have 
perhaps been due to the very rapid growth of the state universt- 
ties, so that the development of the organization has tended to 
lag behind that of the growth of the institution itself but is not 
the same true of many business organizations? 

I think we have got to go slow in applying the same standards 
of efficiency to the educational side that are applied to the purely 
manufacturing plant. The matter of economy should be judged 


2354 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


in a somewhat different way. True economy in education does 
not mean a low cost per student for there is no such competition 
to be met. Employers are not looking to our universities for 
cheaply educated men. 

The only economy worth while and it is very well worth while 
is to turn out the best possible product with the money available 
for the purpose. This means among other things a careful selec- 
tion and retention of good instructors and equipment. 

Mr. Ford objected to the two-headed scheme, as he called it. 
It may be interesting to know that at the University of Wisconsin 
the two-headed arrangement is being tried out. We have the 
president of the university, and besides we have a newly ap- 
pointed business manager, whose duty it is to look after all the 
purely business matters. He has under him the purchasing 
department, the Secretary of the Board of Regents, and Bursar 
and has control of the buildings and grounds. 

The argument for this arrangement is that the institution is so 
large that it is impossible for one man to do justice to both 
interests, the pedagogical and business, and the work may better 
be divided. The situation is analagous to the case of a large 
corporation, where the various vice-presidents are given charge 
of separate divisions of the organization. Although this de- 
parture is somewhat new, it seems to be working very success- 
fully. 

W.L. Upson: There are many points in this paper which in- 
vite criticism. Some of these are already embodied in university 
organization and might be discussed from the standpoint of ex- 
perience. In this respect may be mentioned what the author 
calls, ‘‘ Schools and Departments of Instruction.” This is 
proposed as a means of dividing the various college faculties into 
smaller and more workable bodies, and might be justifiable in 
an institution of 10,000 students. At present, however, 
these divisions are apt to be so totally devoid of power as to 
render them unnecessary and useless complications in the gen- 
eral scheme. In the college faculties, at present, important 
action is usually taken with departmental agreement and as de- 
partments are limited in number, the faculties are not as un- 
wieldly as their actual membership might suggest. The author 
recognizes the value of alumni coéperation, and this can hardly 
be overestimated. Alumni representation on Trustee Boards 
has generally been productive of much good. His method of 
attacking the problem is novel, but will probably find few sup- 
porters. It appears like putting a horse-whip in the hands of an 
incompetent, but self-confident boy, who proceeds to make gen- 
eral havoc in stirring things up. It is doubtful if most state 
universities could command the services of 20 alumni who 
were capable of exercising such functions as are prescribed. 
Again, incompetency is not a general characteristic of university 
faculties. On the contrary, failure to obtain better results is 
tather due to insufficient means—too few and too poorly paid 


7 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2355 


instructors—and to lack of codperation between faculty and 
trustees. These two bodies should be brought more closely 
together, not separated by another all-powerful body of doubtful 
competency. The interest of alumni should be secured by direct 
representation on the board of trustees. 

A third criticism relates to the student advisory board. As 
proposed, this board is too small to be properly representative of 
the student body. It should, however, be recognized as a very 
important part of the university organization and be given as 
full and unlimited power over student activities as individual 
conditions would warrant. 

Ralph D. Mershon (by letter): I regret exceedingly the cir- 
cumstances which rendered it impossible for me to present this 
paper in person and take part in the oral discussion of it. 

It is a matter of regret that no one outside the educational 
field took part in the discussion. The opinions of men who 
have had experience in large industrial organizations are most 
desirable in matters of this kind. 

Mr. Ford’s contribution is more definite and constructive than 
any of the rest of the discussion, and gives evidence of careful 
thought. There are some matters however on which I do not 
entirely agree with. him. 

He says that in my scheme “ The fixing of authority is in- 
definite, particularly as to contentions between management and 
administration, with the result that frequently the Board of 
Trustees decides on matters of administration concerning which 
it has insufficient knowledge to act intelligently. The natural 
result is that the administrative officers are unable to maintain 
a definite policy, and consequently find it difficult to obtain the 
proper codperation of those under them.” 

The fixing of authority should not be indefinite. My en- 
deavor in drawing up the scheme was to definitely fix the 
authority; to give the President all the power requisite to make 
him fully responsible for the success of his administration, and 
yet not leave him so free from possible restraint as to invite the 
condition of czarism that has developed, and led to trouble, 
in some instances. For this reason, on further thought, I 
agree with Mr. Ford that the Secretary should not report di- 
rectly to the Board of Trustees. For this reason, also, I prefer 
to make the Secretary, Registrar and Superintendent of Prop- 
erty report to the President directly, instead indirectly as Mr. 
Ford does. But there is no good reason that I can see why the 
Treasurer should report to the President. I would say, also, 
that if a ‘“‘ Board of Trustees decides on matters of administra- 
tion concerning which it has insufficient knowledge to act in- 
telligently,’ then, in my opinion, it is not a good Board of 
Trustees. A Board that properly does its work will call for 
such information as is necessary to enable it to act intelligently, 
and will see to it, in case of conflicting opinions, that informa- 
tion is had from authoritative sources on both sides of the 


question. 


2356 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


Mr. Ford, and others of those taking part in the discussion, 
think that there would be difficulty in having the Alumni 
Board advise the Board of Trustees and confirm appointments to 
the teaching staff. At Harvard, the Alumni Advisory Board, 
designated as the ‘‘ Board of Overseers’, has, for many years 
done this very thing, and Dr. Eliot, in the Harris lectures on 
University Administration, sets forth this as one of the valuable 
and desirable functions of the Board. If such a scheme has 
worked successfully at Harvard, I see no reason why it should 
not in other universities. . 

My scheme contemplates an Alumni Advisory Board with the 
powers now had by the Harvard Board of Overseers. I recog- 
nize the fact that in instituting such an Alumni Advisory Board, 
in connection with a State University, it would be difficult, and 
perhaps inadvisable, to procure for them, officially, any such 
considerable measure of power as this. I believe, however, that 
an Alumni Advisory Board elected by the Alumni Association 
of a State University, under the restrictions as to membership 
provided by my scheme, that goes to work in a conscientious and 
careful way, will have all the power it needs in any direction 
in connection with the university, whether it has official recogni- 
tion or not. I believe that in most state universities such a 
Board would be welcomed by the Executives and Trustees. 


That it is unlikely the Board of Trustees and the Alumni Ad- 


visory Board would ever come into conflict. But that if they 
ever should, and it should be deemed advisable by the Ad- 
visory Board to compel a course it recommended, it could do 
this by making a public statement of the matter at issue. I do 
not believe it would ever be either necessary or advisable to 
take such drastic action, but the power to take it would lie 
with the Advisory Board. The fact that the Board had this 
power would probably obviate the necessity for its ever being 
exercised; and the fact that such action would be drastic, would 
be a strong reason why the Board should be extremely cautious 
about ever resorting to it. 

All the other suggestions made by Mr. Ford, insofar as they do 
not conflict with the exceptions above noted, seem to me emi- 
nently desirable and practical. I intend, so soon the leisure for 
it offers, to prepare a revised scheme embodying them. 

_ Mr. Brackett asks: ‘‘ Are the representatives of the Alumni 
likely to be any more expert in educational or technical lines 
than the average member of the Alumni Association.” I 
believe the value of an Alumni Board will come through the fact 
that the members of it are not experts in education. Experts 
in any line are likely to become onesided and unable to take a 
common sense view of the relation of their work to the outside 
world. The very object of the Alumni Board is to have the 
benefit of the views of people not subject to educational myopia. 

Some of those in educational work do not realize that an 

Alumni Board, made up of mature men who have had ten or 


1911] DISCUSSION AT CHICAGO 2357 


more years of worldly experience, is not going to interfere in 
matters unless it has good reason to do so. And that, generally, 
the individual members of it are in a much better position to 
acquire reliable information relative to any candidate for the 
instructional force than is anyone connected with the institution. 
The mere fact that an inquirer is connected with the institution 
makes it difficult for him to get information that is reliable. 

Mr. Brackett also says that an Alumni Board with such 
influence may foster excessive inbreeding in the personnel of 
the faculty. Dr. Eliot’s testimony is a sufficient answer to this. 
But I may say, from my own experience in connection with one 
State University, that the Alumni, generally, even those on the 
faculty, hold the view that there is too much inbreeding in most - 
of the State Universities, and that it should be stopped. 

Mr. Langsdorf says: ‘‘ Where is the faculty? Its functions, 
which should be of the greatest importance in a democratic 
institution like a university, are apparently submerged and made 
subordinate to those of unduly exalted executives.’ I agree 
with Mr. Langsdorf that the functions of the faculty are of the 
. greatest importance. The very object of the existence of a 
university is that the faculty may exercise its functions in teach- 
ing, but I do not believe that administration is a proper function 
of a faculty. I do not mean to say that the faculty and its 
opinions should be ignored in the administration. Quite the 
contrary. But I do mean to say that the average faculty 
member has not had that training which fits him to have a part 
in the administration of an institution and that if he had, the 
functions of instructing and administering do not properly go 
together. 

Mr. Upson objects to the division of a college into schools and 
departments of instruction, saying that it might be justifiable in 
institutions of ten thousand students, but implying that it is 
not justifiable at the present time. It was an institution of ten 
thousand students, or more, that I had in mind in drawing up 
this scheme. The time will come, and is not very far away, when 
we shall have institutions of such size; and they will have to be 
handled. It seems to me we might begin now, nominally at 
least, to handle university work in this way, so that we shall be 
ready for the larger problem when it comes; to outline a skeleton 
organization which shall be conformed to now, as nearly as may 
be without needless duplication, and which can be put more and 
more nearly into effect as increasing numbers make it necessary. 
As our State universities become larger and larger the problem 
of handling them will become increasingly difficult unless there 
is now laid the foundation for such organization as will enable the 
proper handling of large numbers. 

It has been found in manufacturing work, where one organiza- 
tion makes a great quantity and diversity of product, that the 
best results are gotten, not by having one great equipment to 
turn out the various products, but by having an institution 


2358 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION [June 30 


consisting of a combination of smaller institutions, each with its 
own equipment, and each turning out its own line of product. It 
is by such course, only, that the individual product can receive 
anything like the individual attention it must receive for best 
results. And under such an arrangement the product can be 
turned out of better quality and with less waste of time and 
money, even though it involves a duplication of equipment. It 
seems to me this applies to educational institutions, and that 
eventually we must have in all universities separate and distinct 
colleges involving more or less duplication of instructive force 
and equipment, in order that we may turn out the best product; 
in order that the product shall receive the same individual 
attention it does in smaller institutions. By such a course we 
shall retain all the advantages of the large institution while 
doing away with the disadvantage that the large institution 
is now considered to have as compared with the smaller one; and 
at the same time establish lines of growth along which the in- 
stitution may continually and naturally expand to meet the 
requirements of continually increasing numbers of students and 
the demands for additional courses of instruction. 


4 


A paper presented at the 264th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, October 13, 1911. 


Copyright 1911. By A.I.E.E. 


A THEORY OF COMMUTATION AND ITS APPLICATION 
TO INTERPOLE MACHINES 


BY B. G. LAMME 


In the usual theory of commutation it is considered that, 


- when the current in a coil is commutated or reversed, the local 


magnetic flux due to the current reverses also, and in so doing 
sets up an e.in.f. in the coil which opposes the reversal. This is 
the so-called reactance voltage referred to in commutation prob- 
lems. The fact that two or more coils may be undergoing 
commutation at the same time involves: consideration of mutual 
as well as self-induction. The relation of the mutual to the self- 
induction, the probable value of each, etc., lead to such mathe- 
matical complication in the analysis of the problem, that em- 
pirical methods have become the usual practice in dealing with 
commutation. The usual analytical methods do not permit a 
ready or easy physical conception of what actually takes place. 
One must think in formulas rather than in the phenomena of 
the commutation itself. 

According to the usual theory, during the commutation of the 
coil the local magnetic flux due to the coil is assumed to be 
reversed. However, in the zone in which the commutation 
occurs, certain of the magnetic fluxes may remain practically 
constant in value and direction during the entire period of com- 
mutation. This is but one instance, of which there are several, 
to show where there is apparent contradiction of fact in the usual 
mathematical assumptions made in treating this problem. 

The above fact of part of the flux in the zone of commutation 
remaining practically constant in value and direction, led the 
author to a method of dealing with the problem of commutation 


_ which is based upon consideration of the armature flux as a 


2359 


2360 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


whole, as set up by the armature ampere turns. The results 
obtained by the method were very satisfactory, and it was ap- 
parent that a much better conception could be obtained of some 
of the phenomena of commutation than was possible with former 


methods. 


In the following pages the method is indicated in general, » 


and its application to interpole machines is then worked out in 
greater detail. In non-interpole machines the problem is greatly 
complicated by the presence of local currents under the brushes 
which modify the distribution of certain of the armature magnetic 
fluxes, as will be shown. 

This theory of commutation, with the method of calculation, 
is based upon the broad principle of the armature conductors 
cutting across the magnetic field set up by the armature winding and 
thereby generating an e.m.f. in the short circuited cotls which 1s 


proportional to the product of the revolutions, the flux which 1s cut. 


and the number of turns in series. The usual “ reactance ”’ 
voltage due to reversal of the local flux of an individual coil is 
not considered, although its equivalent appears under another 
form. 

The method in general is therefore the same as that used for 
determination of the main armature e.m.f., except that the 
magnetic fluxes cut by the armature conductors are those due to 
the armature magnetomotive force instead of those due to the 
field. 

When the armature winding is carrying current its magneto- 
motive force tends to set up certain magnetic fields or fluxes 
which have a definite relation to the position of the brushes. 
Considered broadly, the current after entering the commutator 
or armature winding, at any brush arm, divides into two paths 
of opposite direction. As the winding on each of these paths is 
arranged in exactly the same way, and as the currents flow in 
opposite directions, the armature windings in these two paths 
have magnetomotive forces which are in opposite directions. 
The resultant armature magnetomotive force rises to a maximum 
at points corresponding to the brush positions. Midway between 
these points the magnetomotive force is zero. Magnetic fluxes 
are set up by these magnetomotive forces, which are a function 
of the force producing them, and the proportions, dimensions 
and arrangement of the magnetic paths; and these magnetic 
fluxes will be practically fixed in position corresponding to the 
brush setting. : 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2361 


The armature conductors cutting across these fluxes set up by 
the armature magnetomotive forces, will have e.m.fs. generated 
in them. In those conductors which have their terminals short 
circuited by the brushes, these e.m.fs. may be called the short 
circuit e.m.fs. 

There are three principal armature fluxes which are cut by the 
short circuited armature coils. In the order of their usual 
importance these are, 

1. That which crosses from slot to slot. It may be called the 
slot flux. 

2. The interpolar flux which passes from the armature surface 
to the neighboring poles or yoke surface. It may be called the 
interpolar flux, as distinguished from interpole flux, which term 
will be used later. 

3. That flux set up in the armature end-winding in the zone of 
the short circuited coil, due to the magnetomotive force of the 
end windings as a whole. It may be called the end flux. 

The short circuited armature coils cutting across these three 
fluxes generate the short circuit e.m.fs. The whole problem of 
commutation may be considered as depending upon the prede- 
termination of these three fluxes. 

Consider, first, an armature conductor approaching the point 
of current reversal or commutation. Under this condition the 

current carried by the coil always flows in the same direction 
as the e.m.f. generated by the conductor cutting across the magnetic 
field or flux set up by the armature winding is induced. When the 
terminals of an armature coil pass under the brush and are short 
circuited, it is obvious that the e.m.f. set up in the coil by the 
armature flux is unchanged in direction for the coil is still cutting 
a field of the same polarity. This e.m-f. tends to maintain the cur- 
rent in the short circuited armature coil in the same direction as 
before but the value the current attains will be dependent upon 
the short circuit emf. and largely upon the resistance in the 
circuit, which will usually consist of the resistance of the coil 
itself and of the brush contact. As the coil passes out of short 
circuit, that is, as it leaves the brush, the current must flow in 
the opposite direction, but the emf. set up by the armature 
flux is still in the same direction as before. Therefore, after 
commutation, the armature current in the coil is flowing in 
opposition to the e.m.f. set up in the coil by the armature flux. 

The following is a method for calculating approximately the 

three fluxes before described and the e.m.fs., generated by the 


2362 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


armature conductors cutting them. The interpolar fluxes will 
be considered first, the end fluxes second, and the slot fluxes 
last, as these latter are greatly complicated by the problem of 
local currents produced largely by the interpolar and end fluxes. 


INTERPOLAR ARMATURE FLUX 


By this is meant the flux in the interpolar space between the 
armature core and the field poles and yoke, due to the magneto- 
motive force of the armature winding, as shown in Fig. 1. This 
magnetomotive force has its highest value at those parts of the 
armature winding corresponding to the brush contacts on the 
commutator and is zero midway between such points. If the 
brushes are set with zero lead then the maximum magneto- 
motive force of the armature lies midway between adjacent field 
poles and will taper off in value from this midpoint toward the 


Fic. 1 Fic. 2 


adjacent edges of the poles. The flux density between the arma- 
ture surface and the sides of the poles should therefore tend to 
taper off as the armature magnetomotive force is reduced but, in 
most types of field construction, it tends to increase in value due 
to the relatively shorter magnetic path as the edges of the poles 
are approached. Usually this increase very considerably over- 
balances the decrease due to the lower magnetomotive forces 
and in consequence the interpolar flux density due to the arma- 
ture generally has a minimum value midway between the poles 
and rises toward the edges of the poles. This is illustrated by 
Fig. 2. 

The density of this flux in the interpolar space is dependent 
upon many conditions such as the ampere turns of the armature 
winding per pole, distance between poles, conformation of the 
poles ,yoke, etc. In Fig. 2 the ordinates of the dotted lines 
represent the flux densities at the armature interpolar surface 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2363 


due to each of the two adjacent poles. The resultant of these 
two is the full line a c 6 which represents the distribution of the 
armature interpolar flux. This interpolar flux might be con- 
sidered as a true magnetic field fixed in space with respect to the 
position of the brushes. This field being fixed and the armature 
conductors rotating it is obvious that any conductor moving 
across this magnetic field must have e.m.f. generated in it, the 
value of which depends upon the flux which is cut at any instant. 
Therefore, the e.m.f. due to this interpolar field can be de- 
termined directly, if the intensity of the field itself can be cal- 
culated. 

During the period of commutation the armature coil is short 
circuited and has the current reversed in it under certain por- 
tions of this field. ‘The problem is to determine the strength of 
the field corresponding to this point of com- 
mutation and then by direct calculation the 
corresponding e.m.f. can be determined. 
In the following analysis two cases will be 
considered, namely, pitch windings, and 
“ chorded”’ or ‘‘ fractional pitch ’’ windings. 

Pitch Windings. When commutating or 
reversing a coil with -a pitch winding it is 
evident that if there were no lead at the 
brushes such a coil would commutate, on 
. the average, at the midpoint between two 
poles. The e.m.f. generated in the coil by cutting the interpolar 
field would therefore be proportional to the strength of the inter- 
polar flux at the midpoint. This flux can be determined approx- 
imately ina fairly simple manner in the ordinary types of machines 
in which the poles are relatively long compared with the distance 
between adjacent pole tips and where the distance from the arma- 
ture surface to the yoke is relatively great. The following is 
a method which appears to give reasonably close results: 

Let W,=total number of wires on the armature. 

I, =the current per conductor. 
p =number of poles. 


Fic. 3 


I, x W; 
Then, the armature ampere turns per pole = PO Sees 


neglecting any change in ampere turns due to the short circuit- 
ing action of the brushes. 


In Fig. 3 let > represent the length of the mean flux path 
corresponding to the mid-interpolar position. This is assumed 


2364 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


to be a part of a circle which is practically at right angles to the 
armature surface and the side of the field pole, as indicated in 
Fig. 3. 

Let P=width of body of pole. 

Let B;=the flux density at the midpoint between the poles. 


Then B;= 2b 
But bao ra tO approximately, as angle (90+) is 


only approximate. 


Orie ace (0.254355) =2 aa (0.25+5). 


a D Te ) : 
a fas a ly. 
Also, a ( 2p 5) approximately 
Therefore 
i 1 T at) _ 7 (0.25p+0.5) (# D—Pp 
b= 2m (0.25+5.-) ae = r: 
Therefore 


nue 2X3.19 I. Wixp* 
‘a (0.25p+0.5) (1 D—Pp)X 2 p 


I; Wi p 


OE Hts (0.25p+0.5) (a D—Pp) 


approx. 


The above gives the approximate flux density at the midpoint 
between poles. The flux densities at points at each side of the 
midpoint can be determined in a similar manner, taking into 
account the lower armature magnetomotive force as the mid- 
point is departed from. As the edge of the pole is approached 
the effect of pole horns may complicate the flux distribution so 
that the above method of calculating interpolar flux density will 
not apply for points close to the pole. 

E.m.f. Due to Interpolar Flux. 


Let E.=The e.m.f. due to cutting the armature flux. - 
D =diameter of armature. 
L =length of core including ventilating spaces. 
T, =turns per individual armature coil. 
Rs; = revolutions per second. 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2365 


Then, the e.m.f. induced in a coil cutting the field at c (Fig. 2) 
can be represented by the formula, 


_ Bixt DLX2 TeXRs 


E- 


108 
Or, 
perenne iid rin Pe AN2 DAT OR: 
“~ (0.25p+0.5) (r D—PpP) 108 
Or 
eS Ie W: Tek; x( pit _2pxamDL + # ) 
; 108 (0.25p+0.5) (* D—Pp) 


Incidentally, with this method of dealing with the problem 
the effect of the addition of an interpole can at once be seen. 
The magnetomotive force of the interpole is superimposed on 
that of the armature and the resultant flux is then considered. 
The armature conductors cut this flux and thereby generate 
emf. If the interpole magnetomotive force is stronger than 
that of the armature, then the flux established will be in the 
opposite direction in that part of the armature face which lies 
under the interpole. Therefore, the flux or field over the com- 
mutated coil in the non-commutating pole machine is replaced 
by flux in the opposite direction. The presence of the interpole 
does not increase the reactance of the armature coil as sometimes 
considered, but, on the contrary, the harmful flux is replaced by 
one which is of direct assistance in commutation. 

Effect of Brush Width. In cutting across the interpolar flux 
it is obvious that the e.m.f. set up in the short circuited coil is 
not a function of the length of time the coil is short circuited, 
for this interpolar flux is set up by the armature winding as a 
whole and not by individual coils. If two or more armature 
coils in series are short circuited by the brush, then their e.m.fs. 
will be in series while the total resistance in the path will be very 
little higher than in the case of a single coil short circuited, for 
the principal part of the resistarice lies in the brush contact. It 
is evident therefore that considerably higher short circuit cur- 
rents can be set up by the interpolar field when more commutator’ 
bars, and more turns, are short circuited. It can therefore be 
assumed that, as far as the interpolar field is concerned, the more 


2366 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


commutator bars the brush covers the greater will be the short 
circuit current and the greater will be the difficulty in commuta- 
tion, assuming there is no external field assisting commutation. 

Chord Winding. With a pitch winding, with no lead at the 
brushes, the commutation of a coil will occur in the lowest part 
of the armature interpolar flux, asaain Fig.4. With a chorded 
winding, as indicated at bb, the commutation will occur under 
somewhat higher flux than with a pitch winding. Therefore in 
considering the interpolar flux a full pitch winding commutates 
under better conditions than a chorded winding. 


ENbD FLUXES 


The armature winding as a whole sets up certain fluxes in the 
end windings. These fluxes are fixed in position with respect 
to the brushes, and the armature coils, in cutting across, them, 
generate e.m.fs. The only part of these end fluxes concerned in 


Fic. 4 Fic. 5 


the present problem is that which the commutating coils cut 
during the operation of commutation. 

Fig. 5 illustrates an armature winding in which the heavy 
lines represent two coils in contact with the brushes and there- 
fore at the position of commutation. It is only the end flux 
density along the shaded portion or zone of this diagram which 
need be considered. If the various densities for this zone can 
be determined, then the e.m.f. in the commutated coil can be 
calculated. Only the usual cylindrical type of end windings 
will be considered, as practically all direct current machines at 
the present time use this type. Such windings are usually ar- 
ranged in two layers, the coils of which extend straight out from 
the armature core for a short distance, usually 4 in. to 13 in., 
depending upon size and voltage of the machine, and then extend 
at an angle to the core of 30 deg. to 45 deg. The conductors of 
the upper and lower layers therefore usually lie almost at right 
angles to each other. 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2367 


Pitch Winding. Let Fig. 6 represent a single coil of the end 
winding located in the commutating zone. Both theory and 
test show that the maximum flux density in this zone is at a 
and tapers off slightly to b, then tapers off more rapidly from 
b until it reaches practically zero value at c. It may be assumed 
with but little error that the decrease from 0 to ¢ is at a practi- 
cally uniform rate. The flux density along the commutating 
zone of the end winding may therefore be represented by Fig. 7, 
in which the ordinates represent flux density. On the above 
assumption the total flux in the commutating zone of the end 
winding can be determined with sufficient accuracy if the density 
at b, for instance, can be determined and the distances a b and 
c din Figs. 6 and 7 are known. These latter can be determined 
directly from the winding dimensions. 


db 


t 


Fic. 6 BiG. 7 


The following is an approximate formula for the flux density 
at b, including allowance for proximity of iron end plate, core, etc. 


B= 2.15 I, WixXlog 2N 
es a D sin 8 


N =number of slots per pole. 
I, =current per conductor. 
W,=total armature wires. 

D =diameter of armature. 
Let ab=h, andcd=m. 


Then the flux cut by one conductor at one end is 


m 2.15 I, Wixlog 2.N 
wD (i+) X a D sin 0 


Therefore the e.m.f. per single turn of the armature winding, 


2368 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 18 


due to the end flux, considering the end fluxes for both ends of 
the core, becomes 


m 2.151. W: Xlog2 N47 D RsX2 T< 
‘is (145) x a D sin 6 108 


I. WiTeRs 4.3 (2h+m) 


Be 108 sin 6 


Xlog 2 N 


This formula is on the basis of non-magnetic paths around the 
end windings, that is, with no bands of magnetic material and no 
magnetic supports under the coils. The effect of bands over the 
end winding is approximately equivalent to cutting the flux 
path to half length for those parts of the 
end winding covered by the bands. There- 
fore, with bands, the diagram representing 
flux density in the commutating zone of 
the end winding would be as indicated in 
Fig. 8. In this case the total flux corresponds 
to the total area of the curve including the 
dotted portion. Of course the actual flux 
distribution would not be exactly as shown 
in this diagram for there would be some 
fringing in the neighborhood of the bands. Fic. 8 
The diagram simply serves to illustrate the 
general effect of magnetic bands and an approximate method of 
taking it into account. 

The effect of a magnetic coil support will be very similar to 
that of a steel band in reducing the length of path and therefore 
increasing the flux in the neighborhood of the coil support. 
However, in case of magnetic bands over the winding and coil 
supports under it the limit lies in saturation of the bands them- 
selves. This usually represents a comparatively small total flux. 
The coil support, however, would probably not saturate in any 
case. 

The above formula for end flux can therefore be corrected 
for magnetic bands and coil supports by multiplying by a suit- 
able constant to cover the increased flux. 

It is obvious that the determination of the end flux is, to a 
certain extent, a question of judgment and experience. No 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2369 


fixed method or formula can be specified for all types of machines, 
for this flux would be influenced very greatly by the bands, if of 
magnetic material, and by the material, size and location of the 
coil supports and their relation to the bands. Also, eddy cur- 
rents may be set up in the coil supports which will influence the 
distribution of the end flux in the zone of the commutated coil. 
However, in each individual case an approximation can be made 
which will, in general, be much closer than would be obtained 
from any empirical rule or by neglecting the effect of the end 
flux altogether. 

Chord Winding. ‘The effect of chording the armature winding 
is to slightly diminish the flux density in the commutating zone 
which results in a slight reduction in the e.m.f. of the commu- 
tating coil. But a relatively much greater gain is obtained 
by the consequent shortening of the distance ¢ d in Fig. 8 and 
the corresponding reduction of the total end flux. Due to the 
chording itself the flux density at b is reduced practically in the 
ratio of eae where N,=number of slots spanned by the 
coil. For example, if the full pitch is 20 slots and the coil 
spans 18 slots, then the density at b will be reduced in the 
log 36 
log 40 


along cd, Fig. 7, will be further reduced in the ratio of sa 


ratio of ~().971 due to the chording itself; and the flux 


due to the shorter end extension. The average flux along cd 
therefore will be reduced to 0.90.971 =0.874, or about 87 per 
cent of that of a pitch winding. 

Effect of Brush Width. Asin the case of the interpolar flux the 
width of the brush, or the number of armature coils short cir- 
cuited by the brush, has practically no influence on the e.m.f. 
generated per turn. However, the total effective armature 
ampere turns will be reduced slightly, if the average current in 
the short circuited turns is less than the normal current. This 
will have a very slight effect on the e.mf. 


Stor FLUX 


By this is meant the magnetic flux across and over the arma- 
ture slots which does not extend to the yoke or field poles. 

Two general cases will be considered; first, that in which no 
local currents are present, which is the case in well designed 
interpole machines; and second, that in which there are local 


2370 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


currents set up in the short circuited coils, which is almost 
invariably the case in machines without interpoles or some other 
form of compensation. Also, pitch and chorded windings will 
be considered. 


SLtot FLux witH No LocAL CURRENTS 


Pitch Winding. Let Fig. 9 represent an upper and a lower 
coil in the same slot, with equal turns and currents. Then if 
there is no saturation in the adjacent teeth the flux density across 
the slot will be zero at the bottom of the lower coil and will 
rise to a maximum value at the top of the upper coil. There 
will also be a flux across the slot above the upper coil and also 
from the top of the tooth as indicated in Fig. 9. The total slot 
flux entering at the bottom of the teeth is therefore equal to the 
total flux which crosses the two adjacent slots, plus the flux 
crossing at the top of the slots. The interpolar flux which ex- 


Fic. 10° 


tends from the armature surface to the poles or yoke is not in- 
cluded in this. 

As this slot flux is practically fixed in position the armature 
conductor in slot A, in passing from a to b must cut this flux. 
It is obvious that the flux which crosses above the uppermost 
conductor in the slot is cut equally by all the conductors in the 
slot, as the coil passes from position a to position b; but the flux 
crossing the slot below the uppermost conductor does not affect 
all the conductors equally, and therefore, for simplicity of cal- 
culation, an equivalent flux of lower value can be used which 
may be considered as cutting all the conductors equally. 

Let d_ Fig. 10, represent the depth of the conductors of one 

complete coil. 
t represent the distance between the upper and lower 
coils. 
a represent the distance from the upper conductor to 
the core surface. 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2371 


s represent the width of the slot, assuming parallel sides. 
n represent the ratio of width of armature tooth to the 
width of the armature slot, at the surface of the core. 
T, represent turns per single coil, or per commutator bar. 
C, represent the number of individual coils, or commu- 
tator bars, per complete coil. 
L represent the width of armature core, including 
ventilating spaces. 
I, represent the current per armature conductor. 
Then, ampere turns per upper or lower coil= J. jeg Oe. 
3.19 I. T.XCs L (2 d++#) 
s 


Total flux across coil space= 


3.19 IT. CsLX2Xa_ 
Si 


Flux across slot above coil= 
Flux from tooth top across the slot is approximately, 
3.19 I, T; C: LX2X0.54 Vn 


1 (2a+1.08 s Vn) 


Total flux above upper coil=3.19 J.T. Cs - 


The sum of the two fluxes represents the total flux across one 
slot which enters at the bottom of one tooth. Asa similar flux 
passes across the slot at the other side of the tooth the total 
flux entering the tooth will be double the above and becomes 


. (2 d+t+2 a+1.08s Vn) 
§ 


Total slot flux=2X3.19 Ic Tc Cs 


This total flux cannot be used directly in the calculations as 
it does not affect all the conductors equally. It is therefore 
necessary to determine equivalent fluxes for the upper and 
lower coils which can be used instead of the above value. 

For the lower coil the following value has been calculated: 


axe ie Cs L (1.833 d-+2) 


The equivalent flux= 


And for the upper coil, 
pet T, CsL 0.833 d 


Equivalent flux=~ 


To these equivalent fluxes should be added the total flux 
above the upper coil. This gives the total effective flux for the 
upper and lower coils. Then, for the lower coil, 


2372 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


Total effective flux i. 
: 2a+1.08 5 V 
=2%3.19 fake Gal aeaees Or hes ") 
And for the upper coil, 
Total effective flux he 
(0.833+2 a+ 1.08 sv n) 


=2<319T-79e Cs LX : 


The average value of the effective flux for the upper and 
lower coils then becomes, 


z, (287 d+it+4a+2.16s Vn) 
Ss 


S219 ih ik. (Eg 


(This average effective value is approximately 80 per cent of the 
total slot flux.) 

On the basis of a pitch winding and the assumption that only 
one armature coil is short circuited, that is, with the brush 
covering the width of only one commutator bar, then the above 
slot flux is cut by all the coils in the slot in passing through one 
slot pitch. From this the e.m.f. in the commutating coil due to 
the slot flux can be calculated directly and may be expressed as 
follows: 


B= 45S x number of slots 


Ss 
But C;xXnumber of slots=No. of commutator bars 


_ total number of conductors W,_ 
27; weDoly 


Therefore the above expression for e.m.f. may be changed to the 
form, 


pa Bl TWiT RsL (2.67 d+4a+t+2.16s Vn) 
aie 108 s 


If it is desired to compare this expression with a certain well 
known formula which has been much used heretofore, then let 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2373 


the quantity in the parenthesis in the above expression be repre- 
sented by c;. The formula can then be changed to, 


I,T2Xnumber commutator barsX Rs XL 
108 


E.= (2X3.19X¢z) X 


It contains the same terms (except in the value of the constant) 
for the expression of the e.m.f. which has been used heretofore 
in determining the reactance of the commutated coil. 

Effect of Brush Width or Number of Commutator Bars Covered 
by Brush. The above formulas are on the basis of the brush 
covering only the width of one commutator bar. In this case 
all the conductors of one slot cut across the entire slot flux in 
passing through one tooth pitch. However, if the brush covers 
more than one commutator bar, then the full slot flux is not cut 
in passing through one tooth pitch, and a movement greater than 
one tooth pitch is required for full cutting. For example, if 
there is one commutator bar per armature slot and the brush 
covers a width equal to two commutator bars, then the total 
cutting of the slot flux will take place in two tooth pitches. 
Again, if there are three commutator bars per armature slot and 
the brush covers the width of one commutator bar, then the total 
cutting of the total slot flux would occur in one tooth pitch, while 
if the brush covered two bars, the total cutting would occur in 
14 tooth pitches; and if it covered three bars 13 tooth pitches 
are required. In other words, the total cutting will occur in a 
period corresponding to the number of commutator bars per 
slot plus one less than the number of commutator bars covered 


by the brush. 
On this basis the correction factor for the slot e.m.f. should be 


expressed by the term aR where C;=number of com- 
mutator bars per slot, and B ;=number of commutator bars 
spanned by the brush. However, with several coils per slot, 
and with the brush spanning several bars, the rate of cutting of 
the tooth flux for the entire period is not quite the same as the 
rate for one tooth pitch. Taking this into account the correc- 


C. 


tion factor should not be equal to ms but is slightly 


greater. Up to four commutator bars per slot, and three bars 


2374 : LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


spanned by the brush the correction factor can be expressed by 
hi 1 
the term ee Ee Ei: = a 

Taking the lengthened period of reversal into account, it 
would appear that a wide brush covering a large number of 
commutator bars should be beneficial. in reducing the e.m.f. 
generated by the slot flux. This is true where the local currents 
are very small, or are absent, as is the case in a properly designed 
interpole machine. In a non-interpole machine where the local 
currents in the short circuited coils may be relatively high, this 
condition does not hold, as will be explained later. 

The above formula for e.m.f. due to the slot flux should there- 
fore be modified by multiplying by a factor which takes into 
account the period of reversal as affected by brush width. 

Chord Winding. The armature winding may be chorded one 
or more slots and, in some instances, where there are several 
coils side by side there has been chord- 
ing of part of the conductors in the 
slot. In Fig. 11 is illustrated the 
conditions with one-slot chording. 
The total slot flux now occupies two 
teeth instead of one. Therefore the 
e.m.f. set up by cutting across this 
slot flux will be approximately one- 
half that which is obtained with a 
full pitch winding, on the basis of the brush covering the 
width of one bar only, for the e.m.f. generated by cutting this 
flux will be reduced in proportion as the period of cutting is 
increased. There is one slight difference from the flux distribu- 
tion with a pitch winding, namely, that at the top of the teeth. 
With a chorded winding this flux will be slightly greater than 
with a pitch winding, but the total effect of this difference should 
be relatively so small that ordinarily the value need not be 
changed. Therefore equivalent fluxes used with chord windings 
can be taken the same as for pitch windings. In consequence, 
the e.m.f. dwe to the slot flux, with one-tooth chording, may be 
taken as one-half that for a pitch winding, with the brush cover- 
ing one commutator bar in both cases. 

For two-slot chording the slot flux may be considered as oc- 
cupying the space of two teeth only, while there will be a mag- 
netically idle tooth at the center. The e.m.f. per coil actually 


generated by cutting the slot flux will be, for part of the period, | 


™ 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2375 


the same as for one-slot chording, but there will be an inter- 
mediate period where the slot e.m-f. is practically zero, which 
does not occur with a one-slot chording or with a pitch winding. 
The average results, however, should be practically the same as 
if the total slot flux were actually distributed over three teeth 
instead of two. 

Effect of Brush Width with Chord Winding. In the chord 
winding, when the brush covers two or more commutator bars, 
the period of cutting the slot flux will be lengthened just as with 
a pitch winding on the assumption of no local currents. For 
example, if there are three commutator bars per armature slot 
and the winding is chorded one slot, then with the brush covering 
one commutator bar, complet2 cutting of the slot flux will occur 
in the space of six commutator bars. If the brush covers three 
commutator bars instead of one, then complete cutting will occur 
in the space of eight commutator bars, while in a corresponding 
full pitch winding it would occur in the space of five bars. Th2re- 
fore, the wide brush represents an improvement with the chorded 
winding, but not to the same extent, relatively, as with the pitch 
winding. This is on the assumption of absence of local currents 
in the short circuited coils. 

Bands on Armature Core. By the preceding method of analysis 
the effect of bands of magnetic material on the armature core can 
be readily taken into account. This effect represents simply an 
addition to the total flux which can pass up the tooth and across 
the top of the slots. From the ampere turns per slot, the clear- 
ance between the bands and the iron core, the total section ot the 
band, etc., the flux due to the band can be calculated. T his flux 
can cither be combined directly with the slot flux already de- 
scribed and the resultant e.m.f. can then be calculated; or, the 
e.m.f. can be calculated independently for the baiid flux alone. 
Magnetic bands on the armature introduce a complication into 
the general e.m.f. formula due to the fact that in many cases the 
flux into the bands is such as to highly saturate the band material 
at relatively low armature currents. This flux therefore is 
usually not proportional to the armature ampere turns. If the 
ein.f. due to the band flux is to be calculated separately, the 
following formula can be used: 

@, represents the total magnetic flux in the band from the 
armature core considering both directions from the tooth, then 


oa 2 Po N p T. Rs 
a 108 


— ~~ 


> 
; 


E:- 


2376 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


This formula holds true for the band flux which passes through 
the one tooth in the pitch winding. Proper allowance must be 
made for the effect of chord windings and brush width, which 
can be done by the methods already described. 


SLot FLux witH LocAL CURRENTS 


Pitch Winding. In the preceding analysis local currents have 
not been included, as the method would be greatly complicated 
by taking such currents into account. In the general method 
given below the effect of local currents in the short circuited coils 
can be most easily shown. 

As already explained, an armature coil, as it approaches the 
short-circuit condition, has an e.m.f. generated in it by the inter- 
polar and the end fluxes. After the coil is short circuited this 
e.m.f. is still generated by the coil and naturally a local or short 
circuit current tends to flow through the coil, brush contact 


and brush. In addition, the work, or supply, current is being 
furnished to the armature winding through the brushes. These 
two currents are superimposed in the short circuited winding 
in such a way as to have a very pronounced influence in the 
distribution of the slot fluxes. This effect can be best seen by 
first determining the distribution of the work current in the 
various parts of the short circuited winding on the assumption 
of no local current and second, determining the distribution 
of the local currents on the assumption of no work current, but 
with the same armature magnetomotive force as in the first assump- 
tion. The two distributions can then be combined and the re- 
sultant currents.in the various parts of the short circuited coils 
can be obtained. 

Let Fig. 12 represent the first assumption in which no local 
currents are present. In order to illustrate conditions to better 
advantage, four commutator bars are assumed to be covered by 
the brush. Uniform distribution of current over the brush con- 
tact can be assumed in this case, as there are no local currents. 


ue 


ea —_—<- 
\. 


again at the end of the short circuit. 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2377 


Tracing out the current in each short circuited coil in Fig. 12, 


it will be seen that the current decreases at a uniform rate and 


then rises in the opposite direction at the same rate until the 
short circuit is removed. The period of commutation is the 
longest possible with this number of commutator bars short 
circuited, and the brush conditions are ideal, as the current 
density at the brush contact is uniform at all parts. The above 
are the conditions which the designer endeavors to obtain in the 
construction of good interpole machines, as will be shown later. 

In Fig. 13 the same arrangement of winding and brushes is 
chosen as in Fig. 12 except that only the local currents are shown 
and the values of these are assumed as proportional to the 
e.m.fs. in the short circuited coils and the resistance in circuit. In 
this diagram the current isa minimum 
in the coils at the moment that short 
circuit occurs, and rises to a maximum 
value and then diminishes to zero value 


Fie. 15 


In Fig. 14 the currents of Fig. 12 and 13 are superimposed. 
The resultant currents in the various parts of the short circuited 
winding are seen to rise after short circuit until a maximum value 
is reached and then decrease rapidly and reverse to normal 
value in the opposite direction. Therefore, the period from 
normal value of the current to normal in the opposite direction 
is very much shorter than when no local currents are present. 
It may therefore be considered that the period of reversal is 
much reduced by the presence of the local currents, so that the 
e.m.f. in the short circuited armature conductors generated by 
the slot flux is proportionately increased, compared with the 
value it would have in case the local currents were absent. 
These conditions can be shown possibly in a somewhat better 
manner by curves a, b and ¢ in Fig. 15. The curve a shows the 
distribution of current in the short circuited coils without any 
local currents. Curve b shows the distribution of local currents. 


2378 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


while curve c shows the resultant of the two. The distance be- 
tween d and f on curve ¢ gives the period of reversal from normal 
current in one direction to normal current in the opposite direc- 
tion. This period is much shorter than the full period repre- 
sented by gf which would be obtained without local currents. 
The period df, however, may not differ much from the period 
of commutation with the brush covering the width of only one 
bar, when the local current is high compared with the work cur- 
rent. In such case the gain in the period of commutation which 
should be obtained by means of the wider brush may be practi- 
cally offset by the effect of the local currents which also increase 
with the wider brush, so that over a considerable range the 
resultant of the two effects may be practically constant. This 
is one indication why, in non-interpole machines, the brush 
width may be varied over quite a range with relatively small 
noticeable difference in the commutation. This may be il- 


Fic. 16 Fic. 17 


lustrated by Fig. 16, in which is shown the current conditions 
with two to five bars spanned. In this figure ab, bc, cd, etc., 
each represent the width of one commutator bar. Therefore, 
curve A, extending over the width ac, represents two bars 
spanned. The period of reversal of the current from normal 
value in one direction to normal in the opposite direction is 
represented by gc for curve A, hd for curve B, ie for C and 
k f for D. A comparison of these values is interesting. Calling 
a b the period of reversal with the brush covering one bar only, 
then gc with two bars covered, is greater than'ab. hd is also 
greater than a b, but less than gc, while ze is slightly less than 
ab, and kf is considerably less. However, the variation be- 
tween gc and kf is much less than between ac and uw f which 
would be the corresponding periods with no local currents. 
It should be borne in mind that the above curves are only 


relative, depending upon the comparative values of the local. 
nd work jcurrents and assuming a constant brush resistance 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2379 


which is not correct, but they serve to illustrate the general 
principle. This method of presentation is simply a skeleton of 
the problem of commutation when local currents are present 
in the short circuited coils and it would be beyond the scope of 
this paper to attempt a full solution. 

Effects of Field Distortion. One of the ‘ bugaboos ROL Lae 
designer of commutating machines has been the question of field 
distortion. It has usually been considered that when the ma- 
chine is loaded the magnetic field is more or less distorted or 
shifted from its normal no-load position and that commutation 
is affected by this distorted field. 

To state the case plainly, the field distortion has practically 
nothing to do with the problem. The distorted field magnetism 
is simply a resultant of the no-load main field flux combined 
with that due to the armature winding. Therefore, the two 
components of the distorted full-load field are the no-load main 
field, which is fixed in space and is usually practically constant, 
and the armature field, which is also fixed in space but varies 
with the load. If the brushes are set in a certain position with 
respect to the no-load field, then, as this component of the re- 
sultant full load field is practically fixed in space and in value, 
‘t has no variable influence on the commutating conditions. 
The true variable element which does affect the commutation 
is the armature field, or flux, and it is in this very flux which is the 
basis of the preceding theory of commutation. Therefore, the 


distorted resultant field of a loaded machine does not present 


any new condition in the problem of commutation. One ex- 
ception, however, can be made to the above, namely, where 
there is any considerable saturation in the armature teeth or 
in the main field pole corners. The effect of the armature mag- 
netomotive force is to strengthen one corner or edge of the field 
pole and to weaken the other edge, but when saturation is pro- 
nounced the strengthening action is much less than the weaken- 
ing action. The resultant of these actions is a decrease in the 
total value of the main field flux. If, now, this main field flux 
be brought back to its normal total value, or higher, a very con- 
siderable addition to the main field magnetomotive force will be 
necessary, which will be effective in increasing the field flux at 
the weaker pole corner to a much greater extent than at the 
highly saturated pole corner. In consequence, with load, the 
main field distribution, or field form, may be considered as being 
changed from its no-load form A, to the form B, as indicated 
in Fig. 17. It is, in reality, strengthened at a point 6, for 


2380 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


example. . In such case the main field will have a variable in- 
fluence on the commutation, if the brush is set with a lead, as 
at b, and, to a slight extent, the effect of an interpole is thus 
obtained. 

Effect of Brush Lead. Before taking up the problem of inter- 
poles on direct current machines it might be well to consider the 
effect of brush lead, as this gives a result interm2diate between 
true interpole and non-interpole commutating conditions. 

The preceding formulas apply to non-commutating pole 
machines without brush lead. However, except in case of re- 
versing machines, such as street railway motors, or hoist motors, 
etc., it is usual practice to give a forward lead to the brushes 
of direct current generators or a slight backward lead to direct 
current motors. The effect of giving a lead at the brushes of a 
non-interpole direct current machine may be considered as 
being equivalent to the effect of an interpole with the exception 


Fic. 18 Fic. 19 


that correct flux conditions and proper commutation, with any 
given brush setting, are obtained only for one given load. 

As described before, with a non-interpole machine the arma- 
ture winding sets up a flux in the interpolar space. With no- 
lead at the brushes this flux is usually a minimum midway be- 
tween the poles and rises toward the polar edges. The flux 
from the adjacent main poles has a zero value midway between 
the poles and rises toward the polar edges, but has opposite 
polarities at the two sides of the midpoint. This is illustrated in 
Fig. 18. The resultant of the armature and field fluxes is indi- 
cated by the dotted line A. This resultant falls to zero at one 
side of the midpoint and then rises in the direction opposite to 
that of the flux due to the armature ampere turns. At the other 
side of the midpoint the two fluxes add, giving an increased re- 
sultant flux in the same direction as the interpolar flux due to the 
armature. From this figure it is evident that if the point of 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2381 


commutation is shifted from a to the point of zero interpolar 
flux b, then commutation will occur without any interpolar flux 
to be taken into account, that is, the e.m.f. generated by the 
short circuited armature conductors may be due to the slot and 
end winding fluxes only. If the brushes are shifted still further 
in the same direction to c, then, not only will the interpolar arma- 
ture flux be annulled but a flux in the opposite direction would be 
cut by the short circuited armature conductor, which will gen- 
erate an e.m.f. in opposition to that due to the armature fluxes 
in the slots and end windings. Consequently, the commutation 
can be materially assisted by such lead at the brushes. 

The difficulty in the use of this method of commutation lies 
‘n the fact that the commutating or reversing flux at ¢ is the 
resultant of the main field flux and the armature interpolar flux 
at this point, and the latter flux varies with the load, while the 
former remains practically constant. Therefore the zero point 
of the resultant field shifts backwards or forwards with change in 
load and the density of the commutating field beyond the zero 
point will therefore change with the armature current. In con- 
sequence, if the brushes are shifted into a suitable resultant field 
c at a given current, then with a different load the intensity of 
this field at c will be changed, and unfortunately the change will 
be in the opposite direction from that desired. In other words, 
the density of this resultant field will decrease with increase in 
load, whereas just the opposite effect is desired for good commu- 
tation over a wide range in load. 

In practice, however, an average condition is found which, in 
many cases, will give reasonably good commutation over a rela- 
tively wide range in load. The brushes may be shifted at no- 
load into an active field in such a way as to generate an e.m.f. 
in the armature coils of a comparatively high value. This 
e.m.f. will circulate considerable local current through the brush 
contacts and the amount of lead which can be given is dependent, 
to a certain extent, upon the amount of local current which can 
thus be handled without undue sparking. 

As the load is increased the strength of the resultant field, 
corresponding to this brush position, will be decreased, and with 
some value of the current this field will be reversed in direction. 
At this point the e.m.f. due to this field is added to the e.m.f. 
due to the slot and end winding fluxes. Obviously the limiting 
condition of commutation will be reached at a much higher cur- 
rent than would be the case if no load at all had been given. This 
condition is represented in Fig. 19, in which curves 1, 1, 2, 2, ase 


2382 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


etc., represent the armature and resultant flux distributions with 
various loads. In this figure the brushes are given a lead so that 
commutation occurs at a point corresponding to 0. 

it is obvious that at heavy load a still greater lead at the 
brushes might give improved commutating conditions. How- 
ever, if the load were suddenly removed without moving the 
brushes toward a, then the short circuited coils would be cutting 
the main field at such density that serious sparking or flashing 
might occur. 

One serious objection to this method of commutation is that 
the distribution of the resultant field is practically such that 
equally good commutation cannot be obtained for all the coils 
in one slot when there are several coils or commutator bars per 
slot. All the coils of one slot must pass under a given position 
or value of the interpolar magnetic field at the same instant, 
while the commutator bars to which these coils are connected 
must pass under the brush consecutively. If the field intensity 
is just right for good commutation as the first coil per slot 
passes under the brush, then it may be entirely too great by the 
time the last coil is commutated. For good commutation with 
a number of coils in one slot, the resultant interpolar flux should 
have practically constant value over the whole range repre- 
sented by the period of commutation of all the coils in one slot. 
This condition, however, is extremely difficult, or is frequently 
impracticable, to obtain with the ordinary non-interpole ma- 
chine. 

The above treatment of the problem of the effect of the brush 
lead has been based upon the armature interpolar magnetic 
field being located in the same position with lead as when there 
is no lead at the brushes. It has been assumed heretofore that 
the non-interpolar flux due to the armature winding has a mini- 
mum value midway between the main poles and rises uniformly 
toward two adjacent pole corners. This, however, is only true 
when the point of commutation, or brush setting, is midway be- 
tween the poles. When the brushes are shifted toward either 
pole the point of maximum armature magnetic potential is 
shifted in the same way. This means that the distribution of 
the armature interpolar flux will be modified directly by the 
position of the brushes. Instead of rising uniformly toward th2 
two pole corners, with a minimum value midway between, it 
will have a minimum at one side of the midpoint, this being at 
the opposite side from the point of brush contact, and will have 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION4 2383 


an increased value on the side toward which the brushes are 
shifted. This is illustrated in Fig. 20 in which A represents the 
armature interpolar flux distribution with the brush at a, while 
B represents it with the brush at 6. 

This increased armature interpolar flux due to the brush 
shifting means that the resultant interpolar flux due to both the 
armature and main field fluxes will cross the zero line at a point 
further removed from the midpoint than in the case of no lead 
at the brushes. Consequently, in order to obtain a given useful 
commutating field the brushes must be given a greater amount of 
lead and this in turn shifts the zero point still further. Thus, 
the act itself of shifting the brushes makes the commutating con- 
ditions more difficult. 

The calculation of the commutating conditions with any given 
lead therefore resolves itself into a determination of the re- 


sultant fluxes in which the coil is short circuited or commutated 
and the e.m.fs. generated by such fluxes. For the slot and end 
winding fluxes the calculation will be the same as for no-lead at 
the brushes. The resultant flux in the interpolar space is the 
only condition which will introduce any variation from the pre- 
ceding formule and methods of calculation. This part of the 
problem resolves itself simply into the determination of the 
resultant interpolar flux at the point of commutation for any 
given load. The corresponding e.m.f. can then be calculated. 
This, combined with the e.m.fs. due to the slot and end windings, 
gives the total short-circuit e.m.f. The method is, in principle, 
exactly the same as given before, except that the determination 
of the interpolar flux will be modified. 

Summation of Formule. In order to obtain the total voltage in 
the short circuited coil a summation should be made of the four 
separate voltages which have been derived for the interpolar, 


2384 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


end, slot and band fluxes. In reality it is the resultant fluxes 
which should be combined, but as the voltages to be derived 
from these fluxes represent somewhat different terms, a better 
procedure appears to be the summation of the voltages. Also, 
in practice it is the em.fs. generated by the different fluxes, 
rather than the fluxes themselves, which are desired. 
The e.m.f. derived from the interpolar flux is 
I, W: T- Rs 2p7DL 


Bee (0.25 p+0.5) (t D—P p) 


where ¢, is a correcting factor for chord winding, etc. 
The formula for the end flux voltage is, 


I, Wi Tc Rs., 4.3 (2 h-+m) 


E, = C2 X 108 Kee 5 ee Xlo g2N 


where C2 represents the correcting factor for chord windings, etc. 
The formula for the slot flux voltage is, 


3.191.W:T-RsL  (2.666d+4a+t+2.16s Vn) 
108 Slay eh 


Fe=C3X% 


where c3 is the correcting factor for the brush width, chord 
winding, etc., and, 
For the bands, 


where cy, is the correcting factor for chord winding, brush width, 
etc. 


Therefore, 
LOW 40 Tier dRe 2pa7DL 
E, total =———__——— 
108 [« ( (0.25 p+0.5) (@r D— Pp))t 
4.3 (2h+m) 
C3 sin 0 ear 


. (5.19 1 (2-866d+40-+1+2.16 5 vn) | J 


AY 


2ONPT.Rs 


Hoax 108 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2385 


It is evident from this last equation that when there are no 
bands over the core the total e.m.f. in the short circuited coil 
is directly proportional to the current per armature coil or con- 
ductor. If the bands saturate, as would usually be the case 
with any considerable load, then the e.m.f. is no longer directly 
proportional to the current. Attention is called to this point 
as it has some bearing in the design of interpole machines. 

Condensed Approximate Formula. The above formula can 
be simplified very considerably by certain approximations which 
introduce but little error within the range of ordinary design. 


p 

(0.25 p+0.5) (r D—P p) 
to be capable of any general simplification. In fact, as shown 
from its derivation, it is not a general term, but applies only to 
certain constructions and may appear in a quite different form 
for other constructions. Therefore this expression must be 
used with judgment in any case. Moreover, this term appears 
only in non-interpole machines or in interpole machines only 
when the interpoles are narrower than the armature core or the 
number of interpoles is less than that of the main poles. There- 
fore this term may be neglected in many cases where interpoles 
are used. 


First, the expression, does not seem 


Second, the expression 4.3 oa log 2 N can be changed 
as follows: 
4.3 pe ear) alee , with reasonable accuracy within the 
(sin 0) p 


ordinary limit of design, 
And log 2 N=0.9+0.035 N, with an error of about 4 per cent 
within the range of 6 to 24 slots. 


Pe a ey 4a D  (0.94-0.035° N), 
(sin 0) p 


approximately. 
This is simpler to handle, in practice, than the original term. 
2.666 d+4a+t+2.16 s Vn 


Third, the expression, - eis eee — can be sim- 


plified very materially. 
Let the total depth of slot be represented by ds, which is equal 
to 2d+a+1.5#, approximately. 


4d, ,8a-—3t 
Then, the term, 2.666 d+4 a+? can be changed to~3— + se : 


2386 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 
Assuming a=0.25 and ¢=0.15, then 


ie oS! = 0.52 approximately. 


2.66d+4a+t_ 4ds 0.52 
Therefore, See dal 3 ———— 
s s 
This is a very close approximation within the ordinary work- 
ing range of slot dimensions. Therefore, the above expression 


es j 098 Oe +2. 16 Vn, which is much simpler to use in 


becomes, 


‘practice. 

Fourth, in the simplified equation ma appears in the first 
and second terms, and 3.19 appears in the third term. These 
‘are so nearly equal that 7 may be used as a common factor for 
the three terms. 

The combined formule for the total voltage per armature 
coil thus becomes, in approximate form, 


pal WTR E 2pDL 
‘ai 108  (0.25p+0.5) (4 D—Pp) 


4 D 
+. 


i 


(1.33 d;-+0.52+2.16 5 Vn) 2 Np T- Rs 
ts : Ss Gh 108 


This appears to be about as simple a form as the equation can 
be put into when all the factors are to be included. It will be 
shortened for machines without magnetic bands on the core, 
and in many interpole machines the term derived from the inter- 
polar flux may be omitted. For a given line of machines which 
are all of similar design, etc., it is probable that the terms can 
be further combined and simplified. 


INTERPOLAR MACHiNES 


In the interpole machine a small pole is placed between two 
adjacent main poles for the purpose of setting up a local magnetic 
flux under which the armature coil is commutated. This local 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2387 


flux, in order to assist commutation, must be opposite in direction 
to the interpolar flux set up by the armature winding itself. To 
set up this flux in the opposite direction the magnetomotive 
force of the interpole winding obviously must be greater than 
that of the armature winding in the commutating zone. 

An armature coil, cutting across this interpole flux, generates 
an e.m.f. proportional to the flux, the speed and the number of 
conductors in series. This e.m.f. is in opposition to the e.m.f. 
in the short circuited coils, generated by the slot and end winding 
fluxes. For ideal commutation these e.m.fs. are not only in 
opposition, but they should also be of practically equal value. 
For perfect commutation the current in a short circuited coil 
should die down to zero value at about a uniform rate and 
should then rise to normal value in the opposite direction by the 
time the coil passes out from under the brush, as was illustrated 
in Fig. 12. This is the condition when no local currents are de- 
veloped in the short circuited coils and this can only be obtained 
when the interpole e.m.f. at all times, balances the armature 
e.m.fs. in the short circuited coils. 

Looking at the problem broadly, the resultant magnetic 
fluxes and e.m.fs. may be assumed as made up of two com- 
ponents which can be considered singly. One of these com- 
ponents is that which would be obtained with the armature 
magnetomotive force alone acting through the various flux paths, 
including the interpole. The other would be that which would be 
obtained with the full interpole magnetomotive force alone, the 
armature magnetomotive force being absent. Saturation is not 
considered in either case. 

Considering the first component, due to the armature mag- 
netomotive force alone, there would be the slot and the end 
fluxes with their short circuit e.m.fs., as already described, 
and in addition, there would be a relatively high flux, and short- 
circuit e.m.f. due to the good magnetic path furnished by the 
interpole core. In case the interpole does not cover the full 
width of the armature, or the number of interpoles is less than 
the main poles, there will also be some interpolar flux and e.m.f., 
as already described. 

Considering the second component, the entire interpole mag- 
netomotive force would set up a relatively high flux through the 
interpole magnetic circuit and a correspondingly high e.m.f. 
would be generated in a short circuited armature coil cutting 


this flux. 


2388 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


When these two components are superimposed, it is seen that 
the interpole flux due to the armature magnetomotive force is 
in direct opposition to that due to the interpole magneto- 
motive force and therefore only the e.m.f. due to their dif- 
ference need be considered. As the interpole winding has the 
higher magnetomotive force, the resultant interpole e.m.f. is 
in opposite direction to the armature e.m.fs., and should be 
sufficient to neutralize them. This way of considering the prob- 
lem avoids a number of confusing elements which would com- 
plicate the explanation, if given in detail. 

In practice it is difficult to obtain exact equality between the 
interpole and armature em.fs. That due to the armature 
fluxes is generated in all parts of the coil including the end 
winding, while the e.m.f. due to the interpole flux is generated 
only in that part of the coil which lies in the armature slots. 
However, it makes no difference in what part of the coil the e.m.f. 
due to the interpole is generated provided it is of such value that 
it properly opposes and neutralizes the various e.m.fs., due to 
the armature fluxes. Therefore, in practice the interpoles need 
not have the same width as the armature core and, where space 
and magnetic conditions will permit, the number of interpoles 
can be made half that of the main poles. 

According to the method outlined, the whole problem of the 
design of the interpole depends, first, upon the determination 
of the e.m.fs. due to the armature fluxes, and, second, upon the 
determination of such interpole flux as will generate an e.m.f. 
in the short circuited armature coils which will equal, or slightly 
exceed, the armature e.m.fs. 

Interpole Calculations. Assuming that all the armature 
fluxes, except the interpolar, are unaffected by the presence of 
interpoles, the armature e.m.f. to be balanced by the interpole 
would be represented by the formula 


Bums oe Meee Sy) al 2D p 


7 (0.25 p+0.5) (rt D—Pp) 


rs bee ) (0.9-+0.035 N) + 


1.33 d.+0.52+2.16 s Vn 4g ZEN PTR 
: , ; 4 


C3 16; 
$ 108 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2389 


However, the flux above the slot, from the tooth top, is very 
considerably modified by the interpolar flux. In fact most of 
this should be omitted. It may be assumed that the flux across 
the slot, above the upper coil, simply ‘‘ bulges”’ up slightly 
into the air gap, and the remainder of the usual tooth top flux 
is absent, except when the interpole does not cover the full 
armature width. Therefore, in the above formula, the term 


LX2.16Vn should be changed to (L—Ly) X2.16Vn and the 


‘ce 1.33 a Palacediby 1.33 ss 10.7 


Then, the corrected resultant of all the armature e.m.fs. 
becomes 


_LWRs Tem is ape 
ome 108 [«: (L—Ly) (0.25p+0.5) (a D—Pp) 
+c2x22 (0.9+0.035 N) 
Be P18) cry xt18s |e 


In this formula 

GL represents the width of the armature core. 

Ly represents the effective width of interpole at the gap 

on the basis of the full number of interpoles. 

L—Ly; is the difference between the width of the armature 
core and the interpole face. This term enters when the interpole 
is narrower than the armature core. When alternate interpoles 
are omitted and the remaining interpoles are of the same width 
as the armature core the conditions are practically the same as 
when the full number of interpoles are used but with their width 
equal to half the core width. Other combinations should be 
treated in the same way so that the above formula can be taken 
to represent the general conditions. 

In practice it is desired that the resultant interpole e.m.f., 
and therefore the interpole flux, vary in proportion to the arma- 
ture short-circuit e.m.f. which is to be neutralized. As shown 
by the last equation, this e.m.f. is proportional to the armature 


2390 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


current, except where there is saturation in the armature flux 
path, as in the case of magnetic bands over the core. Therefore 
the interpole magnetomotive force should vary in proportion 
to the armature current, neglecting core bands. In consequence, 
in practice the interpole winding is always connected in series 
with the armature winding. 

The interpole magnetomotive force can be considered as made 
up of two components, one of which neutralizes the armature 
magnetomotive force, and the other component represents the 
ampere turns which set up the actual interpole flux. The first 
component will be referred to as the neutralizing ampere turns 
or neutralizing turns, and the other as the magnetizing ampere 
turns or magnetizing turns. 

Let T represent the total interpole turns for one interpole, 

T; represent the total magnetizing interpole turns for one 
interpole. 
T. represent the total effective ‘‘ armature turns per 


a ,, _ total eff. ampere turns of armature a 
number polesXtotal current ’ = 


I represent the amperes per interpole coil. 
Thentiiz=T leis or sl— igi 


Let g =effective air gap per interpole. 
B;=flux density under the interpole, and 
E;=e.m.f. in an armature coil of turns JT, due to the 
interpole flux. 
Then, 


The e.m.f. due to one interpole is equal to 


Bia D dea fi IRE 
108 


Or, for two interpoles 


_ 319TT; 7 DLiX2T: Rs 


E; 
gX 108 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2391 


This e.m.f. should be equal to the e.m.f. generated in the same 
coils by the armature flux, or E;=£,. Therefore, 


Belo D2 Te Re wel, Wile Reo 
gX108 os 10847, 


SA en Oat SS ae 
[« 25708) D= Pp) 


4 


aX ms OMCs Pa wee oO. 


S 


4¢3 (L—L1)2.16 Vn +e ests aly 


In the second term of this equation I, Wi=IX Ta’ X2p, where 
T,’=total armature turns per pole, as distinguished from eftec- 


; Z joa a ee B g I. j 
tive turns per pole T,, and T,’= lesb where b= W, as will 


be shown later under the subject of ‘‘ Effective Armature Am- 
pere Turns.” Therefore, neglecting magnetic bands on the core, 
the above expression becomes, 


gue . Wars ed Wes Bee _(L-1i) 2D dynes 
$3.19 D Li 1—6 p) | °° (0.25 p+0.5) (w D—Pp) 


+axa (0.9-+0.035 N)+esL ae 
Shes Ld) 228 vi | 


: ees 80 ce 
T=TitTa=Ta [1+ 3.19D Li (1—5d p) 


2Dp = 
(«: (L—L1) © 95 p0.5) (w# D—P?) 


SFO. 
chy digt eS (0.9+0.025 N)+¢s L seis Be 


+e; (L—L;) 2.16 vn) | 


2392 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 18 


If the full number of interpoles is used, and each covers the 
full width of the armature, then L—L:i=0, and 


cs i FON ee 
Fate | nope ase (ax (0.9+0.035 N) 


cay (1. 33 oO ”)] 


Therefore the total interpole turns for one pole are equal to 
the effective armature turns per pole multiplied by a constant 
which is a function of the proportions of the machine. How- 
ever, this holds true only for the condition of no saturated path 
for the armature flux, such as magnetic bands. 

The above formula gives the interpole turns for two inter- 
poles acting on each armature coil. With but one interpole 
per, coil the number of conductors per armature coil generating 
the interpole e.m.f. is halved so that the flux density must be at 
least doubled, and the effect of the armature flux in the inter- 
polar space over the other half of the armature coil must also be 
taken into account. This can be done in the preceding formula 
by using the equivalent value of Li. 

With half the number of interpoles the effective gap length, g, - 
will not be the same as with the full number of interpoles with 
the same mechanical gap, for the flux from the interpole may be 
considered as returning across the gap of the two adjacent main 
poles and the value of g must be increased to represent the total 
resultant gap. 

Let ge represent the effective resultant gap, 

2m tepresent the effective gap under the main poles, 
A; represent the area of the interpole gap, and 
Am represent the area of one main pole gap. 

These areas can be derived from the field distribution or “ held 

form ’’ of the main and the interpoles. 


Then, the effective resultant gap g-=g+<- and this 


at km) 
should be used instead of g. 

With half the number of interpoles and on the basis of the 
interpole flux returning through the two adjacent main poles, 
it may be assumed that this flux weakens the total flux in one 
pole and strengthens that of the other pole a like amount. If 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2393 


there is no saturation in the main poles or armature teeth under 
them, then no additional ampere turns, other than for the 
increased gap, will be required on account of the main poles 
carrying the interpolar fluxes. However, where there is much 
saturation of the main poles or teeth, then additional interpole 
ampere turns will be required, as will be described later in con- 
nection with effects of saturation. 

Chord Windings with Interpoles. Chorded armature windings 
can be used with interpoles with satisfactory results provided 
the interpoles are suitably proportioned. There are apparently 
some advantages with such an arrangement, but there are also 
disadvantages of such a nature that it is questionable whether 
it is advisable to use chord windings with such machines, except 
possibly in special cases. When chorded windings are used with 
interpoles, the e.m.f. due to the armature flux is usually much 

smaller than with a pitch winding and thus fewer interpole 
magnetizing turns are required. Also, the effective armature 
turns which must be neutralized by the interpole are reduced 
somewhat, which also means a slight reduction in interpole 
turns. Against these advantages must be charged the disad- 
vantage of a wider interpole face. This in itself would not be 
" objectionable where there is space for such wider pole face, but 
if the space between the main poles must be increased it may lead 
to sacrifice in the proportions of the main poles or changes in 
the general dimensions, such that the result as a whole is less 
economical than with a pitch winding. 

Effective Armature Ampere Turns. The term 7, representing 
the effective armature ampere turns should be considered, as the 
value of this term is influenced by a number of conditions, such 
as the number of bars covered by the brush, the amount of 
chording in the armature winding, etc. With a full pitch wind- 
ing and neglecting the reduction in current in the short circuited 
coils, the magnetomotive force of the total armature winding 


; I, W, mice 
is represented by the expression, asia and per pole it is, 
a. However, when the brush spans several coils, so that 


a number of armature coils are short circuited at the same time, 
the average current in these short circuit coils should be con- 
siderably less than the normal value so that the effective ampere 
turns per pole is correspondingly reduced. Allowance must be 


2394 LAMME: COMMUTATION . [Oct. 13 


made for this reduction as it has considerable influence in de- 
termining the correct number of interpole turns. 

On the basis of no local currents, the average value of the 
current in the short circuited coils is just half that of the work 
currents per conductor. 

Let B represent the total number of commutator bars, 

B, represent the number of bars spanned by the brush, 
pi represent number of current paths, and 
bp number of poles. 


Then,. po total number of armature turns per pole, and 
1 
By, ‘De . 

2 by =number of turns by which the total armature turns per 
pole must be reduced to obtain the effective turns per pole, or, 
T peal . B, tie 
Peteee 2p1 

W, W, By, T, 
BT.=—~; ..Te=> = a 
2 2phi 2 pi 


Let B; T; be represented asa percentage of W;, or By T.=b W! 
W, 


Then, T.= rb. p (1-0 p) 
ici I, W, = Ce ps) Wi _ me Wa Sf Wi 
2p 2p pi 2ppi 2ppi 
re Te ; 
Therefore, T,’= (i= 9) 


Chorded windings also have an influence on the effective arma- 
ture ampere turns per pole. When the winding is chorded one 
slot, for example, then, in one slot per pole, the upper and lower 
coils will be carrying current in opposite directions and their 
magnetizing effects will be neutralized. In consequence, the 
total effective armature ampere turns are correspondingly re. 


duced and this must be allowed for in determining the interpole 
turns. 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2395 


Conditions Affecting Interpole Proportions. The foregoing 
formula have been based upon the use of interpoles of such pro- 
portions that the interpole flux varies directly as the magnetizing 
current and its distribution over the commutating zone is such 
as will give the proper opposing e.m.f. at all times. 

However, the proportionality of flux to current can only be 
true as long as there is no saturation in the interpole magnetic 
circuit. Such saturation is liable to be found in practice and not 
infrequently it is quite a problem of design to avoid it within 
the working range of the machine. 

Also, another difficult problem lies in so designing the interpole 
face that the flux distribution in the commutating zone is such 
that its e.m.f. will properly balance the armature e.m.fs. in the 
short circuited coils, especially as the latter are generated by 
cutting fluxes which may be distributed in a quite different man- 
ner from the interpole flux. 


1 
' i . 1 
| jf TBs 1 : 
1 4 PI 1 1 
Perrone Pei Mews Seer nae eee oS 
" 


Fic. 21 


Shape and Proportion of I nterpole Face. As already shown, 
the effective interpole flux under the pole face is the resultant 
of the total interpole magnetomotive force and the opposing 
armature magnetomotive force. As the armature winding is’ 
distributed over a surface and the interpole winding is of the 
polar or concentrated type, the resultant magnetomotive force 
would normally be such as would not tend to give a uniform flux 
distribution under the interpole unless the interpole face is 
properly shaped or proportioned for such distribution. The 
conditions may be illustrated in Fig. 21. In this figure the lines 
AA represent the armature magnetomotive force, with a full 
pitch winding, and the brush covering one commutator bar. 
The heavier part of the lines a bc at the peak of the magneto- 
motive force diagram, represents the armature magnetomotive 
force which would be obtained under the interpole face, and also 
the flux distribution which would be obtained, with no interpole 


2396 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


magnetomotive force, and with uniform gap under the pole 
faces. In opposition is shown the interpole magnetomotive 
force and flux distributions def for corresponding conditions. 
The resultant magnetomotive force is represented- by ghz, and 
with a uniform gap under the pole, the resultant interpole flux 
would have a similar distribution. Instead of this, either a 
flat or, in some cases, the reverse distribution is required, that 
is, with a slight ‘‘ hump ’’ in the middle instead of a depression. 
By properly shaping the pole face so as to give an increased air 
gap toward the edges, the flux distribution can be made practi- 
cally anything desired. In some cases a relatively narrow 
pole tip with a very large air gap will give a close approximation 
to the desired flux distribution. 

However, in practice the above distribution of the armature 
magnetomotive force is rarely found. The use of brushes 
which cover more than one commutator bar serves to cut off 
or flatten out the pointed top of the armature magnetomotive 
force diagram, as shown by the dotted line B, in Fig. 21, and thus 
lessen the depression at the center of the resultant magneto- 
motive force distribution. 

As intimated before, this problem of proportioning the inter- 
pole face turns upon the determination of the armature e.m.fs. 
in the short circuited coils which have to be balanced by the - 
interpole. If the different armature e.m.fs. are determined for 
the whole period of commutation and then superimposed, the 
resultant e.m.f. indicates the flux distribution required under the 
interpole. Usually the e.m.fs. due to the end winding, and to 
the interpolar flux, if any, will be practically constant during the 
whole period of commutation. If no local currents are present 
the e.m.f. due to the slot flux will also be practically constant, 
although it may be slightly reduced near the beginning and end 
of the commutation period. The sum of these e.m.fs. should 
therefore be practically constant over the whole commutation 
period and therefore, in a well designed machine, the interpole 
flux density should be practically constant over the whole 
commutation zone. As explained before, special shaping of the 
poles and pole face will be necessary, in most cases, to obtain 
exactly this proper flux distribution. Large interpole air gaps 
are obviously advantageous in obtaining such distribution. In 
fact, a very small interpole gap makes the determination of the 
proper interpole face dimensions very difficult in many cases. 
On account of the interpole usually covering less than two 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION ' 2397 


armature teeth, the ordinarily accepted methods of determining 
the effective length of air gap under a pole will not apply, in 
many cases, which may lead to a slight error in the results. 
Practically the effective gap under the narrow interpole will 
usually be longer than determined by the ordinary methods. 
This partly explains the fact that, in some cases, an increase 
in mechanical clearance between the interpole face and the 
armature core does not require anything like a corresponding 
increase in the interpole magnetizing ampere turns. The effec- 
tive interpole air gap increases, but at a much less rate than the 
mechanical gap. 

The brush setting in relation to the interpole is of great im- 
portance. The point of maximum armature magnetomotive 
force is definitely fixed by the brush setting. With the interpole 
fixed in position, any shifting of the brushes backward or forward 
will obviously change the shape of the resultant magnetomotive 
force distribution under the interpole face and in consequence 
the flux distribution will be changed. With but one armature 
coil per slot and the brush covering but one commutator bar, 
good commutating conditions might be found over a considerable 
range of brush adjustment, by suitably varying the interpole 
ampere turns. However, with two or more coils per slot and 
with the brush short circuiting several bars, any marked change 
in the resultant interpole magnetomotive force and flux distribu- 
tion will mean improper commutation for some of the coils. 
Proper brush setting is therefore of first importance. 

It has been assumed in the foregoing treatment, that an exact 
balance between the interpole and armature e.m.fs. will give the 
best conditions. From certain standpoints, this is true, but in 
practice usually a slight excess in the interpole strength, or 
“ over-compensation ”’ of the interpole, as it is frequently called, 
is advantageous. Reference to Fig. 14 shows that in a machine 
without interpoles, and therefore without compensation, the 
current flowing between the brush contact and the commutator 
is crowded toward one brush edge, this being the edge at which 
the commutation of a coil is completed, that is, at the so-called 
forward brush edge. With over-compensation the opposite 
effect occurs—that is, the brush current density is below the 
average at the forward edge. This is, to a certain extent, a de- 
sirable condition. Also, if there is any saturation of the inter- 
pole circuit at overloads, the over excitation of the interpole 
winding can take care of the saturation ampere turns, so that 


2398 © LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


normal compensation can be obtained at considerably higher load 
than in a machine with no over compensation. Furthermore, 
over compensation is desirable on account of the effect of the 
resistance of the coils undergoing commutation, which heretofore 
has been neglected as being of minor importance. Such re- 
sistance tends to lower the current density at the middle of the 
brush contact, and increase it toward the brush edges. Over 
compensation will oppose this at the forward edge, but increase it 
at the back edge, which is less objectionable. Also, as shown in 
Fig. 21, there is liable to be a depression at the center of the 
interpole flux distribution, if the pole face is not properly 
shaped. This depression tends to cause higher current densities 
at the brush edges. Over compensation again tends to reduce 
this density at the forward brush edge. Thus there are several 
good reasons for slight over compensation, and practical opera- 
tion bears this out, especially on high voltage machines, where 
the short circuit e.m.fs. average higher than in other machines. 

Balanced Circuits. It has been assumed that the armature 
ampere turns per pole have been the same for all poles. This 
will be true for the usual two-circuit or series type of winding, 
or its allied combinations, but is not necessarily true of the 
parallel type of armature winding. In such a winding a number 
of circuits are connected in parallel at the brushes, and, unless 
ample provision be made for equalizing the different circuits, 
they may not carry equal currents at all times. As the re- 
sultant interpole flux and e.m.f. is directly dependent upon the 
opposing armature ampere turns, it is obvious that any ine- 
qualities in the armature currents would lead at once to incorrect 
interpole conditions. A poorly equalized parallel-wound arma- 
ture might furnish conditions such that the interpoles cannot be 
adjusted for satisfactory operation. Also paralleling of the 
interpole windings, unless care be taken to insure equal current 
division among the circuits, is liable to lead to trouble. 

Saturation of the Interpole Circuit. Heretofore the interpole 
turns 7’, as determined, have been only those required for forcing 
the resultant interpole flux across the effective interpole air gap, 
and nothing has been allowed for any turns required for magnet- 
izing the parts of the interpole circuit other than the gap. 
Where such additional turns are required they must be added to 
the turns T, already determined. 

Saturation in the interpole magnetic path is the principle 
cause for such additional turns, but saturation in the various 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2399 


flux paths may occur in such a way as to be either harmful or 
beneficial, depending upon where it is located. Beneficial 
saturation may be assumed to be such as will reduce the arma- 
ture short circuit e.m.fs., while harmful saturation tends to re- 
duce the interpole e.m.f. 

Whils the useful interpole flux passing into the armature may 
be relatively low—say one-fifth that required for saturation of 
the interpole material—the leakage flux between the interpole 
and the two adjacent main poles is often very much greater 
than the useful flux so that the interpole at the part where it 
carries the highest total flux may be worked up to possibly half 
saturation, or higher, with normal load on the machine. The 
interpole leakage flux is due to the total ampere turns on the inter- 
pole, while the useful interpole flux is due only to the magne- 
tizing component of the interpole ampere turns, which may be, 
as low as 15 per cent to 25 per cent of the total interpole ampere 
turns. Theo leakage flux is thus liable to be a high percentage 
of the total interpole flux. 

While the ampere turns on the interpole will rise in direct 
proportion to the current, the effective magnetizing component 
will rise in direct proportion only below saturation of the inter- 
pole circuit. Any ampere turns required for saturating this 
circuit will be taken from the magnetizing component of the 
interpole winding. Therefore, when any appreciable saturation 
occurs, the effective magnetizing component will not vary in 
proportion to the current, and the interpole e.m.f. will not vary 
in proportion to the armature e.m.fs. As the magnetizing com- 
ponent of the interpole winding usually represents a relatively 
small number of ampere turns per pole a comparatively slight 
saturation in the interpole circuit may have an appreciable effect. 
It is therefore advisable to work at as low a saturation as possible 
in the interpole circuit so that practically no saturation occurs 
within the ordinary working range of the machine. 

Where saturation occurs in any of the armature flux paths, 
as, for instance, with saturated bands over the armature core, 
the result of such saturation will serve to neutralize the effect 
of saturation in the interpole magnetic circuit. In other words, 
the armature e.m.f. will not rise in proportion to the current 
and therefore the opposing interpole e.m.f. does not need to 
increase in proportion either. 

The principal source of saturation in the interpole circuit lies 
in the magnetic leakage from the interpole to the adjacent main 


2400 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


poles. Serious trouble has often been encountered by not 
making due allowance for such leakage. However, there may 
be other causes for saturation. When the full number of inter- 
poles is used the interpole magnetic path or circuit is independent 
of the main pole magnetic circuit, except in the yoke and in 
the armature core below the slots, as indicated in Fig. 22. 
In the yoke it may be seen that the interpole flux is in the same 
direction as the main flux at one side of the main pole and is in 
opposition to the main flux at the other side. The same is true 
in the armature core. Therefore the interpolar flux tends to 
reduce the flux in one part of the yoke and tends to increase it in 
the other part. If the saturation in these parts is relatively low, 
then the magnetomotive force required for forcing the low and 
the high fluxes through the yoke will be but little greater than if 
these fluxes were equal. However, if the yoke is highly saturated 
the increase in ampere turns required for the high part much 
more than offset the decrease in ampere turns for the low part, 
so that, as a result, additional am- 
pere turns are required for sending 
the interpole flux through this path. 
The interpole ampere turns therefore 
must be increased on this account, 
when the saturation is high. The same 
condition holds for the armature core. 

A similar condition occurs where half the number of interpoles 
is used and when there is much saturation of the main pole and 
the armature teeth under it, as already referred to. This con- 
dition requires additional interpole ampere turns. 

In practice, with the ordinary compact designs of direct cur- 
rent machines, it is usually difficult to keep the total interpole 
flux as low as one-third that which gives any material saturation 
and, not infrequently, it is much higher than this. Therefore, 
by direct proportion it might be assumed that such machines 
could carry only double to treble load without sparking badly. 
However, the resistance of the brushes, etc., will be of such as- 
sistance that relatively higher loads may be commutated rea- 
sonably well. For instance, with the interpole worked at about 
half saturation at normal load, the machine may be able to 
commutate considerably more than double load without undue 
sparking. It is also of material assistance, where heavy over- 
loads are to be carried, to over-excite the interpole winding, 
that is, to make the magnetizing component somewhat greater 


Fic. 22 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2401 


than required at normal load, as described before. In this case, 
at light loads, the interpole e.m-f. exceeds the armature e.m.f. 
a certain amount which is taken care of by the brush resistance 
as local currents will be less harmful when the work current is 
low. As partial saturation is obtained at overload, the two 
e.m.fs. become equal but at a higher load than would be the case 
without over-excitation of the interpole. 

Commutating Conditions on Short Circuit. When a direct 
current generator is short circuited across its terminals, either 
through a low external resistance or without such resistance, a 
current rush will occur which will rise to a value represented 
approximately by the generated e.m.f. divided by the resistance 
in circuit. This current rush is only of short duration as the 
excessive armature current will react to demagnetize or “ kill” | 
the field. If the short circuit is without external resistance the 
current rush may reach an enormous value as the internal re- 


_ sistance on large machines is usually very low. This means that 


currents from 25 to 40 times full load may be obtained on ‘‘ dead ”’ 
short circuit. Experience shows that under such current rushes, 
any kind of direct current machine will tend to flash viciously at 
the brushes. 

By the preceding theory and analysis a rough approximation 
to the commutating conditions on short circuit can readily be 
obtained. Assuming an interpole machine, the following con- 
ditions will be found: 

1. The interpole will be highly saturated so that it is of little 
or no direct benefit. ; 

9. The slot flux will rise to such a value that the armature 
teeth in the commutating zone are practically saturated. 

3. There may be some interpolar flux from the armature, as the 
high interpole saturation may allow this. 

4. The armature end flux, with the exception of that part due 
to magnetic bands, will rise practically in proportion to the 
current. 

The following short circuit e.m.f. conditions will be obtained: 

1. There will be possibly a slight e.m.f. due to the armature 
interpolar flux. 

2. There will be an e.m.f. due to the tooth flux which is almost 
as high, per conductor, as could be obtained by a conductor 
cutting the flux under the main field at no load, for saturation of 
the armature teeth may be assumed to be the limit in both cases. 

3. There will be an e.m.f. due to the end flux which may be 
10 to 20 times larger than at normal full load. 


2402 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


Therefore, the total e.m.f. in the short circuited coil due to 
cutting the armature flux on dead short circuit may be higher 
than would be obtained if the brushes were shifted at no load until 
the commutated coil lies under the strongest part of the main field. 

As very few machines of large capacity would stand this 
latter condition without flashing, it may be assumed that they 
would be no more able to stand a dead short circuit without 
flashing. In fact, 8 to 10 times full load current will make an 
interpolar machine of normally good design flash badly, as it is 
impracticable to make an interpole of the usual type which will 
not saturate highly at 8 to 10 times normal current. 

If, however, the interpole is combined with compensating 
windings in the main poles, the interpole leakage may be made 
so small that comparatively low saturation is obtained normally 
in the interpole circuit. In such case the interpole may be effec- 
tive with heavier currents and the flashing load-may be very 
much higher than with the usual type of interpole machines. 


CONCLUS1ON 

The foregoing is a general presentation of the problem of 
commutation, which is admittedly crude and incomplete in some 
points. In particular may be mentioned the part describing 
the action of local currents. Also, the method of considering 
the resultant action in interpole machines as the superposition 
of two components does not tell the whole story, but the actual 
analysis, in detail, of a number of these phenomena would be so 
confusing and complicated that a general physical conception 
of what takes place during commutation would be lost. In the 
ultimate analysis it will be found that a number of the methods 
described are, in reality, simply illustrations of the conditions 
of commutation rather than an analysis of the conditions them- 
selves. However, the method as given throws light on many 
things which take place during commutation. It also includes 
a number of conditions which are not covered in the usual 
methods of dealing with this problem. For example, the number 
of commutator bars spanned by the brush is an important ele- 
ment in this method of handling the problem, whereas, in many 
former methods, this point was either omitted, or treated in an 
empirical manner. In this method the results obtained would be 
very greatly in error if the brush span were not included. 

Any theory or method of calculation is open to question until 
ti has stood the proof of actual test. In consequence, the above 


1911] LAMME: COMMUTATION 2403 


method has been tried on a very large number of direct current 
machines, including high speed direct current generators, 
direct current turbo-generators, direct current railway motors of 
all sizes, moderate- and low-speed generators of all capacities, 
industrial motors of various designs including adjustable speed 
motors and machines with half the number of interpoles. In 
those cases where the actual test data of the machines was very 
accurately obtained, the agreement between the tests and the 
calculated results by the above method was found to be close. 
In fact, the method in some cases indicated errors or inaccuracies 
in the test results. In a number of cases of early interpole 
machines there was considerable disagreement between the 
results of the calculation and the actual test, but, in many of 
these cases, later experience showed definitely that the proper 
interpole field strength or proportions had not been obtained 
in the actual.test or that the proper brush setting had not been 
used.’ These cases were thus, to a certain extent, a verification 
of the method, for in general the greatest discrepancies between 
the calculated and the test results corresponded to the ma- 
chines which eventually proved to have the poorest proportions 
or adjustment. 

This theory of commutation looks complicated and cumber- 
some in its practical application, but it should be understood 
that it is, in reality, an exposition of a general method from 
which special and simpler methods may be derived for different 
types and designs of machines. It indicates plainly that the 
problem is so complicated that no simple formule or methods of 
calculation can be devised which will cover more than individual 
cases, and that such formule, if applied generally, will lead 
to error sooner or later. If, however, the general derivation 
of such simplified formule is well understood, then they may 
be used with proper judgment and with much less danger of 
error in the results. It is evident, from the general analysis, that 
the whole problem must be handled with judgment, for new or 
different conditions are encountered in almost every type of 
machine. 

A great many problems, closely allied to that of commutation 
in interpole machines, have not been considered, because some 
of them represent special cases of the general theory, while 
others are somewhat outside the subject of this paper. Of the 
former class may be mentioned, commutation of synchronous 
converters, machines with distributed or true compensating 


2404 LAMME: COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


windings, the so-called “‘ split-pole ’’ converter, and the commu- 
tator type alternating current motors, etc. In the latter class 
may be included such problems as the effect on commutation of 
closed circuits around the interpoles, losses due to commutation, 
current distribution at the brush contact, etc. Some of these 
subjects were included in this paper as originally prepared, but 
on account of its undue length they had to be omitted. 


‘ie 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2405 


Discussion on “' A THEORY OF COMMUTATION AND Irs APPLICA- 
TION TO INTERPOLE Macuines,” New York, OCTOBER 
13 20915. 


H. F. T. Erben: When I learned that Mr. Lamme had 
written a paper on the subject of commutation I was in hopes 
that at last we would see an exposition on the subject from which 
would be absent the familiar ‘“‘ K ”’ which is found in all formulae 
so far developed by various writers. I find however, that the 
“ K” is still freely used and that Mr. Lamme has been unable 
to develop formula which brings the subject of commutation 
down to what we might call an exact science. I do not wish to 
disparage Mr. Lamme’s ability to produce such formulae I 
firmly believe that there are so many variables, both of the me- 
chanical and electrical nature, entering into the subject of com- 
mutation that the derivation of a formula without constants is 
simply an impossibility. I think we will have to remain content 
with formulae of a skeleton nature, upon which the designer 
will build the finished product. I think that the merit of Mr. 
Lamme’s paper lies in the method in which the subject matter 
is presented, rather than any new or fundamental ideas. 


Of the three fluxes which Mr. Lamme considers, the first two 
have always been thoroughly considered in making our calcula- 
tions. I have not studied the paper sufficiently to get a clear 
idea of what Mr. Lamme terms the “slot flux”. I think, 
however, that what he terms the “slot flux ” is identical with 
what other authors have termed “ flux set up by the coils 
undergoing commutation » The fact that the formula which 
Mr. Lamme uses for determining the e.m.. due to slot flux is 
very similar to that used by other designers, confirms this 
opinion. 

In the latter part of Mr. Lamme’s paper he states that up to 
the present, little has been done in the way of determining the 
maximum overload capacity of machines at the time of short 
circuits. A little over a year ago we carried out a long series 
of tests on machines of the commutating pole type and com- 
pensated type with a view to determining the maximum momen- 
tary overload which could be carried without flashing over. 
The result of these tests show that an overload of 10 to 12 times 
normal, will cause a complete flash over and that momentary 
overloads of seven or eight normal, will cause very severe 
sparking and flashing around the brush holders but the machine 
is not liable to completely flash over. The compensating wind- 
ing permits a machine to carry a somewhat heavier momentary 
overload but the gain is not very great. Oscillograph records 
taken at the time of short circuits show that in the case of a 
compensated machine there is less field distortion than if commu- 
tating poles alone are used and in consequence a machine fitted 


- with compensated winding will carry a somewhat greater maxi- 


mum load before the flashing over point is reached. 


2406 COMMUTATION {Oct. 18 


Photographs taken at the moment of short circuits show that 
a considerable amount of gas or vapor is generated, due to the 
brushes and commutator copper being momentarily heated 
to incandescence. This gas being of high conductivity permits 
the establishment of an arc between the brush and the commu- 
tator segments. 

The formation of gas as effecting flashing is clearly shown 
by the fact that if half the brushes are removed from the com- 
mutator the machine will flash over at a lower current value than 
if the full set of brushes are present. 

We are all very much indebted to Mr. Lamme for this paper 
as he has presented the subject of commutation in rather a new 
light and has thereby stimulated general interest in a subject 
which has of late years been neglected by those presenting 
papers before general technical societies. I. hope that this 
paper will serve the purpose of inducing other members to pre- 
sent their views on this most difficult and complex subject. 

Geo. L. Hoxie: The way in which Mr. Lamme has put together 
his qualitative description of what goes on in a machine seems to 
me to be open to some criticism. The point I wish to make is that 
you cannot consider magnetic fliixes separately, each as being a 
flux due to a particular m.m.f. taken alone, and then add up these 
component fluxes and get the resultant flux. That is to say, 
you cannot do this where you have magnetic material in your 
magnetic circuit, and especially where some parts of. the mag- 
netic circuit are saturated, as will usually be the case. 

In a direct current generator we have at no load a more or 
less uniform flux under the pole faces, a very dense flux through 
the armature teeth, etc., all due to the field currents. With 
load, armature currents superimpose their m.m.f. upon the 
m.m.f. of the field and the resultant m.m.f. produces a resultant 
flux which as a rule is not at all the geometric sum of the fluxes 
that would be due to each m.m.f. taken separately. This is the 
very result that electrical machinery designers found it neces- 
sary to strive for from the beginning, and they usually expressed 
the thing by saying that the distortion of field flux due to arma- 
ture reaction was largely minimized by a strong field, liberal 
air gap, and by saturation, in pole tips, pole faces, and armature 
teeth. In the very early machine it was not uncommon to have 
the magnetism in one set of pole tips reversed by armature 
reaction. Such a state of affairs meant a tremendous field dis- 
tortion, and brought with it very bad commutation. 

I would take issue with Mr. Lamme on the proposition that 
field distortion has nothing to do with the problem of commuta- 
tion. As I understand the problem of commutation it is ideally 
desirable that during the time a coil is short-circuited by a 
brush, the coil should have generated within itself an e.m.f. 
opposed to the current that the particular coil carried a moment 
earlier. Also that the e.m.f. of the short-circuited coil should be 
exactly enough to stop the old current in, the coil, start a current 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2407 


in the opposite direction, and bring this new current up to the 
exact number of amperes that are flowing in the coils next be- 
yond. If all of this occurs exactly during the time that the coil 
is short-circuited, ideal commutation will result. If the brushes 
be given no lead, zero e.m.f. is generated at no load in the short- 
circuited coil. The correct lead used to be found by experiment. 


_ Then as load increased, the field distorted, and a new commu- 
tating position was found, also by experiment. With the intro- 


duction of carbon brushes, and saturated magnetic circuits, 
machines were produced that did not require a constant shifting 
of brushes to follow up the distorted field. This was largely 
because only a little distortion occurred. 

Now we come to interpole machines, which are rather a new 
thing. In these machines the effort is made to set up a m.m.f. 
proportional to the armature m.m.f., and either equal to, or a 
little greater than, the armature m.m.f. This means practically 
an effort to balance, or neutralize, armature reaction, at least so 
far as concerns the field through the coils being commutated. 
It is found that neutralizing armature reaction in this manner 
produces very excellent commutating results, and the interpole 
machines are getting quite popular. 

I do not intend to discuss interpole machines but I do want 
to say that about 21 or 22 years ago Professor H. J. Ryan de- 
signed and patented a pole-face winding, so called, which was 
simply a distributed interpole winding, or was a series winding 
distributed in the pole faces just outside the armature, having ~ 
ampere turns equal and opposite to the armature ampere turns. 
Those machines also commutated excellently. I have always 
believed, and I still believe, that had the Ryan patents been 
owned by one of the big companies instead of by a rather small 
concern we should have seen direct current development proceed 
upon quite different lines. Probably these patents have expired 
by this time, and possibly they would cover the interpole machine 
if still in force. 

Perhaps we shall yet see the pole face winding, or some modifi- 
cation of it, such as I take the interpole to be, come into wide use. 
It will certainly pay students of direct current machine design, 
and of commutating problems, to look carefully into this early 
work of Professor Ryan’s. 

H. M. Hobart: In listening to this very interesting abstract 
by Mr. Lamme it occurred to me what a capital thing it would be 
if the International Electro-Technical Commission could stand- 
ardize some commutation criterion. Each of us has a theory 
of commutation and each believes that his own theory serves the 
case admirably; but we have great difficulty in interchanging 
views. We all speak the same mother tongue, and yet never- 
theless language differences exist which make it quite difficult to 
follow another’s exposition of the subject. Now, I -have felt 
this in reading Mr. Lamme’s paper. Already at the first reading 
I could see that a great deal of valuable information was con- 


2408 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


tained in the paper, and yet it took a lot of study on my part 
before I began to grasp the full significance of Mr. Lamme’s 
point of view, and as my study of the paper progressed, I found 
that the differences between the way we are often in the habit 
of looking at it and the way in which I saw Mr. Lamme re- 
garded it, gradually decreased until it seems to me it is largerly 
a matter of expression. I have usually obtained pretty good 
results from considering the voltages in the short circuited coils 
as arising largely from various components and it has only seemed 
worth while to take the two principal of these components into 
account. Mr. Lamme speaks of a component voltage asso- 
ciated with slot fluxes and a component voltage associated with 
end winding fluxes. In addition to these he lays a great deal of 
stress on a third component, that associated with the inter- 
polar flux. 

It is difficult to deal with this third component in any except 
one of the three cases which naturally present themselves. 
There is, first, the interpole machine; then secondly there is the 
non-interpole machine in which you advance the brushes a little 
to overcome sparking, and thirdly there is the non-interpole 
machine operated with the brushes in the geometrical neutral 
position. As to the first of these types, the armature m.m.f. 
which would (were no interpoles present) set up the interpolar 
flux, is overcompensated by the m.m.f. of the winding on the 
interpole. As to the second type, I agree with the previous 
speaker that Mr. Lamme’s method of treatment is faulty, since 
he combines fluxes instead of adhering to the combination and 
resolution of m.m.fs. It seems to me hopeless to tackle the 
problem in this incorrect manner. But in the third type, the 
difficulty largely vanishes. We there have an arrangement in 
which the armature m.m.f. is alone of any account in the position 
midway between pole tips because the main field fluxes are sym- 
metrically disposed with reference to the resultant armature m.m.f. 
The difficulties met with in determining the interpolar flux in this 
third type relate mainly to the estimation of the reluctance of the 
path followed by that flux from the center lines on the armature 
periphery until the flux finds a landing place in the main mag- 
netic circuit. For my part, I never had the temerity to attempt 
to calculate that flux. I think Mr. Lamme is entitled to credit 
for his courage in undertaking the job. In the abstract which he 
gave us Mr. Lamme states that we need a different formula for 
calculating the interpolar flux for each different type of mag- 
netic circuit. 

I rather anticipate that there will be considerable difficulty 
in calculating that flux. Nevertheless, it is well worth trying. 
I wish that Mr. Lamme had given quantitative figures of repre- 
sentative machines, setting forth the amount of each of these 
three components of the sparking voltage. I am very inter- 
ested in Mr. Lamme’s statement that in a certain design this 
third component was greater than the sum of the other two 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2409 


components. As far as I can see, that could only have been 
the case in rather a bad machine. In my designs, I have always 
sought to minimize the interpolar flux. A chief means to this 
end is to have as wide a neutral zone as possible. This usually 
involves having a fairly small pole arc and a considerable distance 
between pole tips. The interpolar flux may also be maintained 
low by designing with a weak armature and a strong field, but of 
course such a design is relatively expensive. 

After careful reflection I feel disposed to give very serious 
consideration to Mr. Lamme’s proposal to take into account 
this third component in addition to the two components usually 
considered, indeed, we have always done it in one way or another, 
for of course we all recognize that the reactance voltage formulae 
we use are empirical, and if we decide on employing three com- 
ponents instead of two, then we shall distribute the resultant 
voltage amongst the three components in as suitable a proportion 
as our ability to analyze the data at our disposal will permit us. 

Mr. Lamme gives no attention whatever to one point of con- 
siderable importance in the study of commutation. We can 
correctly deal with the reactance voltage nowadays. When the 
reactance voltage must be high, we neutralize it by the intro- 
duction of interpoles. Amongst other advantages this permits 
of building motors whose speed may be varied over a wide range 
by controlling the current in the shunt field. But while the 
reactance voltage now presents no difficulty in such machines 
the commutation may still be very bad through having too 
great an average voltage between adjacent commutator segments. 
At the motor’s highest speed the maximum voltage between 
adjacent segments will often be several times greater than the 
average voltage between segments. This is because the arma- 
ture reaction quite overmasters the normal field. It may lead 
to 40 or 60 volts between the segments when the average voltage 
- between segments is only—say—10 or 15. Now that brings us 

to the border line of commutation trouble of a kind which has 
nothing to do with the reactance voltage. 

The introduction of interpoles has tempted designers toincrease 
the reactance voltage. Indeed, there has been a temptation 
to take great liberties in this direction, such as decreasing the 
number of segments with a view to cheapening the machine. 
This has resulted in increasing the average voltage between 
‘segments and has increased still more the maximum. I have 
pointed out this omission to deal with the average and maximum 
voltages between adjacent segments as I consider that in a 
modern theory of commutation their consideration 1s of no less 
importance and may even be of greater importance than the 
consideration of the reactance voltage. 

Returning for a moment to a consideration of Mr. Lamme’s 
third component of the reactance voltage, i.e., the component 
associated with the interpolar flux, it will obviously be a function 
of the armature strength in ampere turns per pole. For ma- 


2410 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


chines with the same armature strength and the same number of 
poles, this third component may for armatures with one turn 
per commutator segment, be expressed as a function of the 
product of the gross core length (A g) and the speed in revolu- 
tions per minute (R). It is interesting to compare this result for 
Mr. Lamme’s additional component with a result in my article 
published on page 6 of The Electrician for April 20, 1906, and 
which is further developed on page 336 of Hobart and Ellis’ 
“High Speed Dynamo Electric Machinery’, from which I 
abstract the following portions of an extensive table for facili- 
tating estimations of the reactance voltage: 


Table of factors to be employed in obtaining the reactance voltage in terms of the gross 
length of the armature core and the speed in revolutions per minute. 
Armature strength | Values of K in the formula: 
in ampere-turns | Reactance voltage =K XA g XR for the numbers of 
per pole | poles set forth at the heads of the vertical columns 
4 8 16 

8000 0.000256 0.000512 0.001024 

4000 0.000128 0.000256 0.000512 

2000 0.000064 0.000128 0.000256 


From the above table it is seen that I have resolved the first 
two components (slot and end connection components) down to 
a simple form to which the “ interpolar ’’ component can also be 
reduced. Nevertheless, it would appear to be desirable to keep 
in mind that the result is a combination of three important com- 
ponents instead of comprising only two components. 

We must always remember that electromagnetic considera- 
tions are by no means the only ones affecting commutation. 
Various mechanical conditions may be and often are of pre- 
dominating importance. These are often not susceptible of 
quantitative predetermination. Thus who can calculate the 
extent of the improvement in commutation which will attend 
grooving out the mica between segments, or the use of a grade 
of brushes of different composition and construction, or the sub- 
stitution of a different type of brush holder, or a low peripheral 
speed of the commutator? We know that we can often very 
greatly improve commutation by attention to these points and 
that we may then safely employ higher reactance voltage and 
higher average and maximum voltage between commutator 
segments, but we can rarely make quantitative statements of 
the extent to which we shall obtain advantages by these means. 

Malcom MacLaren: The method of treating the theory of 
commutation proposed by Mr. Lamme throws a great deal of 
light upon this very complex problem, and should allow a clear 
analysis to be made in many special cases where the problem 
had previously appeared hopelessly involved. ' 

The formulae which he derives appear at first sight rather 
formidable, but, as he explains, these can be materially simplified 
when applied to a single class of machines. For example for 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2411 


four-pole machines with the poles covering 3 of the armature 
circumference the expression for E, becomes: 


E as 14.7 Le WwW, lee ROG 
; 108% 


A somewhat closer approximation can be made for four-pole 
machines by substituting 82 for 90 in the value of b and sub- 


stituting ae for = in the expression for a. These changes 
would simply alter the constant in the above expression for E, 
and make this 16.8 instead of 14.7. For any greater number of 
poles the approximations which have been made in the general 
solution are very close. A further modification might be 
introduced however, to take care of the effect of armature slots, 
for the expression given in the general formula shows the e.m.f. 
which would be produced in the coil under commutation due to 
the interpolar flux, if this coil were on the surface of the armature. 
This correction would of course be slight except in the case of 
comparatively small diameters and deep slots. 

It is interesting to note that this method of treatment shows 
clearly that a full pitch winding commutates under better con- 
ditions as regards the interpolar flux than a chorded winding. 
This effect, however, is not large even with considerable chording 
when account is taken of the neutralization of the armature 
conductors in the chorded zone. For example, with the pole 
covering 2 the polar pitch and with chording 4 of the interpolar 
space the effective ampere turns will be 5/6 of the ampere turns 
with full pitch winding. The length of path from the coil under 
commutation to the nearest pole will be 4 the length of path for 
the pitch winding, and the length of path to the more distant 
pole will be 13 times this distance, so that the mean effective 
path for the chord winding will be 2 of the path for the pitch and 
the strength of field will be 5/6 X4/3 or 10 per cent higher than 
the field with pitch winding. 

The effect of chording upon the slot flux as given in the paper 
on the basis of the brush spanning one commutator bar is ap- 
parently greater than experience with actual machines would 
suggest. Mr. Lamme’s analysis clearly shows that a number of 
factors enter into the determination of the effect of chording 
upon commutation some of which tend to neutralize each other, 
but it would seem as though sparking at the commutator would 
be more a function of the maximum rate of cutting of the slot 
flux than the average, which Mr. Lamme has used. 

Applying the formula, given by Mr. Lamme, to a number of 
non-interpole machines for which the commutating charac- 
teristics were known, it was interesting to note the relative im- 
portance of the various elements contributing to the e.m.f. 


2412 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


produced in the short circuited coil. All of the machines in- 
vestigated had long poles similar to Fig. 3, so that the expression 
for the interpolar flux in the formula could be used without change. 
As comparative figures only were desired, the brushes were con- 
sidered as spanning one commutator bar and were set on the geo- 
metric neutral. It was found that for a whole line of slow speed 
generators the e.m.f. due to the end winding flux remained sur- 
prisingly constant at about } volt; but for certain high speed 
machines this value was nearly doubled. The e.m.f. due to the 
interpolar flux was relatively unimportant in many cases, but 
for several large generators this became the predominating 
factor; in the case of a 1500-kw. high speed generator the e.m.f. 
due to the interpolar flux was 2.8 volts, to the end winding flux 
0.9 volt and the slot flux 1.3 volts. 

C. A. Adams: Mr. Lamme deserves great credit for the care- 
ful and conscientious manner in which he has attacked this ever- 
new problem of commutation. He has considered several 
points ordinarily neglected, and has presented the whole subject 
in such a way as to assist greatly in visualizing a very ¢om- 
plicated set of phenomena. The subject is one which in most of 
its phases does not admit of a very satisfactory oral discussion, 
since it requires too close an analysis. I should like however 
to say a few words about the characteristic feature of the present 
paper, the feature which chiefly distinguishes it from most others 
on the same subject; it is the assumption that the total e.mf. 
induced in a short-circuited coil is induced by the mechanical 
movement of the coil in question through certain stationary 
fluxes. 

In the more familiar form of analysis a part of this e.m.f. is 
calculated as if induced by the change in magnitude of the flux 
linked with and moving with the coil in question, said flux being 
due and proportional to the current in the coil. When more 
than one coil are undergoing commutation at the same time, this 
method demands the consideration of the e.m.f. induced in each 
coil by the change of current in each of the others, i.e., the con- 
sideration of the mutually-induced as well as the self-induced 
e.m.f. This necessity seriously complicates the problem in the 
general case, and it was doubtless a desire to avoid this complica- 
tion that led Mr. Lamme to his present method. The question 
I wish to raise as to the legitimacy of this method, may be most 
readily answered by a consideration of the location and magni- 
tude of the various m.m.fs. which go to produce the resultant 
flux in the commutation zone. If these m.m.fs. are stationary 
as a whole, and if the local magnetic circuit is stationary, then will 
the resulting magnetic flux be stationary. 

Divide the total m.m.f. into three parts: first, the field m.m.f. 
which is obviously stationary; second, the main part of the 
armature m.m.f. (exclusive of the current in the commutating 
zone), also stationary as a whole; and finally the m.m.f. due to the 
current in the commutation zone, i.e., the current in the coils 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2413 


undergoing short-circuit by the brushes. In order, for the 
present, to eliminate the question of variable local reluctance, 
assume a, smooth core armature. Assume also a full pitch wind- 
ing. Then the only possible source of a non-stationary flux is 
a non-stationary m.m.f. due to the current in the commutation 
zone. 

Consider the current distribution around the periphery of the 


- armature in the vicinity of the commutation zone. In Fig. 1, 


B C=4+I represents the current in each coil as it approaches 
the brush, and A D= —I represents the current in each coil as 
it leaves the brush; the ordinates of the line C D representing the 
time variation of current in each coil during the commutation 
period, on the assumption of perfect commutation. If there are 
many segments under the brush and many coils undergoing com- 
mutation at the same time, the line C’ CD D’ will represent 
the approximate peripheral distribution of current in the vicinity 


<< 
ROTATION 


Fic. 1 


of the commutation zone at any instant; 2.e., each ordinate of this 
line represents the current in the coil located at that part of the 
periphery at the instant considered. With any possible number 
of segments under the brush, each coil will occupy an appreciable 
part of the zone-width and the peripheral current density will 
obviously be constant over the coil width. If it were possible 
to have 16 segments under the brush, the instantaneous current 
distribution for the case of perfect commutation would be shown 
by the pair of stairs in Fig. 2, where 11, 72, 13, etc., are the currents 
in the several coils located at bi, b2, b3, etc. For the case of de- 
layed commutation, shown by the time current curve Go ey, 
the instantaneous space distribution of current would be shown 
by 16 steps of equal width but of varying height, superimposed 
onthe curve CO’ D. A little consideration will show that there 
are slight pulsations in either of these distributions as each coil 
moves over the width of one step, @.g., from b, to bz, and that these 


2414 COMMUTATION [Oct. 18 


pulsations are less, the larger the number of segments under the 
brush. In other words, for a large number of segments under 
the brush, the current and m.m.f. distribution are practically 
constant. Thus in this case of many segments, the e.m.f. com- 
puted on the assumption of a stationary flux (the method being 
accurately applied) will be exactly the same as that computed 
on the assumption that there is a self-inductive flux carried 
along by the current. In the case of a few segments however, 
the difference is not negligible; e.g., consider the case where the 
segment width and the brush width are equal. The same as- 
sumptions as before are made as to smooth-core armature, full 
pitch winding, and perfect or straight-line commutation. Then 
when the coil under the brush has progressed § of the way across 
the commutation zone, the current in the coil, and the peripheral 
current density over that portion of the armature occupied by 


I ae 
| ROTATION 


Fic. 2 


the coil in question, will have dropped to 2 of their full pre- 
commutation value. The distribution of current density in the 
vicinity of the commutation zone will then be shown by the lines 
marked 1 in Fig. 3. When the coil has progressed 2/8 of the way 
across the zone, the distribution of current density will be shown 
by the lines marked 2 and so on. If the commutation is not 
according to the straight line CD, but according to the curve 
CO’ D, then will the height of each step be determined by the 
corresponding ordinate of CO’ D rather than of CD? In any 
case it is obvious that with only one coil under the brush, and to 
a lesser degree with two or three, there is a very considerable 
pulsation of the m.m.f. distribution in the vicinity of the com- 
mutation zone. It is thus no longer legitimate from the the- 
oretical point of view to assume a stationary flux distribution, 
but more accurate to deal with that part of the armature m.m.f. 


1911) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2415 


comprised within the commutation zone as producing a local 
flux which moves with the armature and varies as the moving 
current varies. This point of view is still more obviously con- 
sistent with facts when it is remembered that in practically 
all commercial machines the armature: core is toothed and that 
therefore the local magnetic circuit moves with the current. 
T.e., the reluctance of the local self-inductive magnetic path 
linked with a group of conductors in a given slot is constant when 
considered as moving with the conductors, but the reluctance of 
a local path at any point (stationary with respect to the field 
poles) of the commutation zone is not constant, but varies as 
the teeth and slots pass by. 

Most of the common simple formulae for commutation reac- 
tance e.m.f., give only the approximate average value, assuming 
perfect commutation, and do not take account of the variation 


Fic. 3 


of the reactance e.m.f. during the commutation cycle. The 
averaging in this method is equivalent to the assumption of sta- 
tionary flux in Mr. Lamme’s method; i.e., neither takes account 
of the local pulsations of flux and of the corresponding induced 
em.fs. It is on this account that the principal terms in Mr. 
Lamme’s equations are so familiar. The real essential difference 
between the common formulae and those of the present paper 1s 
that the latter include a number of factors ordinarily neglected. 

Mr. Lamme states as evidence of the accuracy and legitimacy 
of his method, that the results check with the experimental 
results of tests which give the potential curve under the brush; 
but it should be remembered that an ordinate of one of these 
curves is obtained by connecting a direct current voltmeter 
across the contact surface at the point in question, and is there- 
fore the average value of the potential drop, not showing the 


pulsations. 


2416 COMMUTATION © {Oct. 13 


Thus neither Mr. Lamme’s method nor the reactance voltage 
method as ordinarily applied, takes account of the pulsations 
above described. To do this requires a much more thorough 
analysis, such as that which Professor Arnold gives in his classical 
work, ‘“‘ Die Gleichstrommaschine ’’. 

But there is still another source of flux pulsations and induced 
e.m.fs. besides that due to the pulsations of m.m.f. in the com- 
mutation zone and to the pulsations of local reluctance in the 
same region; it is the pulsations of the reluctance of the main 
magnetic circuit linking with the coil undergoing commutation, 
due to the varying number of teeth under the.main field poles. 
E.g., suppose that the equivalent pole arc is 103 times the tooth 
pitch; then in one position there will be eleven teeth under one 
pole, and in another position only 10, with an approximate change 
of reluctance of something less than 10 per cent. If the same 
change takes place under adjacent poles at the same time this 
will mean pulsations of the main flux, which while much less 
than 10 per cent owing to the damping effect of the field coils, is 
nevertheless of sufficient magnitude to induce a considerable 
e.m.f. in the short-circuited coil. Increasing the number of slots, 
increasing the length of the gap, chamfering the pole faces, a 
proper choice of the ratio of the equivalent pole arc to the tooth 
pitch, or any arrangement which brings the maximum reluctance 
under one pole at the same time with the minimum reluctance 
under the adjacent poles, will obviously reduce these pulsations, 
which though not large on well designed machines, frequently 
account for otherwise unexplainable eccentricities of commuta- 
tion. 

I was very glad to hear Mr. Lamme agree that with the brushes 
in the geometrical neutral, the degree of distortion per se, has 
nothing to do with commutation. Since the coil is in the field- 
neutral, the only e.m.f. is due to the armature flux, which is 
practically independent of the air gap. With a short air gap 
there is much greater distortion but no greater flux in the field- 
neutral zone for a given armature current, and no greater in- 
duced e.m.fs. in the short-circuited coils, provided the shortening 
of the air gap has not increased the pulsations of reluctance of the 
main magnetic circuit. I have proven this on an actual ma- 
chine, by reducing the air gap from its normal value of 0.15 in., 
(1.27 mm.) to 0.02 in. (0.508 mm.), without reducing the current 
at which sparking commenced. In fact with one armature, of 
such tooth proportions that the main reluctance pulsations were 
less with short than with long gap, the commutation actually 
improved as the gap was reduced. With another armature 
where the reluctance pulsations were larger with the shorter 
gap the reverse was true. 

It has been claimed or at least intimated in the discussion 
to-night that because of the numerous non-computable me- 
chanical factors which may seriously affect commutation, it 
does not pay to go into refinement of calculations in connection 


1O1\s DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2417 


with the computable portions of the subject. I cannot agree 
with this position for two reasons; first, the improvement 
in the mechanical design and construction of commutators, 
brushes and brushholders, have vastly reduced the relative 
magnitudes of the disturbances introduced by these various 
elements; second, every well developed refinement of prede- 
termination, however slight, is a step in the right direction and 
well worth while. The time involved in its application is ridicu- 
lously small when compared with the importance of the result. 
Because we can’t have the whole loaf is not a. good excuse for 
refusing half or three quarters of it. 

I therefore wish to congratulate Mr. Lamme, and to express 
gratification that a practical designing engineer of his high 
standing has shown his belief in the importance of careful and 
refined calculations. 

C. F. Scott: I want to comment for a moment on the method 
which is used by a prominent designer and engineer in doing his 
electrical work. This paper, aside from the specific results 
which it-gives, is, I think, typical of the man. He uses physical 
methods of analysis rather than mathematical formulas. He may 
use mathematical methods; he isa mathematician, but it is rather 
a method than a kind of machinery that he employs. For 
example, in simple things he does not happen to use a slide rule, 
but with a little lead pencil and a good deal of mental arithmetic 
he can set down the answer quicker than most men can use the 
slide rule. So in his handling of the larger problem, he has a 
sort of short cut method which enables him to get his results by a 
kind of physical analysis which is exhibited to us in the paper 
without very much mathematical machinery being apparent in it. 

In the present paper he has treated the matter of commuta- 
tion not as a limited and particular problem involving only an 
isolated coil, but he has somehow made it a part of the gen- 
eral problem of the cutting of a stationary magnetic field by 
moving conductors; so that commutation comes into the general 
class of phenomena which are involved in the generation of elec- 
tromotive force in the armature. 

Nine years ago at the opening meeting of the Institute for that 
year Mr. Lamme presented a paper on single-phase motors. 
There was a great deal of interest in that paper, and it was 
thought that he must have some mysterious method which 
would account for the commutation of alternating current. He 
simply insisted that there was nothing magical about it, that he 
simply had a machine of exceptionally excellent commutation. 
Now, his paper tonight reveals somewhat of the method by 
which he has presumably handled not merely his direct current 
commutator problem, but also the problem of the alternating 
current which led to the motor. 

The paper, therefore, can be commended as an excellent 
example of a method of handling engineering and design 


problems, 


2418 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


James Burke: I had not intended to make any comments 
upon this excellent paper of our friend, Mr. Lamme, especially 
as regards the interpole feature; but Mr. Lamme has explained 
in this paper the reason why we have been doing many of the 
things that we have been doing for a great many years, which 
arouses much interest. I think all manufacturers of commu- 
tating machines have for 20 years stated that their machines 
operated sparklessly, that there was no sparking under any con- 
ditions. This paper tells us why they have operated spark- 
lessly. 

ie interesting point brought out in the paper is the matter of 
the fractional pitch as compared with the full pitch of winding. 
Mr. Lamme’s paper mentions the influence of fractional pitch 
where commutating poles are used. Machines have been built 
by some companies for many years with various degrees of frac- 
tional pitch, and many were built as low as 70 per cent of frac- 
tional pitch. However, introduction of the interpole necessi- 
tated increasing the pitch so as to bring the commutated coil 
under the interpole. I think that pretty generally it has been 
found that in interpole machines the pitch of the coil must nearly 
approach a full pitch in order to get the best results of the 
introduction of the interpole, except in the exceptional cases 
where the end winding becomes a large factor. 

I think we must not assume that because we have this paper 
that any one without any additional experience can build a non- 
sparking machine, because there are a great many other items 
of very great importance that are not brought into consideration 
here. For example, this paper does not introduce the question 
of the width of the mica between commutator bars. The cus- 
tomary machine has a width of mica of about 1/32 (0.794 mm.) 
of an inch. Under certain conditions of design, very marked 
improvement can be obtained by increasing the width of the 
mica. I have had experience with machines in which with the 
ordinary width of mica the machines would have been impossible 
of successful operation, but by introducing increased widths of 
mica into the design, in some extreme cases to about 3 of an inch, 
(9.525 mm.) or abouc 12 times the usual practice, the machines 
wre entirely successful. The improvement in commutation 
due to wider mica is a study by itself, but one of the important 
factors introduced is thé increased effect of the resistance of the 
brush in the path of the short circuit coil, because the path 
through the brush although variable, has a minimum length 
equal to the width of the mica, and by increasing the mica, that 
path is increased so that the effect of the resistance of the brush 
is very markedly increased. There are difficulties in getting 
mica that will wear evenly with the copper in the commutator, 
but this can be overcome by scraping the mica lower than the 
copper. Asan example, I know of one motor that if its criterion 
of commutation be judged by any of the well known formulae, 
would be declared impossible, and yet this machine, operating 


1911] _ DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2419 


as a reversing motor with its brushes at the geometrical neutral, 
has been operating for some years carrying intermittent loads 
in excess of what would be considered normal for this size of 
machine. The feature of the width of mica is a very important 
one in the study of commutation. 

The question of finding the geometrical neutral is one that is 
difficult and takes considerable time as mentioned by Mr. 
Lamme, especially if the coils are fractionally pitched, and more 
especially if the armature is twisted so that the teeth do not 
enter evenly under the pole. The proper position as mentioned 
by Mr. Lamme is very important in interpole machines. A 
method that we have used for many years might be of interest 
and is a time saver. It will be better understood by the follow- 
ing diagram, Fig. 1, in which a two-pole machine is used for 
illustration: A-A represent the poles; B the armature; C-C 
the brushes; D any one of the 
armature coils, shown in the 
diagram as being the coil short 
circuited at that instant by one 
of the brushes, and in the illus- 
’ tration being at the geometrical 
neutral, the pitch of the coil 
being slightly fractional in the 
illustration. F-F represent the 
field coils excited from an ex- 
ternal exciting supply, which 
field excitation can be thrown 
on or off by means of switch H. 
Across the brushes is connected 
alow reading voltmeter J. Now 
if the switch H is opened or 
closed while the armature is 
stationary, there will be an in- 
stantaneous deflection of the in- Fic. 1 
dicator of the voltmeter, if the 
brushes do not happen to be at the geometrical neutral. By 
moving the brushes, the deflection at opening or closing the 
switch will decrease if the brushes ar> moved towards the geo- 
metrical neutral, until finally there will be no jnstantaneous 
deflection of the voltmeter when the brushes are on the proper 
neutral position. Instead of making or breaking the field, it 1s 
sometimes more convenient to simply use switch H for inter- 
posing resistance in the field circuit. The foregoing gives the 
true position both for machines without interpoles and with 
interpoles for the geometrical neutral. This is the starting 
point from which the brushes are moved to aid commutation 
when brush movement is resorted to. Also in the interpole 
machines in cases where the interpoles are not of the proper 
strength, some departure from this position will be found 
necessary to correct. for incorrect strength of interpoles, 


2420 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


This paper takes up only one kind of interpole construction, 
perhaps the most inefficient kind of interpole because it is that 
which takes the largest number of ampere turns for producing 
commutating zones of the correct condition for commutation. 
For instance, another extreme in the comparison with this may be 
illustrated by the following sketches, Figs. 2 and 3. Fig. 2 
shows the ordinary type of interpole which is the form referred 
to throughout Mr. Lamme’s paper. If the armature strength 
is for example, 10,000 ampere turns per pole, it would be neces- 
sary to have somewhere between 12,000 and 14,000 ampere 
turns on the interpole, all of which magnetization is accom- 
panied by copper loss in the production of that field and that 
loss is very often as large and sometimes larger than the other 
field losses. In some cases the total field losses are doubled by 
the introduction of interpoles. Now in contrast with this, 


+ 42000 TO 14000 3000 
Ip AMPERE-TURNS AMPERE-TURNS| pty 


10000 
AMPERE-T URNS 


Fic, 2 Fic. 3 


another way of producing a suitable commutating zone is shown 
in Fig. 3, in which B indicates the interpoles supported from the 
magnet frame in any suitable way by non-magnetic material. 
Assuming again an armature magnetization of 10,000 ampere 
turns at the middle of the interpole, we can find a point indicated 
approximately at X in Fig. 3, at a convenient position me- 
chanically and electrically which will have a strength of ap- 
proximately 8,500 ampere turns, so that the winding on this 
type of interpole will require a magnetization of only the dif- 
ference between the 10,000 point and the 8,500 point, equals 
1500 ampere turns, plus that necessary for overcoming the air 
gap and magnetic circuit of the interpole in producing the de- 
sired commutating flux, or in the illustration approximately 
3,000 ampere turns. It will be seen that with this type of inter- 
pole, with approximately 3,000 ampere turns, if properly de- 
signed, the same effect can be accomplished as with say—12,000 


ue 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW VORK 2421 


ampere turns, in the type of interpole shown in Mr. Lamme’s 
paper. This particular type is one that I have given consid- 
erable attention to in investigation and in tests, and believe 
it shows a greater promise than the old fashioned interpole that 
has been customary. 

I note with interest Mr. Lamme’s remarks on using a lesser 
number of interpoles than main poles. When we first started 
doing this some people thought that we had left something off 
the machine, particularly in two-pole machines where we used 
only one interpole, and in some six-pole machines with series 
connected armatures, where we used only two interpoles, but the 
success in the operation of the machines with a lesser number of 
interpoles than main poles when properly proportioned war- 
ranted this use, and I think Mr. Lamme confirms the correctness 
of using lesser interpoles than the total number of poles, provided 
you can get your other magnetic conditions correct. 

One other point of great importance is, I think, not fully 
treated in the paper, and that is the effect of the number of coils 
per slot. We find in machines sometimes as many as five per 
slot and five commutator bars per slot. The difference in the 
effect between one commutator bar per slot and many bars per 
slot is a matter of very serious consideration in the designing 
of interpole machines. 

I regret that I did not have an opportunity to study this 
paper fully so as to be able to discuss it, and I will only conclude 
by expressing gratitude for the contribution which Mr. Lamme 
has made to the recorded knowledge on the subject which is 
available to those who are studying the designing of commu- 
tating machines. 

R. B. Treat: Mr. Lamme’s paper covers in a step by step 
manner several of the factors affecting commutation. The 
development can easily be followed, and each final formula has a 
real physical conception. 

The last formula for B; would seem to require a correction 
factor of 2/z due to the distributed magnetizing armature 
winding. One eminent author omits to apply this factor in his 
discussion of direct current machines, but does apply it when he 
discusses synchronous machines. Why he draws the distinction 
is a question to me. 

Fig. 10, of the paper, shows a flux density diagram to the right 
of the slot picture. This shows a straight line increase of flux 
from the base of the conductor d to its top. The author appears 
to assume that the e.m.f., developed in the conductor of depth 
d by this flux is proportionately to one-half d. Extensive ex- 
periments have shown that the e.m.f. curve for the conductor of 
depth d will take the form of a parabola and the average e.m.f. 
is proportionately to 3 d. 

The formula for flux from tooth top.......... contains the 
factors 0.54. I have been unable to verify this part of the 
formula for experiments had indicated that it should bea logarith- 


2422 COMMUTATION [Oct. 18 


mic function of the armature core surface enclosed by the coil 
divided by the slot width. Again there seems to be no reference 
to the flux set up in the end connections by the commutating 
coil, this end flux being entirely independent of that referred 
to on a previous page which gives calculations for end flux set 
up by the armature magnetizing turns. ° 

There is a chapter headed ‘‘ Condensed approximate formula. 
The designer might well omit this chapter and adhere closely 
to the previously developed individual formula, for he may then 
easily note the effect of minor changes upon the design. — 

In the discussion of the effect of brush width given in the 
paper, I would ask if the factor B; is not intended to be By, 
to conform to the value as given under the heading “‘ Effective 
Armature Ampere Turns?” 

The paper presents a theory of commutation which looks 
complicated and cumbersome, but if the designer will adhere to 
the elements which have been developed, he will find that the 
matter is of very easy application and it insures a little more 
accuracy than may have been obtained heretofore. 

C. E. Wilson: During the preparation of the paper by Mr. 
Lamme I was engaged for a considerable time in checking over a 
large number of machines with the idea of verifying the formulae 
by tests. In other words, I have made practical application of 
the substance of the paper, not only in checking the tests on 
existing machines, but also in predicting the commutation on 
new designs. While engaged in this work I have been especially 
impressed by the importance of ‘‘ over-compensation ” and by 
the necessity for obtaining an approximately uniform distribution 
of current under the brushes. 

A great deal of light can be thrown on these subjects by what 
are commonly called “‘ brush curves’. These curves are taken 
by reading the voltage between a point on the end of the brush 
near the commutator and a point on the commutator directly 
beneath. This voltage is a rough indication of the current 
density under the brush; but it is only an indication and not a 
measure of the current density, for, as is well known, the res- 
sistance between the brush and the commutator is exceedingly 
variable. 

Fig. 1 shows the effect on the brush curves of changing the 
magnetizing force of the interpoles. These curVes were taken at 
full load on a 1,500-kw., 500-rev. per min. machine, which has a 
high short circuit e.m.f. Curve a was taken with the machine 
under-compensated and sparking slightly; Curve b with it com- 
mutating perfectly, and Curve c with it over-compensated and 
sparking about the same as when Curve a was taken. These 
curves are characteristic. ‘The current crowds to the leading 
tip when the machine is under-compensated and to the trailing 
tip when it is over-compensated. 

In Fig. 2, Curve a was taken on a 15-h.p. motor at ? load. 
Curve 6 was taken on the same motor at the same load with 


1911] DISCUSSION AT.NEW YORK 2423 


brushes only half as wide, but with twice as many brushes. per 
arm, so that the average current density was the same for both 
tests. Curve a shows flat compensation, while Curve b shows 
the machine to b2 under-compensated. This result is consistent 
with the theory advanced this evening. The difference would be 
more marked if this machine had a higher short circuit voltage 
due to the slot flux. 

Changing the interpole gap has, of course, an effect on the 
brush curves similar to that produced by changing the interpole 
ampere turns. Fig. 3 shows tzsts at full load on a 125-kw. 
generator which has a low short circuit voltage. Curve a was 
taken with a 1-in. (6.350 mm.) interpole gap and b witha5 /32-in. 
ais mim.) gap, all other conditions being the same for both 
ests. 

The same kind of brush curves can be taken on non-interpole 


2.5 — = 
c 
2.0 7 
b 
1.5 7] 1b 
1.0 
G Uy yy 
: Z ’ Y op . 5 /f 
Be > d My YW 
Yi Y j 
Y) ROTATION G a te 
Yi pip ppt tth LLLP IN, /, Y YJ; Wa Ge. 
YY VEM#W Ma — 


0 VLLILLLLSELLS, 


! i) 
<—_—_——BRUSH W — 
ij———_ BRUSH WIDTH i spit | 
: 


Fic. 1 FIG, 2 


machines. It is customary to shift the brushes of such ma- 
chines to assist commutation. The short circuited coils, being 
in an active field at no load, have large local currents set up in 
them, which fact shows clearly in the brush curves. Fig. 4 shows 
the tests on a 100-h.p. non-interpole motor at no load and full 
load with the brushes given 2.7 bars lag. This machine commu- 
tated perfectly at no load and full load and only sparked slightly 
at 14 load. The short circuit voltage per coil on this machine 
is 3.1 volts from test and 3.0 volts by calculation—a very close 
agreement. The test value of this short circuit voltage was 
obtained directly from the brush curves taken at no load and 
full load. 

A good way to look at this problem is that, with the brushes 
on the no load neutral and the brush covering only one bar, 
the difference in voltage between the two edges of the brush is 
equal to the short circuit voltage per coil. For any other 


2424 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


condition the approximate short circuit voltage can be found 
from the brush curves if due allowance is made for the number 
of bars covered by the brush and for any voltage assisting com- 
mutation due either to interpole flux or to the main flux in non- 
interpole machines if the brushes are shifted into an active field 
at no load. 


In regard to saturation in the interpole circuit, Curves a 


| 


ROTATION 


| 
K———— BRUSH WIDTH————_> 
( | 


Fic. 3 Fic. 4 


MPERES 


< 
wi 
a 
e) 
a 
oa 
ul 
bk 
= 


' 
im—————-B 
0100200300 400-500 PLONE ear 


Fic. 5 Fic, 6 


and b shown in Fig. 5 are of special interest. They show the 
limits of sparkless commutation on a 624-kw., 250 volt generator. 
This machine with flat compensation will begin to spark at 
14 load (point A), while with over-compensation it will not 
spark until 1$ load (point B) is reached. This shows very 
clearly why an interpole machine should be over-compensated. 
Fig. 6 shows the brush curves taken on this same machine at 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2425 


full load, Curve a, and 14 load, Curve 6. Curve b, of course, 
shows under-compensation. 

In a series or heavily compounded motor, saturation is even 
more serious than it is in a shunt machine, for that part of the 
magrtietic circuit common to the main pole and interpole saturates 
as the load comes on. Fig. 7 shows the brush curves for a 5-h.p. 
heavily compounded motor, 1260 rev. per min., 5.25 amperes 
(Curve a), and at 813 rev. per min., 20 amperes, (Curve 0). 

Curve a, Fig. 8 shows another way of representing the satura- 
tion of the interpole circuit. It represents the resultant voltage 
between bars at the center of the brush for various armature 
currents in a series motor operating at constant speed. This 
160-h.p. motor, on account of the conditions of the service re- 
quired of it, is necessarily highly saturated. The dotted line b 
gives the over-compensation which would be obtained if there 


ROTATION 


‘ 500 
FULL LOAD 


+ 


i} 
}<—_——BRUSH WIDTH 
iy 


Fic. 7 Fic. 8 


were no saturation in the interpole circuit, while the dotted line c 
gives the approximate short circuit voltage of the commutating 
coil. This curve shows clearly the special importance of over- 
compensation in the case of series motors which are required to 
operate at large overloads for short periods of time. 

The importance of properly shaping the interpole face, as 
explained by Mr. Lamme, is clearly shown by the brush curves 
in Fig. 2. Curve a, while it shows flat compensation, also shows 
current peaks at both sides of the brush. The effect is caused 
by too wide an interpole face and too small an interpole gap. 
When the interpole covers more than one slot pitch and the 
period of commutation does also, the increased flux density 
under the edges of the interpole will give a brush curve similar 
to Curve a in Fig. 2. Curve d shows this effect much reduced 
due to the shortening of the period of commutation, and, while 
it shows under-compensation, the current density at the leading 


2426 COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


brush tip is apparently less than in the case of Curve a. A 
machine with a brush curve like a is, of course, sensitive to inter- 
pole adjustment, brush setting, sudden changes of load, “‘ etc”. 
It thus seems to be well worth while to so fashion the interpole 
face that good brush curves and approximately equal distribu- 
tion of current under the brushes may be obtained. 

B. G. Lamme: I have been much interested in the various 
points brought up in the discussion of the paper. There seems 
to be a general misunderstanding in regard to what is covered in 
this theory of commutation. This theory was intended to in- 
clude only the internal actions involved in the operation of com- 
mutation and was not intended to cover extraneous conditions, 
such as undercutting of mica, quality or grade of brushes, type 
of brush holder, peripheral speed of commutator, etc. These 
features have largely to do with the mechanical conditions of 
commutation and, while they might be rightly classified under 
the broad subject of commutation, yet they do not belong to 
the theory as I have presented it. The undercutting of the 
mica, for instance, does not directly improve the commutating 
characteristics but it allows the brush to maintain more intimate 
contact with the copper surface of the commutator, at all times, 
than would be the case where the mica is not undercut. In the 
same way a good brush holder will maintain a more uniform con- 
tact and will prevent jumping and chattering of the brushes. 
The grade of brush will have a direct influence on the commuta- 
tion, through its resistance, but the action of the brush is also 
mechanical, to a certain extent, as some brushes will give much 
smoother “riding ’’ action on the commutator than others. 
The peripheral speed of the commutator face has considerable 
to do with the operation of the machine, through the operation 
of the brushes which ride on the commutator surface. However, 
these conditions do not modify the theory of the internal actions 
which take place in the armature during commutation. 

A number of statements have been made this evening, to the 
effect that it should not be assumed that the method of analysis 
shown in this evening’s paper will enable a beginner, or inex- 
perienced person, to design good commutating machines. It 
was not the intention to create any such impression. A more 
careful perusal of the paper should call attention to the fact 
that, throughout, I have stated repeatedly that judgment and 
experience are required to use the method accurately. In fact, 
instead of making the problem appear simpler than formerly, 
in my mind, this method of analysis makes the problem appear 
more complex, for more conditions are included than in the 
usual methods of analysis, and at the same time these conditions 
have been shown to be extremely variable for different types of 
apparatus. In applying this method of analysis to non-interpole 
machines, for instance, the results obtained in many cases show 
that it is surprising that such machines have been made to work 
as well as they do. In fact, had this method been applied to 


or 7 — laos 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2427 


any great extent in the past, I am inclined to think that many 
non-interpole machines now in existence would never have been 
undertaken, as their commutating characteristics would have 
appeared so questionable. 
_ One direct consequence of the use of this method of analysis, 
in the author’s own experience, has been to dispel a former 
notion that interpole machines were more sensitive, or more 
delicate ’’, in some ways than the non-interpole type. After 
long experience in the analysis of the various types of machines, 
the conclusion was reached that interpole machines work sur- 
prisingly well, considering some of the badly proportioned ma- 
chines which have been put on the market in the past by various 
manufacturers. 

Taking up in order some of the points brought up at the 
discussion this evening—Mr. Erban has evidently misread the 
paper when he intimates that I said that little has been done 
to determine the permissible overload, without flashing, at the 
time of short circuit. I did not intend to give any such im- 
pression, but did intend to give the idea that it is impracticable 
to build large, high speed machines, especially for the higher 
voltages, which could be dead-short-circuited without flashing, 
and I attempted to show in a simple way why certain limits 
could not be exceeded. I judge that his experience, as to the 
limiting load possible without flashing, coincides very closely with 
my own. 

As to the presence of conducting gas or vapor assisting or 
causing flash-overs, I agree entirely with him, but it should be kept 
in mind that this vapor is not the initial cause of the flash but isa 
means for spreading it. The real cause lies in the excessive 
short circuit voltage under the brush due to the excessive arma- 
ture current at the moment of short circuit, as explained in the 

aper. 

: Mr. Hoxie takes exception to my statement that field distor- 
tion has no effect on the commutation. His contention appears 
to be that, when there is saturation, the distortion of the main 
field flux has a direct influence on commutation. But this is the 
one exception I made to my broad statement, for I showed in 
Fig. 17, and the accompanying text, why a saturated main pole, 
with a consequent heavy series winding, tended to give, to some 
extent, the effect of an interpole. 

Mr. Hobart brings up the point that, with a non-interpole 
machine, without lead at the brushes, this method of calculation 
might give very good results, but that when lead was considered 
it was hopelessly involved. 1 do not agree with him that the 
method is an impossible or impracticable one in this latter case, 
for it has been tried out, in many Cases, with very enlightening 
results. In that method of direct current machine design in 
which the magnetic “ field form » or field distribution is used as 
the basis of the calculations, this method comes in naturally and 
is simpler to apply and gives a better insight of the problem than 
taking the resultant of the magnetomotive forces instead of fluxes. 


2428 od COMMUTATION [Oct. 13 


Mr. Hobart has also suggested that the maximum voltage 
between commutator bars should be given consideration as this 
may lead to commutation trouble. I do not see wherein either 
the average or the maximum voltage between bars has anything 
to do with the direct problem of commutation, but I do agree 
with him that it is the maximum voltage which we should con- 
sider in the design of the machine, instead of the average voltage. 
The sparking or flashing troubles caused by too high a maximum 
voltage between bars do not originate under the brush as a rule, 
but start between those commutator bars which are connected 
to conductors cutting the maximum field flux. I would define 
this as commutator, rather than commutation, trouble. 

Professor MacLaren has called attention to the fact that 
while the e.m.f. due to the interpolar flux is increased due to 
chording, yet the increase is not very large. He is correct in 
this. The point which I intended to bring out in my paper was 
that chording was harmful rather than beneficial as far as the 
interpolar flux is concerned, and possibly the proportions shown 
in Fig. 4 in the paper, gave an exaggerated idea of this effect. 

He also states that in working out certain large machines 
according to this method of calculation he found that the e.m.f. 
due to the interpolar flux in some cases was much greater than 
the e.m.fs. due to the slot and end fluxes. This appears to me 
to be rather unusual, in the ordinary type of machine, although 
I can see that if extra precautions were taken to reduce the e.m.fs. 
due to the slot and end fluxes, while none were taken to reduce 
the e.m.f. due to the interpolar flux, it might be possible to get 
the latter relatively high. Professor MacLaren also suggests 
that the effect of the chording on the slot e.m.f. as given in the 
paper, is greater than experience indicates. However, in many 
cases, especially where the end and interpolar fluxes are high, 
the effect of the chording would be relatively small, in the total 
result. In the example which he mentions, in which the e.m.f. 
due to the interpolar flux was 2.8 volts, that due to the end 
flux was 0.9 volts, while that due to the slot was 1.3 volts, it is 
obvious that a considerable variation in the latter value, due to 
the chording, would have a comparatively small effect on the 
total result. The influence of chording, as indicated in this 
paper, agrees very well with my own experience. 

Professor Adams has called attention to the fact that the 
method of analysis given in the paper does not cover instantane- 
ous conditions during the operation of commutation. I admit 
that there are small high frequency disturbances which occur 
periodically within the period of commutation, but these dis- 
turbances repeat themselves within a cycle of one tooth pitch, 
while in the method of calculation shown in the paper the 
results are averaged over one tooth pitch. The period of com- 
mutation is very seldom as short as that represented by one 
tooth pitch and is usually considerably longer. Therefore, in 
practice, the minor disturbances occur only in a relatively small 


> ui i 


1911} DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2429 


part of the period of commutation. But even if we did calculate 
these disturbances with any accuracy, we could not use the 
results in our calculations for interpole machines, for it is only 
the average voltage which we can compensate, or it is only the 
average short circuit e.m.f. which the interpole neutralizes. 
While such minor disturbances may be interesting from a purely 
theoretical standpoint, yet in a practical design they need not 
be taken into account and, in fact, they may be, to a certain 
extent, suppressed by damping action in the interpole and else- 
where. 

Professor Adams also calls attention to the possibility of 
secondary currents in the short circuited coils, set up by pulsa- 
tions in the main field flux due to changing magnetic reluctance 
in the main circuit, as the armature rotates. This effect may be 
present, to a certain extent, and, if of materially large value, it 
would be harmful. However, this is an effect which the de- 
signer aims to eliminate, or to reduce to a low value for other 
reasons than commutation and, in well designed machines, it 
should have but very little influence on the commutation. In 
fact, I do not recall any instances in machines of recent design 
in which this effect has been sufficient to give any noticeable 
trouble. 

Mr. Burke brings up a number of points which have been 
covered, to some extent, by what I have already said. He calls 
attention to the fact that certain machines operate in a satis- 
factory manner which, according to the ordinary calculations, 
should not be good operative machines. I have noted similar 
cases. Asa tule, these cases have to do with machines for inter- 
mittent service, reversing machines, etc. In such machines, 
commutation characteristics appear to be allowable which are 
not at all permissible in ordinary continuous service. In fact, 
non-interpole railway motors without any lead at the brushes 
are, in many cases, operative at voltages across the brush, or 
between adjacent commutator bars, which would seem to be 
prohibitive. In fact, they would be prohibitive if it were not 
for the intermittent load and other special conditions of opera- 

ion. 

: Nhe Burke has referred to a method of finding the true inter- 
pole commutating position, and he refers to adjustments which 
are departures from this position, in order to obtain more suit- 
able conditions. I agree with him that it is very important 
to find the theoretically correct position of the brushes in inter- 
pole machines, but I think that it is wrong, especially in gen- 
erators which are to operate in parallel, to permit any appreciable 
departure from this correct setting; for other troubles than 
commutation are liable to be encountered if the brushes are not 
set at the true neutral. 

Mr. Burke has referred to a special arrangement of interpole 
which, in his opinion, may have some advantage over the usual 
type. The type of interpole he shows is not a new one to me, 


2430 COMMUTATION {Oct. 13 


for an experimental machine of this type was designed by one of 
my associates several years ago. The arrangement is operative, 
but it seems to me that it is not a very practical scheme. Mr. 
Burke is somewhat in error in the figures which he gives for the 
advantages in this arrangement. For example, he assumes 
10,000 ampere turns per pole in the armature and an excess of 
2,000 to 4,000 ampere turns in the interpole, or say, 3,000 
ampere turns excess. With the arrangement of interpole which 
he has shown he considers that the armature opposing ampere 
turns may be reduced to 1,500, instead of 10,000. The total 
ampere turns on the interpole then become 1,500 plus 3,000 
=4,500. But he overlooks the return path required for the 
interpole flux and, assuming this to be of practically the same 
section as the interpole, 3,000 ampere turns additional are 
required for the gap in the return path. The total thus becomes 
7,500 ampere turns, compared with 13,000 ampere turns with 
the usual type. This would be but little better than the inter- 
pole arrangement with half as many interpoles as main poles. 
However, a marked disadvantage in this scheme lies in the extra 
space required for the interpole. With the usual arrangement 
of interpole it is frequently difficult to find space for the inter- 
pole without reducing the effective circumferential width of the 
main poles. With this proposed arrangement the space for the 
special interpole would have to be increased very materially 
in most cases, and I believe that the decrease in output, due to 
such reduction in the width of the main poles would far more 
than balance the possible gain. 

Mr. Treat has called attention to what he considers an ap- 
parent error in the derivation of the formule. He states that 
in connection with Fig. 10, ‘‘ The author appears to assume that 
the e.m.f. developed in the conductor depth d by this flux is 
proportional to 3d. Extensive experiments have shown that 
the e.m.f. curve for the conductor of depth d will take the form 
of a parabola and the average e.m.f. is proportional to 3 d.” 

Evidently Mr. Treat has not gone carefully into the deriva- 
tion of the formule given in connection with this point, or he 
would have seen that the actual value used is in proportion to 
3 dinstead of }d. The result obtained is therefore in accordance 
with his experience in this point. 

He also states that he has not been able to verify the factor 


0.54 Vn, which represents the flux from the tooth top and 
that, according to his calculations, the expression should be a 
logarithmic function of certain slot and surface dimensions. 
In reply to this I will say that, as worked out originally, this was 
a logarithmic function, but the expression was unduly com- 
plicated and was replaced by the simpler expression given in the 
paper, which is an equivalent within the practical range of 
design. Furthermore, a slight discrepancy in this part has 
such a small effect on the total result that it was considered ad- 
-visable to use the simpler expression throughout. 


*F 
a 


1911) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2431 


I feel that the discussion of the paper has been hampered, to a 
certain extent, by the delay in its issue. A number of the 
statements made this evening have obviously been due to in- 
sufficient opportunity to go into the paper thoroughly, for a 
number of points which have been raised are, in reality, covered 
in the paper itself. In a number of cases I have not called at- 
tention to these, for I believe that more careful reading of the 
paper will furnish the answer to these points. 


sedge Sea Ree 
Yue ok cee 
' AER ee 


A paper presented at the 265th Meeting of tha 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers, 
New York, November 10, 1911. 


Copyright, 1911. By A.I. E. E. 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES 
UP TO 200,000 CYCLES 


BY E. F. W. ALEXANDERSON 


The measurements of magnetization, core loss and skin effect 
of iron at high frequencies described in the following were 
undertaken partly in order to get data for predetermining the 
core loss and magnetic densities in high frequency alternators 
and partly in order to investigate the possible usefulness of iron 
for transformer construction at high frequencies. 


DESCRIPTION OF APPARATUS 


The generator used for producing 200,000 cycles is sub- 
stantially of the same type as the 100,000-cycle alternator de- 
scribed by the author in a paper before this Institute in June, 
1909. The 200,000-cycle alternator was designed primarily 
for the purpose of wireless telegraph and telephone service, 
particularly in connection with small antenne used for trans- 
mission over moderate distances, where the natural frequency is 
higher than it is in high antennz intended for long distance 
work. The output that can be obtained from a generator of a 
certain physical size decreases with the frequency or, vice versa, 
increases with lower frequencies, which is a fortunate circum- 
stance inasmuch as the power needed for short distance trans- 
mission in relatively small, whereas, long distances require a 
greater amount of power and a lower frequency. 

In the design of the alternator for 200,000 cycles some new 
difficulties wereencountered. Thesize of slot used in the 100,000- 
cycle alternator is almost as small as it is practicable to use, 
if an adequate insulation is to be provided for a normal operating 

2433 


2434 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


potential of 110 volts and a high potential test of 750 volts. 
It was found possible to increase the number of slots from 600 
to 800, retaining the same insulation, but beyond that it seemed 
that any increase in frequency must be obtained by an increase 
in speed. It appeared that the factor of safety of the material 
would allow a certain increase of speed, but there was another 
consideration which made the increase of speed almost prohibi- 
tive; the air friction. From measurements made on the 100,000- 
cycle alternator the law for the variation of the air friction with 
the speed has been determined, and it was found by plotting the 
results on a logarithmic scale that all the measured points within 
the whole range of speed where measurements could be made, 
fall on a straight line, indicating that the air friction is an 
exact function of the 2.7th power of the speed. The air friction 
of a 12-in. (31 cm.) disk at 20,000 rev. per min. is 5 kw. and hence 
a general formula is found for the air friction. 
On a 12-in. disk; 


i 27 
rev. per min. ) 
. ’ 


10000 


‘Airttvietiondin’kwix 0.76 ( 


Hence it was found that the speed needed for 200,000 cycles on 
the above assumption would require a power to be dissipated 
in air friction of 15 kw. which would be excessive particularly 
from the point of view of heating. 

The 200,000-cycle alternator which has been developed has 
800 slots but the machine runs at the same speed as the 100,000- 
cycle alternator, 20,000 rev. per min. The winding has one 
conductor per slot, insulated in the same way as the 100,000- 
cycle machine but the winding is of a special type so that 800 
slots give the equivalent effect of 1200 poles. It generates 
90 volts at no load. 


SYSTEM FOR MEASUREMENT 


Inasmuch as the principal object of this test was to ascertain 
the core loss in the iron, it was necessary to find a way of making 
wattmeter measurements. The ordinary hot wire instruments 
have been found very reliable for measuring amperes and volts 
at high frequencies but a wattmeter for such frequencies does 
not exist. However, it might be possible to construct such an 
instrument applying the a?—b? principle to the hot wire meter, 
For these core loss measurements another method was adopted 


a =: 


1911] ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2435 


which required no special instruments. The principle of the 
method is the following: 

A compound circuit is formed of the sample coil, a bank of 
condensers, and a variable inductance. The relation of the 


‘capacity to the inductance is varied until the volt-amperes input 


through the combination becomes a minimum for a constant 
value of current in the sample coil. The minimum input 
indicates the changing point from leading to lagging current of 
the combination and consequently the input represents the 
watts consumed by the group. The iron core is then removed 
and the same measurements of minimum input is made with the 
remaining air circuit. This second measurement represents 
the loss in all the auxiliary apparatus and wiring, and the dif- 
ference between the two measurements is the watts core loss 
in the iron sample. 

In following out this principle it must be observed that any 
presence of higher harmonics in the measured circuit might give 
a certain amount of wattless current even at the point of mini- 
mum input and any such disturbance must be eliminated. For 
this purpose the alternator was connected in series with a 
variable condenser which was in every case adjusted so as to 
give maximum current output for any given field excitation. 
In this way the harmonics were eliminated by tuning, so 
that a comparatively pure sine wave was delivered to the test 
circuit. 

In arranging the test circuit there was a choice between con- 
necting the condensers in multiple to the sample coil and tuning 
for minimum current input or connecting the condensers in 
series with the sample and tuning for minimum voltage input. 
Out of these two alternatives the second proved to be more con- 
venient and was used throughout. The accuracy of the method 
was ascertained by substituting a known resistance in the place 
of the sample coil and checking the measured input to the same 
with the calculated J? R loss. The results agreed within the 
errors of measurement. The arrangement of the test circuit 
employed is shown in Fig. 1. The sample coil is connected 
in series with a bank of condensers of one microfarad each, ar- 
ranged in series, and a variable inductance consisting of a fine 
insulated wire about 1.5 meters along which was wound or un- 
wound on a cylinder of wood about two cm. in diameter. This 
type of variable inductance was preferred to the one of the 
ordinary laboratory type where a blank wire is gradually rolled 


2436 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


from an insulated to a conducting cylinder. It is of importance 
that no change be made in the losses in the auxiliary apparatus, 
because the core loss in the sample is determined by subtracting 
the losses in the apparatus from the total losses in the combina- 
tion. The current was measured by a three-ampere hot wire 
meter with all the current flowing through the hot wire and the 
voltage was measured by a hot wire voltmeter with a full scale 
deflection corresponding to 0.23 amperes. Inasmuch as the 
series resistances of the voltmeter were originally made for 
ordinary frequencies it might be questioned whether they are 
sufficiently non-inductive for accurate readings on high fre- 
quencies. The tests made to ascertain this point indicate how- 
ever that there is no measurable error even at 200,000 cycles. 
In the first place the readings of the voltmeter are proportional 
to the speed of the alternator 
over the whole range of speed 
in which the machine can be oper- 
ated. For additional assurance | 
it was tried to eliminate any vocrweres| 
possible inductance in the volt- = 

a 


meter by connecting it in series  goypeysen= nT dete 
with a variable condenser, and = 

it was found that the maximum cw 
reading was obtained without VARIABLE INOUCTANCE 


the condenser and that the 
readings decreased first slowly 
and then rapidly when the im- 
pedance of the condenser was increased. 

The sample coil consisted of a ring 2 in. (5.1 cm.) in diameter 
made up of 10 turns of a soft iron strip 0.003 in. thick and 
0.75 in. wide (0.0076X1.9 cm.). The layers of the strip were 
separated by thin paper. The winding was made of 0.016 
silk covered wire with two wires in multiple and 20 turns in 
series. 

The test comprised two sets of measurements: 

Skin effect measurements; 
Core loss measurements. 

This skin effect measurements consisted in determining the 
apparent permeability of the iron at various frequencies and 
densities by observing the volts and amperes at the terminals 
of the sample coil. The complete sets of observations at various 
frequencies are given in Table I. 


200000 CYCLE 
ALTERNATOR 


CONDENSERS 
emis cGy 


HH 


Fic. 1.—Arrangements for 
measurements 


1911) ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2437 


TABLE I 
SKIN EFFECT MEASUREMENTS 
Bmax Effective 
lines per ampere turns per 
Frequency Amperes Volts cm? cm, 
40,000 1.8 8.2 1550 2.25 
1.64 7.4 1440 2.05 
1.48 627 1300 1.85 
1.28 5.2 1010 1.6 
60,000 2.02 12.8 1650 2.53 
1.88 AES: 1460 2.35 
1.74 10.2 1320 2.18 
1.33 7.2 930 1.66 
80,000 Zuok 18.4 1780 2.97 
2.14 15.3 1480 2.68 
1.82 12.3 1190 2.28 
1.48 9.2 890 1.85 
100,000 2.46 20.4 1580 3.08 
2.06 16.2 1260 2.58 
1.64 11.5 890 2.05 
1.27 8.4 650 1.59 
120,000 2.38 21.8 1410 2.98 
2.14 18.0 1160 2.68 
1.83 14.3 925 2.29 
1.38 10.2 660 1.73 
1.6 ita) 770 2.0 
140,000 2.29 22.0 1220 2.86 
1.94 17.3 960 2.43 
1.69 13.7 760 2.11 
160,000 2.26 22.6 1090 2.83 
2.00 19.0 920 2.5 
1.69 14.7 710 Zea 
1.30 ilar 550 iti 
180,000 2.32 24.8 1070 2.9 
2.20 22.8 885 2.75 
1.91 18.4 790 2.39 
saa) 13.5 580 1.88 
1.25 10.5 450 1.56 
200,000 2.34 26.1 1010 2.93 
2.04 21.3 820 2.55 
1.67 16.4 635 2.09 
1,27 L,.5 446 1.59 


The method of procedure during the core loss measurements 
was as follows: 

The alternator was held at constant speed and the outside 
condenser C; was tuned so as to give maximum current for that 
particular frequency. The yoltmeter connection was then 


2438 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


moved along the bank of condensers C, until the point was 
found which gave approximately minimum volt reading. The 
variable inductance was then wound or unwound until the exact 
minimum point was found. With this adjustment of the cir- 
cuit, a continuous series of readings was taken by varying the 
field strength of the alternator and noting the volts and am- 
peres input to the test circuit. The sample coil was then short 
circuited and another tuning of the auxiliary circuit undertaken 
leaving the voltmeter connection in the same place but in- 
creasing the variable inductance by winding up the wire until 
the minimum volt reading was found. The same procedure 
was repeated at each of the various frequencies from 40,000 to 
200,000 cycles. The complete data as obtained from tests is 
given in Table II. 


TABLE II 
CORE LOSS MEASUREMENTS 
Minimum | Minimum volt | Minimum Effective ampere 
| Frequency Amperes | volt total auxiliaries volt coil turns per cm. 
40,000 1.96 8.4 0.53 7.9 2.45 
1.87 7.4 0.48 6.9 2.34 
shew eee 7.0 0.43 6.6 2.21 
1.52 5.1 0.32 4.8 1.9 
1.23 3.9 0.20 3.7 1.54 
60,000 2.08 10.5 0.8 9.7 2.6 
1.92 9.2 0.68 8.5 2.4 
1.78 8.2 0.59 1 GL) 2.23 
1.63 7.2 0.49 6:7 2.04 
nes yank 0.32 4.8 1.64 
1.06 4.1 0.21 3.9 1.33 
80,000 2.32 15.2 1.2 14.0 2.9 
2.18 lane 1.06 12.6 2.73 
2.05 12.1 0.94 vies 2.56 
1.80 9.5 0.72 8.8 2.25 
1.60 8.2 0.57 7.6 2.0 
1.33 6.5 0.4 Gat 1.66 
1.08 4.9 0.26 4.3 1.35 
100,000 2.29 16.5 1.68 14.8 2.88 
2.02 13.4 1.32 12.1 2.53 
1.76 11.0 1.0 10.0 2.20 
1.61 9.3 0.83 8.5 2.01 
1.33 7.4 0.57 6.8 1.66 
1.06 5.3 0.36 4.9 1.32 
120,000 2.44 19.0 1.54 17.5 3.05 
2.26 aly (uk ies: 15.8 2.82 
1.94 13.7 0.97 12.7 2.43 
1.65 10.5 0.70, 9.8 2.06 
| 1.39 8.4 0.50 7.9 1.74 
1,12 6.6 0.32 6.3 1.4 


-~ 


1911) ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2439 


TABLE II—ConrtTINUED 


| Minimum Minimum volt | Minimum Effective ampere | 
Frequency | Amperes | volt total auxiliaries volt coil turns percm. | 
| | | 
140,000 2.24 Noe HERS) 1.46 16.3 2.8 
|) 20h jolebticaat, 1.18 Sseets 2.52 
| 1.67 11.4 0.81 10.6 2.09 
1.34 9.0 0.52 8.5 1.68 
1.08 7.0 0.34 6.7 1235 
1.79 12.7 0.96 Say; 2.24 
2.20 17.6 1.42 16.2 2.75 
160,000 2.75 26.9 Bel 23.8 3.44 
2.67 * 26.5 2.92 23.6 3.34 
i 2a 325 2.37 20.1 3.0 
| 2.16 |) 19.0 1.92 alfa eel 
1.89 15.3 1.46 13.8 2.36 
| 1.53 L155 0.96 10.5 1.91 
1.26 9.0 0.65 8.4 1.58 | 
1.12 aes 0.51 7.2 1.4 | 
180,000 2.38 22.8 2.62 20.2 2.98 
2.00 24.8 2.9 21.9 3.13 
| 2.25 21.4 2.34 19.1 2.81 | 
1.95 17.4 1.76 15.6 2.44 | 
1.68 na E dex} 12.4 2.10 
1.32 10.1 0.81 9.3 1.65 | 
1.04 7.6 0.5 We 1.30 | 
200,000 2.32 23.1 2.4 20.7 2.9 
1.93 17.6 1.66 16.0 2.41 | 
Tes) Pik 1.36 WES ¢ 2.19 
1.52 12.6 1.03 26 1.9 
1.19 9.2 0.63 8.6 1.49 
| 0.98 7.4 0.44 4 i) 1.22 


For the sake of completing the data the same sample coil was 
tested at 1740 cycles and at 60 cycles in order to ascertain the 
permeability and core loss at lower frequencies. In these two 
sets of measurements a dynamometer was used for determining 
the core loss. 

Although the apparatus described above for measurements at 
high frequencies was convenient to use and worked with all the 
accuracy that could be desired, it was found rather difficult in 
the beginning to get consistent measurements that could be 
reproduced. The quantity that was difficult to control was the 
actual properties of the iron due to the rapid changes in tempera- 
ture. The skin effect or apparent permeability as well as the 
core loss is a function of the specific resistance, which on the 
other hand varies with the temperature. In order to maintain 
constant temperature the sample core was immersed in oil, 
however, the heat radiation was not as rapid as might be desired ° 


2440 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


because the coil, in order to give a closed magnetic circuit was 
solidly wrapped in tape. At the highest densities and the 
highest frequencies that were used the heating of the iron was so 
rapid that the apparent permeability could be observed to 
increase about 20 per cent after the circuit was closed, the whole 
change taking place in about half a minute. 

The following corrections of the measured results have been 
considered but it was concluded that none was of a magnitude 
that would be worth taking into account. 

The inductance of the air circuit surrounding the winding 
of the coil. 

Resistance of the winding. 

Error due to current absorbed by the voltmeter. 


0.20 ‘a 


a 0.18 
ul 


0.16 0.04 
sU-l6a 0. 


= = 
50.140 
Ww a 


(5) lid, Ay 
o0.12 50.08 


a 
50.10 5 
© Senk 


(00.08 (4 0.02 
a a 


20.06 2 
k ae 
ma fe) 
= 0,04 > 0,01 


0,02 


0 1 2 
EFFECTIVE AMPERE TURNS PER CENTIMETER 


Fic. 2.—Saturation and core loss qt 60 cycles 


In order to ascertain the inductance of the dir circuit of the 
coil wiading an identical sample coil was made up with a paper 
core instead of the iron core. The inductance was, however, 
too low to be measured. Similarly it was found that the re- 
sistance could be neglected. The correction for the voltmeter 
current might be considered appreciable being about 4 per cent, 
however, considering the possible variations of several times 
this amount due to heating all efforts were bent to produce 
measurements which are consistent with each other rather than 
to correct the absolute quantities. The sets of readings given 
in Tables I and II are the results after several less successful 
attempts. The method finally adopted in taking the readings 


lel 


1911] ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2441 


was to complete all the tuning, then let the coil cool and take 
the readings rapidly, closing the circuit only for a moment at a 
time. 

The data represented by curves in Fig. 2 to Fig. 11, inclusive, 
are obtained from the test results given in Tables I and II in 
combination with some other tests made with a 100,000 cycle 
alternator in order to reach the intermediate frequencies. 

Figs. 4 to 7 inclusive, give the data on magnetizing current and 
skin effect, whereas Figs. 8 to 11 inclusive, give the data on core 
loss. Fig. 5 gives the magnetization of the iron in the same form 
_as ordinary alternating current saturation curves, one curve 


= 
~ 


oS 
| 


WATTS PER CUBIC CM, 
w 
| 
ees 
AP 


eo a 
CO He CO 


i) 
ru) 
i 


Ss 
_ 


0 0.5 1 15 2 25 3 
EFFECTIVE AMPERE TURNS PER CM. 


FIG. 3.—Saturation and core loss at 1,740 cycles 


being drawn for each frequency. The curves in Fig. 6 show the 
decrease of the apparent magnetic densities with increasing 
frequency; in other words, the skin effect. Fig. 7 gives the 
magnetizing current in a form which is most useful for the 
purpose of design. Each curve represents a constant value of 
effective volts induced by a cross section of one square centi- 
meter of the core. The curves show that, in spite of the skin 
effect, the magnetizing current needed to produce the same in- 
duced voltage decreases continually with increasing frequency. 
Fig. 11 gives the core loss in a similar form, each curve Tepre- 
senting a constant value of volts produced per square centimeter 
of the core. The core loss, like the magnetizing current, de- 


creases with increasing frequency. 


2442 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


CONCLUSIONS 


As a conclusion from these tests it may be stated that the 
opinion held quite extensively that iron does not respond to high 
frequencies is entirely without foundation. The iron not only 
responds but it seems to have the same permeability at 200,000 
cycles as at 60 cycles. The apparent permeability of the iron in 


\ oe 
AY 


— 
Sy) 
> 


at + 


Sen 3 
ne 


i 
— 
| 


2 


VOLTS PER TURN PER CM" 
| 
| 
| 
—+ 


o 
| 
| 


i 
i 
} 
1 
| 
4 
<< 
@) 
zm 


0 “40000 80000 
20000 GN000-—-«- 100000140000 180000 
FREQUENCY, CYCLES PER SECOND 


Fic 4.—Induced volts at constant ampere turns and varying frequency 


the sample which was tested is only about one-tenth as great 
at the high frequencies as at the low frequencies but the decrease 
of. the apparent permeability is substantially in agreement with 
the change that would be expected from purely theoretical con- 
siderations due to the skin effect, which indicates that the actual 
permeability has remained unchanged, 


1911] ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2443 


In order to apply Steinmetz’s formula for skin effect: 


: 3570 
Penetration, 1,=~- a = 
Auf 
® 
10000 Ta = 
9000 - — - 
8000 | 
= + 
7000 
3 6000 = 
a 
uu 
oa 
w 
wl 5000 
ad 
3 s 
oo 4000 
s 
3000 ow 
oo 
2000 “0 
ws 
Ws 
seh 
1000; = Me 
2 
SEE A 


0 02 0406" 0.01.0) 12) tees 1s 2.0 2.2 24 26 28 
EFFECTIVE AMPERE TURNS PER CM. 


Fic. 5.—Alternating current saturation curves 


The following constants may be used as average values for 
the sample 


Permeability, p=2,250 
Conductivity, 4=0.9 x 10° 


*Transient Electric Phenomena and Oscillations, 


2444 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES {Nov. 10 


Hence penetration at 200,000 cycles should be 


1,=0.00056 cm. 


: 


5 


: 


LINES PER CM2 


SESSES 2 EE 


Bay. 


0 40000 80000 12000" 160000 20r 000 
FREQUENCY, CYCLES PER SECOND 


Fic. 6.—Apparent densities at constant ampere turns and varying 


frequency 
si 
S| ae el ea a 
o 3 
a s 
a 
28 G z 
a $ 
aa, - 
Ld ied 
w a 
© oO 
te 5 
re > 
7 3.0 
>] 2.5 
be 2 
uy 15 
b 1.0 
u i | 405 
= 0 40000 80000 = 120000 =: 160000 ~=—- 200000 


FREQUENCY CYCLES PER SECOND 


Fic. 7.—Magnetizing current at constant volts per turn 
and varying frequency 


The data from the tests give 


Average permeability at low frequency............ 2250 
Average apparent permeability at 200,000 cycles.... 180 
Hence penetration =0,0076 X4xX snp af scxgslel 0.0003 cm. 


1911] ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2445 


| -T 
200000 
22 180000 
160000 
20 140000 
«18 120000 
a 
w 16 feats 
= 80000 
Zl 60000 
uw 
O16 
ol 40000 
S10 
a 8 20000 
wi 
eM 
op) 
D 6 
- 
= 4 
2 


EFFECTIVE AMPERE TURNS PER CM 


Fic 8.—Core loss at constant frequencies and varying ampere turns 


e.g 
ie 1 BS 
= = nd 
a eo 4 
oe 
20 
18 
> 
< 16 Z 
oO ° 
oO 14 oe 
5S 
re 12 
3 ti 10 
oa 
| 2 8 
b. fe 
= 
= 6 = 
jaa L 
o +— 


E 
0 40000 80000 120000» 160000 + 200000 
FREQUENCY, CYCLES PER SECOND 


£ Gg. 9 —Core loss at constant apparent densities and varying frequency 


ed 


> 


a 


} ye See ee: ee 
2446 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCL 


= 
Ss 
AT. PER CM. 


8 
; 20 
Gr OO DO Tr 


i 4 
So 
_ 


Ss s 


POWER FACTOR 


S227 5 


r 
0 40000 = svduv0 =: 120000: 160000 ~—- 200000 
FREQUENCY, CYCLES PER SECOND 


Fic. 10.—Power factor at varying frequency 


ft 


a 
eae 
bad 
sahlbd 
Set 


_ i 
7 
e Yeas 
ae 
eo VOLT PER TURN PER CM.” 


WATTS pen cusic CENTIMETER 
= 
Ga 
( SIGN 2 
(fy 
| 
‘Z ‘" 


NCCES 
ar ie 
Sse re ee 


120000 160000 200000 
FREQUENCY, CYCLES PER SECOND 


: 
: 


Fic. 11.—Core loss at constant volts per turn and varying frequen va 


y 


“il 


1911] ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES 2447 


__ The discrepancy between the measured and calculated values 

of the penetration is probably due to the fact that the coil has 
not a completely closed magnetic circuit, but depends upon 
the leakage from turn to turn of the laminations, whereby an 
additional skin effect is created. 

The data on the magnetic properties of iron at high frequencies 
may be of more interest if it can be shown that iron may actually 
be useful in the construction of apparatus for such frequencies. 
Its usefulness may be claimed to be already demonstrated in as 
far as the construction of a 200,000 alternator would have been 
impossible without an iron armature. . There is however, a 
generally accepted opinion that transformers for high fre- 
quencies cannot be made with iron core. On the other hand there 
is a well known rule that transformers for ordinary frequencies 


TABLE III 
DESIGNS OF FIVE-KW. TRANSFORMER AT VARIOUS FREQUENCIES 


| 
Frequency......-..05+: 60 1740 |10000 50000 | 100000 | 200000 | 


Dimension of core,cm .. 4.65 2.51 2.41 2.14 2.06 2.0 
Weight, kege. \s00t Fe eee 19.5 3.05 Qik. 1.9 Wee 1.5 


Volts per turn 


: 0.04 0.47 0.56 0.92 1.08 1,22 
Per cm? of iron J 
Corevlosshiasses gas see's « 120 156 92 56 2 | «C54 52 
WSR Gc aiee la selene arerenevels, wiser 450 70 62.4 44 39 35 
Efficiency... 60... 00% 90 96 97 98.1 98.2 98.3 
Per cent magnetizing cur- 
Souder aoa oO fchsneusis)sis 5 5.6 2.9 1.73 1.5 ics 


are lighter and more efficient at the higher frequencies. In 
order to examine the usefulness of iron for transformer design 
from the point of view of this rule a series of transformer designs 
have been made on the basis of the measurements of the skin 
effect and core loss. It might be expected that there would be 
found a turning point in the usefulness of iron, but actually it 
appears that the rule holds true at 200,000 cycles and probably 
a good deal higher. 

The series of transformer designs shown in Table III is made 
on a purely theoretical basis so as to illustrate the magnetic 
properties of iron on a uniform plan. Considerations that would 
be involved in a practical design such as insulation and capacity 
between turns have been left out entirely. All the designs have 
the same proportions of core and winding space and the heating 
is figured uniformly on the basis of one watt per square inch 


2448 ALEXANDERSON: IRON AT 200,000 CYCLES [Nov. 10 


(0.156 watt per cm.”) for radiation of the core loss from the 
surface of the iron. The insulation between laminations has 
been assumed to be one-half of the thickness of the sheet. The 
current density in the winding is assumed to be 3000 amperes per 
square inch (470 amperes per cm?) the copper occupying one- 
third of the winding space. The calculations show that the 
200,000-cycle transformer has an astonishingly low weight 
and is very efficient, whereas, the 60 cycle transformer built on 
the same proportions is too inefficient to be acceptable and al- 
though it weighs twelve times as much as the 200,000-cycle trans- 
former it should weigh a good deal more in order to reach a rea- 
sonable efficiency. It should also be noted that the 200,000- 
cycle transformer, in spite of its skin effect, has a magnetizing 
current of only 1.3 per cent, whereas the magnetizing current 
would be about 40 per cent if the core was removed. These 
figures are not given in order to advocate the use of iron trans- 
formers to the exclusion of air core transformers for special 
purposes where such apparatus is used but are simply intended 
to show that high frequency transformers can be built with 
iron and would compare very favorably in weight and efficiency 
with transformers for ordinary frequencies. 


,. 
i) hoe 


4 
i. 
" 
ad 
- 
~ 

, 
2 
x 
J 
a 
P 
4 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2449 


DiscuSsSION ON MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES 
up To 200,000 Cycres.”’ New York, NovemBer 10, 1911. 


Harold Pender: I should like to call attention to the fact 
that the results of this paper are confirmed by some experiments 
which were performed at the Institute of Technology last year 
under my direction by F. B. Silsbee. The method used was 
entirely different. For the high frequency generator we used 
an arc giving a frequency something like 200,000 cycles per 
second. This frequency was impressed upon a primary winding 
on a small iron core made up of very fine iron wire, and the 
electromotive force induced in a secondary winding on the same 
core was measured. This secondary induced electromotive force 
was also calculated on the assumption that the true permeability 
is independent of the frequency. In making this calculation the 
proper allowance was made for the non-uniform distribution of 


the flux in the core, usually referred to as the magnetic skin 


effect. The measured and calculated electromotive forces 
were found to agree quite closely. 

B. A. Behrend: ‘This paper is interesting in bringing again 
to our attention the question of high frequencies, a question 
which 20 years ago was perpetually under controversy. The 
paper of this evening is extremely instructive, although I regret 
that the able author does not strongly bring out the fact iat, 
as far as fundamental laws and principles are concerned, the 
problem confronting the physicist or the electrical engineer, 
whether frequencies of 10 cycles, 25 cycles, 60 cycles, 120 cycles, 
or 100,000 cycles are involved, remains exactly where it was 
before; in other words, the permeability of iron as such remains 
unchanged independent of the frequency. This fact has, I be- 
lieve, been known for some time. The high frequency induces 
vitiating factors which make it appear as though the permea- 
bility of iron were different for different frequencies, which it is 
not. 

There is another point in the paper on which I wish to comment 
and that is the point of efficiency of high frequency apparatus. 
The apparatus may have a high efficiency, as the author has 
stated, but the apparatus is useless in its present form for 
practical applications other than wireless telegraphy, because 
of its want of regulative properties; in other words, a transformer 
or a generator of high frequency, though its efficiency may be 
entirely satisfactory, is an inferior piece of apparatus, in fact, an 
impossible piece of apparatus for the operating conditions re- 
quired by the use of current-consuming devices of low power 
factor. 

The statemlent which I have made is of a certain measure of 
importance and of interest to those of us older men, who argued 
in former years strongly in favor of lower frequencies in order 
to be able to design satisfactorily transformers, generators, and 
motors. The higher efficiency of the high-frequency transformer 
may be a great desideratum, yet its lack ofjregulative’properties, 


2450 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON [Nov. 10 


owing to the high frequency, makes it an impracticable piece of 
apparatus for modern power plants. 

Charles P. Steinmetz: The importance of this paper appears 
to me two-fold; first, in announcing the success of developing 
an alternator capable of generating at 200,000 cycles. It is very 
difficult, from the mere number, to realize what 200,000 cycles 
means. We were very proud when we succeeded in generating 
10,000 cycles, one-twentieth of that frequency. We must 
realize that 200,000 cycles is 40 times as high a frequency as the 
highest frequency at which sound is audible; the pitch at which 
the ear fails is 1/40 of this frequency. The most powerful re- 
search instrument we have, the oscillograph, fails at 1/40 of this 
frequency, and even at 5,000 cycles it gives merely a single kick 
without shape or characteristic. 

If we would send a current of 200,000 cycles into a line con- 
ductor, we would find that while the current flows into the con- 
ductor at one point, only 2,000 ft. away the current is still 
flowing in the opposite direction, is half a wave behind, and is 
zero 1,000 ft. away, at the center, and when the current stops 
at one point it is still maximum only 1,000 ft. away. 

The second important feature of the paper is the information 
it gives us of the behavior of iron at these extremely high fre- 
quencies which are far beyond any machine frequency ever 
produced, but which are the frequencies of industrial importance 
in our wireless telegraph and telephone systems. The paper 
gives the quantitative values, showing that the permeability 
of iron at these frequencies is unchanged, and furthermore show- 
ing that with commercially practicable thickness of iron, while 
the eddy currents in the iron are formidable, still the effective 
permeability is 180 times that of air, that is, iron is still 180 
times as good as air as the core for a 200,000 cycle transformer 
or reactive coil. 

This may have an industrial value bearing in wireless ap- 
paratus. As you know, in wireless systems we transform the 
energy produced by the oscillating discharge from the voltage 
of the generator circuit to the much higher voltage impressed 
upon the antenna, by a transformer or auto-transformer, which 
is an air core apparatus. In these cases we deal not with alter- 
nating voltages, but with oscillating voltages; trains of waves 
which gradually, and usually quite rapidly, decrease in amplitude 
and then die out. The important problem, then, is to get the 
rate of dying out, the attenuation of the waves, as low as possible, 
to get as well sustained waves as possible, that is, to reduce the 
losses in transformation. 

Iron has not been used in these transformers, not always 
because people did not believe iron would follow the frequency, 
but because the general impression is that the losses in the iron, 
even when as thin as commercially feasible, would be so formida- 
ble as to greatly increase the attenuation, increase the rapidity 
of dying out of the wireless wave. 


~~. 


- 
_ 
. 
> 

a 

a 
4 
j 
g 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK . 2451 


As to the question of the magnetic action of the iron, the ap- 
parent permeability, I estimated theoretically, some years ago, 
the frequency at which the apparent permeability of iron, as 
affected by the eddy currents in the iron, would become inferior 
to air, that is, at what frequency the permeability would drop 
down to one, and I found this frequency to be of the magnitude 
of hundreds of millions of cycles, that is, up to a hundred million 
cycles iron still increases the magnetic flux, when using the 
thinnest feasible commercial sheet iron. But long before that, 
while the iron still increases the magnetic flux, it also increases 


the loss, and the increased loss, increased attenuation of the ~~ 


wave would make it useless. 
Mr. Alexanderson’s investigation gives for wireless frequencies, 


200,000 cycles, definite numerical results of the apparent permea- 


bility, and shows this to be of the magnitude of 180. Thus iron 
is 180 times as good a conductor of magnetic flux as air, and in 
such transformers the losses in the iron are of the same magnitude 
as the J? Rloss. If we would redesign this iron core transformer 
tentatively designed by Alexanderson, to eliminate iron, using 
an air core, then the section of the air core to carry the same 
magnetic flux would have to be 180 times the size of the iron core 
used; | that is to say, the length of the coil would have to be 
/180 =13 times as great; and to save half the loss, the core loss 
in the iron, we would have to increase the other half of the loss, 
the J? R loss, 13 times. 

So you see this investigation seems to show that by using an 
iron core of proper proportion, at wireless telegraph frequencies, 
we can materially improve the efficiency of the transformer or 
auto transformer, and so reduce the attenuation of the oscillating 
wave, and that is the problem of the power in wireless telegraphy. 

Naturally, this design may be more or less, possibly materially 
modified, by the problem of the voltage that we have to generate, 
and the necessity of insulating for the voltage, which must be 
taken into consideration; but in general it seems from the con- 
clusions of this paper that there should be a material advantage 
in wireless telegraphy in using iron core transformers, or auto 
transformers, instead of the air core apparatus used at the present 
Tide: 4 

Reginald A. Fessenden (communicated after adjournment) : 
For long it was supposed that iron lost its permeability at high 
frequencies, and was not able to respond quickly enough. This 
theory was a plausible one if Weber’s theory that magnetization 
was due to currents circulating round the atoms, or if Kelvin and 
Maxwell’s dictum that the electromagnetic rotation of light 
demonstrated conclusively that, to quote Maxwell, “ some phe- 
nomenon of rotation is going on in a magnetic field ”, be accepted. 

But about 1890 or earlier J. J. Thomson had shown that iron 
had a permeability of at least 200 for. frequencies of 1,000,000 - 
per second, by measuring the velocity of propagation of an 
electric wave along an iron wire, In March.1895 ‘the writer 


2452 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON [Nov. 10 


showed that the phenomena of magnetism could be explained 
both qualitatively and quantitatively by the theory that ionic 
charges, or electrons, circulated round the molecule with the 
velocity of light and that the maximum ferric induction so cal- 
culated agreed very closely with that found experimentally. 
Also, in March 1900 (Phys. Rev.) the writer showed that the 
mathematical work on which Kelvin and Maxwell based their 
conclusion was erroneous, in that the fundamental assumptions 
made virtually implied a theory of matter which was not justified, 
and that furthermore electromagnetic rotation could be mathe- 
matically deduced from the equations for an electric wave passing 
through an absorbing medium, without any assumptions as 
regards the nature of matter or of rotation, being a necessary 
consequence of the lag produced in the wave by the absorption 
and the presence of electrons. 

Theory and J. J. Thomson’s results were thus in agreement, but 
to what extent was unknown. Some experiments made with 
arc-produced high frequency currents in 1901 showed that the 
permeability of iron was of the same order as for low frequencies, 
but it might be a fifth as much or five times as much, for arc- 
produced high frequency currents are very unreliable, even when 
apparently continuous, having sometimes as much as 50 per 
cent of the waves missing, and also fluctuating so much in fre- 
quency as to make it absolutely impossible to get any accurate 
quantitative results. (Lond. Electrician, Feb. 15,1907. Later 
confirmed by Fleming.) 

Mr. Alexanderson’s results form therefore the first definite 
and dependable knowledge in regard to this subject, and the 
paper is remarkable, both for its general interest and its scientific 
and practical importance. Workers with high frequency cur- 
rents can now go ahead with confidence and use iron without 
fear. It will undoubtedly come into use as transformers, es- 
pecially with the heterodyne system, where the electrostatic 
inductance between primary and secondary is of no importance 
and the shortening of the wave length along the wire winding 
does no harm, but may even in certain cases, be advantageous. 
I am able to confirm Mr. Alexanderson’s statements as to the 
accuracy of the method used for measuring the power lost. 

F. B. Silsbee (communicated after adjournment): In con- 
nection with Mr. Alexanderson’s paper I would like to give a 
brief account of an investigation along similar lines which I car- 
ried on during the winter of 1910-11, at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, under the direction of Professor Pender. 

The object. of the research was to decide whether or not iron 
can respond magnetically to a very rapidly alternating magneto- 
motive-force. Especial care was taken to arrange the conditions 
of the experiment so that they would be amenable to mathe- 
matical analysis, and all disturbing factors could be allowed for. 
The method used was quite different from Mr. Alexanderson’s, 
as the specimens were magnetized by a primary winding, and the 


~ 


eS 


woes Soe ke ee 


E 
4 
1 
a 
4 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2453 


flux"determined by measuring the voltage in a secondary winding. 
To allow for the magnetic ‘“ skin-effect ”’ a careful mathematical 
analysis was made which took into account the effects of both 
eddy-currents and hysteresis. The assumptions it was necessary 
to make were: first, that the hysteresis loop, traversed by the iron 
during a complete cycle, was a simple symmetrical loop having 


the equation 
2 2 
4H”) H ) _ 

( V By +( Tal oe (1) 


where H =m.m.f. per cm. at any point. 
B =corresponding flux density. 
H,=makx. value of H during the cycle. 
By=value of B corresponding to H= Ho. 


and second, that w and pv were constant and independent of Ho. 
The iron used had been hardened in drawing so that the maximum 
permeability was only about 700. It was, however, very well 
suited for this investigation as mM Was practically constant at 
80 for values of Ho between O and 3.5 c.g.s. units, v also:was 
practically constant over this range. From the above assump- 
tions it can be proved that the secondary voltage is of the form 


B= = MM, @ (By A+ (A— vB) (2) 


where M,)=mutual inductance between the two windings at 
low frequency. 
w =27 times the frequency. 
I =primary current. 
jee 


A and B are functions of the radius of the core, the conduc- 
tivity, permeability and hysteretic constant of the iron, and of 
the frequency; and are expressed as a rather complicated series. 

The secondary voltage was measured by an alternating cur- 
rent modification of the potentiometer method, so commonly 
used in direct-current work. A variable inductance and re- 
sistance were connected in series with the primary winding, 
and the secondary winding, was connected, in series with a 
suitable detector, so that its voltage was opposed to the LZ 
drop in the impedance. The inductance and resistance were 
both adjusted until there was no current in the detector, thus 
eliminating any demagnetizing action from the secondary coil. 
Then from the known values of the resistance and inductance, 


2454 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON {[Nov. 10 


and the primary current, as measured by a hot-wire ammeter, 
both the magnitude and phase relation of the secondary voltage 
could be computed. 

The high-frequency current was obtained from a Poulsen arc 
formed between copper and carbon electrodes in an atmosphere 
of coal gas. The arc was supplied with 220 volts direct current 
and gave about two amperes at 350,000 cycles per second. The 
frequency was measured by the use of a resonating circuit, 
loosely coupled inductively to the primary circuit and containing 
inductance and capacity in series with a detector. The reso- 
nating circuit was adjusted for maximum current, and the 
frequency computed from its constants by the formula, 


27 
= 3 
f WG 

The detector used in this and also in measuring the voltage 
of the specimen was a thermo-couple heated by the passage of 
the high-frequency current, and connected to a low resistance 
D’Arsonval galvanometer. 

Four specimens were used, made up of fine iron wire 0.009, 
0.005, 0.004, 0.002 in. (0.228, 0.127, 0.101, 0.050 mm.) in diam. 
respectively. Each size of wire was wound into a ring of circular 
cross-section about 8 cm. in diameter, and having a total sec- 
tional area of iron of about 0.2 sq.cm. Great care was taken in 
insulating between adjacent wires. The material was passed 
through thick shellac, and thoroughly dried by a blast of hot air 
before being wound into the ring. The electrical resistance 
between the ends of the iron wire after winding was practically 
that computed from its length and resistivity, thus showing 
that there could be no short circuit between turns. 

It will be seen from equation (2) that when the potentiometer 
circuit is balanced 

L=M,(A-—vB) 


R= My w (B+ v A) 


This was found to be the case in most of the measurements to 
within 3 or 4 per cent which was the limit of precision of the 
measurements. This shows that the true permeability pw is 
unaffected by frequency up to 350,000 cycles, at least over the 
range of H used. In some cases there were quite wide dis- 
crepancies but it is probable that they were due, at least in part, 
to the rise in temperature as suggested by Mr. Alexanderson. 
The observed values of the energy component were uniformly 
low, which suggested that possibly the hysteresis loss per cycle 
might be less at the higher frequencies, when the molecules are 
‘ subjected to such rapid agitation. Such a decrease in hysteresis 

has been suggested by Ewing, Lodge and others. It would be 
interesting to know if Mr. Alexanderson has separated his core 
losses, so that this fact could be determined. 


- 4 


A paper presented at the 26th meeting of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
New York, December 8, 1911, 


Copyright 1911. By A. I.E E, 


METHODS OF VARYING THE SPEED OF 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS* 


BY GUS A. MAIER 


_ Electrical developments of recent years have been toward 
the extension of the use of alternating currents in every field 
where practicable, due to the advantages of distributing sys- 
tems and the simplicity of the induction motor. For constant 
speed work, the field is well covered by the squirrel cage and 
polar wound motors. Various methods have been proposed for 
varying and adjustable speed work and this paper is to discuss 
the methods used and proposed. 


VARYING SPEED 
For varying speed work the following types of motors have 
been used. 


Induction. 
Squirrel cage (resistance control). 
Squirrel cage (compensator control). 
Double squirrel cage with one movable stator. 
Sliding armature. 
Polar wound armature. 


Commutator. 
Repulsion (resistance). 
Repulsion (brush shifting). 


* A number of papers have been written on the individual methods of 
varying the speeds of alternating-current motors. No effort has been 
made to go into details of design or to discuss broadly those subjects 
which have recently been treated. Free use has been made of papers 
and all articles referring to this subject. This paper covers in a general 


way the methods of varying the speeds of alternating-current motors. 


2455 


2456 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


For adjustable speed work the following have been used: 


Induction. 
Pole changing. 
Multispeed Frequency changing. 
Cascade. 
Commutator. 
Shunt repulsion. 
Induction in connection with shunt repulsion. 

Induction Motors. The two principal methods of obtaining 
varying speed with induction motors are, first, primary control 
(varying the stator voltage of a motor having a high resistance 
rotor); and second, by secondary control (varying the rotor 
resistance). The first can be subdivided depending on whether 
the variation in the stator potential is obtained through a com- 
pensator or a resistance in the primary circuit of the motor. 

The starting torque of an induction motor is equal to 


Fer 
K cS ‘) 
Where K =a constant. 


E=applied voltage. 
r,=rotor resistance per phase. 
Z=total impedance. 


The starting current is equal to a 


Z 
The running torque is equal to 
K OLE Se 
[(r,+Sr)?+S? X?J 


Where X =total reactance. 
r=stator resistance per phase. 
s=slip. 


It is thus directly dependent on the rotor resistance, the slip 
and the square of the voltage, and inversely on a function of re- 
sistance, slip and reactance. 

Fig. 1 gives a comparison between the percentages of full- 
load torque and current at various percentages of synchronous 
speed for the two methods of speed variation. For full-load 
torque at starting, 2} times full-load current is taken from the 


" 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2457 


line with resistance control and 1.4 times full load current with 
compensator control. 

A squirrel cage rotor designed for this service is necessarily 
very expensive, as the losses necessary to obtain the reduced 
speeds are all within the machine and, therefore, a large motor is 
‘necessary. Compensator control is complicated and expensive, 
owing to the fact that the compensator coils must be cut out and 

; cannot be short circuited, as is the case with rheostatic control. 
§ The sliding armature control, in which the rotor is displaced 


iT | | ee 
| | eb 
Kk PRIMARY CONTROL 
a Zz WITH 
; 600 RHEOSTAT AND COMPENSATOR |—|— 
: re OST Ag ee a 
| =) 
r on COMPENSATOR —— — — ————~—— 
: = 
i 0400/3 ; i 
-— = 2 
a 5300 4 
; See r 
200 — 
ai ar 
210 EPC CCEee 
ae = 
4 a Pars 
4 0 | _| 2S 
4 w 
4 3300-3 we 1 ical 
° ah >> | 
= mm 
4 ra) JESS 
: < N 
: 9200/2 Sal aese = Ti 
a Sig 
, 5 a) im Sie: mal 
Le *. 
4 ie SI 
E doa Sane 
Ww ea | Sah eee ie 
6 SCLC ECERSSES 
gy 


0 2 30 40 50 60 7 80 90 100 
PER CENT SYNCHRONOUS SPEED © 


Fic. 1 


horizontally with respect to the stator and the double squirrel 
cage with one movable stator have the same limitations and 
characteristics, as noted above. 

The polar wound induction motor with variable rotor re- 
sistance is best adapted to variable speed, as the losses necessary 
to obtain reduced speeds are external to the motor itself. The 
primary current is approximately proportional to the torque, 


full load for full load torque. See Fig. 2. 
The main objection to this type of motor even though the 


* 


2458 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


speed characteristics are satisfactory is the efficiency at reduced 
speed, the efficiency being reduced in direct proportion to the 
reduction in speed. 

By comparing Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, you will note that in curve 
No. 3, the torque per ampere is the same for all three methods 
of control. This is because the total resistance in the polar 
wound rotor circuit, on this point of the controller, is equal to 
the resistance of the high resistance squirrel cage motor. It is of 
further importance to note the very much better inherent speed 


“ 


5 


5 


S 


E 


PER CENT FULL LOAD CURRENT 


So 


QUE 
E 


5 
| 


3 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


~ 
—+ 
r 
4 
| 
4 


PER CENT FULL LOAD TOR 
| 
/ 
ii 
| 
] 
| 


o 
oT 


10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
PER CENT SYNCHRONOUS SPEED 
Fic. 2 


regulation of the polar wound motor over other methods of con- 
trol. 

Referring to Fig. 3 it is important to note the advantages of 
the polar wound equipment as compared with the other two 
methods. The current taken from the line is less, the power 
factor higher and the efficiency high throughout practically the 
entire range. Furthermore, the slip is less; the final slip shown 
by the resistance and compensator control is due to the use of 
high resistance squirrel cage windings. 


Bice 


ae ON Te © Pees 


d 
4 
4 
- 
; 
4 
3 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS. 2459 


Commutator Motors. The operation of single-phase alter- 
nating-current commutator motors can be explained in a simple 
manner by comparison with direct-current commutator machines. 
In each direct-current machine, the torque is developed by the 
resultant of the current flowing in the armature bars and the 
field in quadrature thereto. In case such a motor is supplied 
with alternating current, then also a torque will be exerted. 


300 = at 


s 


AMPERES. 


ENT 


S 
is 
i 
Zz 
m 
fe) 
ie 
nv 
Po) 
m 


3 


2 2 
oO 
am 


zi 
POWER FACTOR | 


> OU 
So 
—t 


eS 


7 Bis 1 
EFFICIENCY | 


EFFICIENCY AND POWER FACTOR 
SS 
jiz 


SP Sh 2S 


S 
eal 


T ls tet Fa 2 es ed 


ls ie 3 
0 10 2 30 40 50 WW 70 80 90 100 
PER CENT SPEED 


Fic. 3 


Due to the alternating nature of the current and voltage, both 
field and armature current will fluctuate, passing through all 
intermediate values between maximum and minimum, and a 
pulsating instead of a constant torque will exist. In case field 
and armature circuit has been connected in series, the variation 
of the instantaneous values of field’ and armature current will 


be in complete time phase and the torque will never reverse; 


2460 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


for a reversal of torque, it being necessary that either the direc- 
tion of the field or the direction of the armature current be 
changed, as is known from direct current practice. The possi- 
bility of driving a direct-current motor with alternating current 
was discovered by Dr. Louis Duncan.* By connecting the 
field and armature circuits in multiple, the torque will be con- 
siderably reduced, the current in both circuits differing in time 
phase, due to the difference of the self inductance of the two 
circuits. Hence, it even can happen that at the moment the 
armature current has just passed through its zero value, the 
torque is reversed. In a direct-current machine from the 
magnetic lines interlinked with the armature conductors, a flux 
will result, which is in quadrature to the field when the brushes 
are standing in the neutral. This flux decreases the perfection 
of the operation by distorting the shape of the main field and 
by inducing in the windings—short circuited under the brushes— 
and e.m.f. of rotation which can give rise to sparking. In 


(4 


Fic. 4 Fie. 5 


modern direct current design, the armature flux usually is 
compensated by a special compensating winding or by interpoles. 
With alternating-current motors such a compensating winding 
is rarely omitted since the armature flux in this case also lowers 
the power factor by inducing a reactive voltage. This will be 
readily understood by considering that in an ordinary induction 
motor, the reactance is nearly exclusively caused by leakage 
lines inside the slots, from teeth to teeth and around the end 
connections, while in a commutator motor, the number of leakage 
lines is largely increased by the flux which finds a path of low 
magnetic reluctance in the field core. By using a cylindrical 
core instead of polar field, the influence of the armature flux is 
increased. The compensation of the armature flux can be ob- 
tained in the same way as the direct-current motors, by con- 
necting the armature and compensating winding in series. 
(Compensation by conduction). See Fig. 4. 


* See Transactions A. I. E. E., 1888, Vol. V, p. 211. 


‘ 
} 
% 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2461 


The compensating winding can be closed upon itself in which 
case the compensation is obtained by induction as shown in 
Fig. 5. Compensation by induction is also possible by con- 
necting field and compensating winding in series, in which case 
the armature current is induced in the short circuited armature, 
Fig. 6. 

With the arrangement according to Fig. 5, the e.m.f. induced 
in the short circuited winding equals the product of current 
times impedance, while in the arrangement according to Fig. 6, 
in addition thereto, there has to be transferred from the com- 
pensating winding into the short circuited armature winding, 
an e.m.f. which is balanced by the e.m-f. generated by rotation of 
the armature conductors in the magnetic field. 

Fig. 6 at the same time represents a type of repulsion motor, 
which, in its original form, as invented by Elihu Thomson in 
1887, has but one stator winding, the axis of which is displaced 
over a certain angle to the axis of the brushes. (Fig. 7). In 


a: 
hoe 


Fic. 6 Fic. 7 Fic. 8 _ 


this case, in order to investigate the operation of the machine, 
we can always replace this single winding by two imaginary 
windings, so as to have the conditions outlined in Fig. 6. 
Instead of providing on the stator both the field and the com- 
pensating winding, as outlined in Fig. 6, the field winding can 
be omitted if we place on the armature two brushes in quadrature 
to the short circuited brushes, and connect the compensating 
winding in series with the brushes, which may be called field 
brushes. (See Fig. 8.) 
This arrangement covers the principle of the compensated 
repulsion motor, which was invented by Winter and Eichberg 
in Germany, and La Tour in France. In any motor, in which 
the armature flux is compensated by induction, the compensating 
winding and armature winding act as the primary and secondary 
of a transformer. Hence, as in any transformer, a flux lagging 
over 90 deg. in time phase behind the primary energy current 


| Sa) a 


2462 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 ~ 


will exist. This flux, which may be called “ cross flux’ can be 
made effective in improving the commutation of the armature 
current. In the compensated repulsion motor, apart from this 
effect, the cross flux generates an e.m.f. of rotation which 
compensates the self induction of the armature field circuit and 
also of the stator winding when connected in series to the arma- 
ture field winding. When bearing in mind that between the 
brushes of a revolving armature, only an e.m.f. of rotation can be 
induced by a field winding, the axis of which is standing in 
quadrature thereto, and that this e.m.f. will always be in time 
phase with the field current in which the armature is rotating, 
it will be understood that between the exciting brushes only the 
cross flux interlinked with the compensating winding can induce 
an e.m.f. of rotation, and that between the short circuited energy 
brushes, only the flux interlinked with the armature field winding 
can induce an e.m.f. of rotation. Apart from the above out- 
lined improvement, resulting from the introduction of field 
brushes on the commutator, the compensated repulsion motor 
does not differ from the other mentioned types of single-phase 
commutator machine. 

To supply a motor with energy current, counter e.m.fs. have 


to be overcome. Of these, there are both useful and harmful. — 


Of the useful there is chiefly the back e.m.f. induced in the rotor 
by rotation in the motor field, for the motor output is propor- 
tional to the product of this e.m.f. and the energy current. 
On the other hand, the counter e.m.f. of self induction of the 
rotor winding is injurious and can practically prevent any ap- 
preciable energy current flowing. It is, therefore, necessary to 
neutralize the inductance of the rotor winding along the brush 
axis and reduce the inductive pressure to a minimum. This is 
accomplished by means of a compensating winding on the stator, 
the axis of which is arranged along the brush axis. The winding 
is traversed by the rotor current or current proportional to this 
and serves to neutralize the armature field, the effective ampere 
turns being adjusted to secure this result. Thus we see that the 
compensating winding is an essential part of the commutator 
motor and the same can be either a separate winding or combined 
with the exciting winding. 

Hence, in regard to speed control, the motors covered by 


Fig. 4. to Fig. 8 can all be considered as direct current series, 


and the method used for speed regulation of the same.can be 
applied, | 


nS 


ek Se 
\ 


Th ee ee eee 


\ 


s 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2463 


PRIMARY VOLTAGE CONTROL 


Assuming constant torque, in which case the current has to 
be constant, the e.m.f. induced between the armature energy 
brushes will increase in the same ratio as the speed. Hence, 
since the requirement has to be fulfilled, that the voltage applied 
to the armature (either by conduction or induction), be equal to 
the resistance drop and the e.m.f. of rotation; the voltage applied 
to the terminals has to be raised in order to reach this condition. 
By connecting the terminals of the motor covered by Figs. 4 
to 8 to a transformer with variable taps or to an induction 
regulator, the applied voltage can -be changed and the speed 
regulation obtained. The principle has been demonstrated 
in Fig. 9, for compensated series motor according to Fig. 4. 


PRIMARY RESISTANCE CONTROL 


Instead of using a transformer with variable ratio of trans- 
formation, the reduction of the voltage can also be obtained 


TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 9 Fie. 10 


by inserting resistance between the line and the motor terminals. 
This method is less efficient than the former, however, due to 
simplicity of the required control apparatus, can be used for 
small units and control during short periods. 


FIELD CONTROL 

By connecting in parallel to the field variable resistance or by 
connecting the field to the secondary of the series transformer 
with variable taps, the ratio of field current to armature current 
can be changed and thus, the speed of the motor would be 
- regulated. 
ARMATURE VOLTAGE CONTROL 

This method is in principle the same as the methods described 
under the heading ‘‘ Primary Voltage Control ”’ the only dif- 
ference being that the armature is directly connected to the 
secondary of a transformer, which is laying in series with the field 
winding. (See Fig. 10.) 


2464 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


BRUSH SHIFTING 


The brush shifting commutator motor is built both single and 
three-phase. On account of simplicity, the single-phase will be 
described. 

The single-phase motor of this type is known as the Deri 
type or modification thereof, and is used for hoists, railway work, 
and in fact, such places where a motor with series characteristics 
is applicable. 

The torque of a motor depends on the diameter and axial 
length of its rotor, on the number of conductors, the current 
and the field. The torque is commonly varied by variations 
in the current and field strength, but in the type of repulsion 
motor provided with brush displacement gear, it is also possible . 
to vary the ratio of active field conductors to active rotor con- 
ductors. 

By shifting the brushes out of the neutral, that is, by reducing 


A Z =a 
B.S. 
1/ 
A.T.ARM | A.T.FIELD FNM 
Pé 
1 A.T. MAX, Se 
1 
vf 
| B.S. 


Fic. 11 Fic. 12 Fic. 13 


the number of active conductors in which an e.m-f. is induced 
by rotation with the same field strength, the speed has to be 
increased in order to induce the same e.m.f. of rotation which 
again has to balance the energy voltage. 

In regard to brush shifting, special reference should be made 
to the motor according to Fig. 7, and which again has been 
represented in Fig. 11. 

If the line of the brushes makes an angle A with the axis of the 
main winding and A Tmaz represents the total magnetomotive 
force yielded by this winding, then we can resolve A Tmaz into 
two components, one A Tarm being along the line of the brushes 
and A Tye at.right angles to this line. By shifting the brushes, 
we increase one of the components and simultaneously decrease 
the other. There are two positions in which the torque vanishes, 
that is, for A equals zero, in which case the field is zero, and for A 
equals 90 degs., in which case the armature current is zero. In 
case A equals 20 to 30 degs., the torque will be maximum. 


AS Cree a ee 
, 


, 
_ 
7 
; 


\ 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2465 


Since the motor, according to Figs. 7 and 11, is very sensitive 
in regard to the position of the brushes, an arrangement has been 
made for reducing the effect resulting from a certain displace- 
ment of the brushes. 

Fig. 12 represents this arrangement for the Deri motor, 
which has four brushes for two poles, two of which are stationary 
(Bs1 and Bs2) and two movable (Bm1 and Bm2). Assuming 
that the position in which the line of the brushes Bm1, Bm2 
falls along the line of the brushes, Bs1, Bs2 corresponds to a 
certain speed, then after the brushes have been shifted over an 
angle 2A, according to Fig. 12, the axis of the armature will 
have been shifted over an angle 1A only. 

LaTour has proposed a scheme also with four brushes for two 
poles, which, however, in this case are moved simultaneously, 
keeping the same relative position to each other. In this case, 
a part of the armature, 1.e., the conductors between the brushes, 
Bs1 and Bm2 are always ineffective in regard to generation of 
e.m.f., whereas with the Deri motor, this part is ineffective at 
certain speeds only. The advantage of the arrangement 
according to LaTour is that the brushes are standing in such a 
position that less trouble is caused by induction of an e.m.f., 
which affects the commutation of the short circuited coils under 
the brushes. 

* The importance of the brush shifting motor warrants further 
consideration and we may consider the theory of operation ina 
different manner. Let us suppose the rotor winding replaced 
by two equivalent windings, which are in space quadrature, 
and which, while independent of each other magnetically, 
must be regarded as electrically connected in series. (See 
Fig. 13.) 

The magnetic axis of one winding is coincident with the axis 
of the stator poles, while the axis of the other winding is in space 
quadrature with the stator poles. The first winding alone is 
subject to the inductive action of the stator flux and plays the 
part of the secondary of a transformer, of which the stator wind- 
ing forms the primary. This winding will be called the trans- 
former winding—the secondary winding may be termed the 
quadrature winding. Any flux produced by the current in the 
quadrature winding will be in time phase with the current in the 
transformer winding and will produce accelerating torque at 


the rotor. 
* See the Electrician, London, January 3, 1908. 


2466 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


Figs. 14, 15 and 16 indicate three positions of the brushes and 
show the equivalent connection for the transformer and quadra- 
ture windings on the motor. Both when the axes are together 
and when they are separated by 180 space degrees, the torque 
‘is zero. In the former case, the transformer effect is zero, while 
in the latter case, there is no quadrature effect. 

Under speed conditions, there are produced two e.m.fs., 
which affect the value of the secondary current, and therefore, 
alter the torque, which for each position of the brushes varies 
directly with the square of the current in the armature. One 
e.m.f. appears at the transformer axis and the other at the quad- 
rature axis—the former is proportional to the product of the 
speed and the quadrature flux, and the latter varies directly with 
the product of the speed and the transformer flux, these two 
e.m.fs. have such values and time-place position as to tend to 
decrease the armature current with increase of speed. 


With constant primary voltage at any given speed, the 
current and torque can be varied over a wide range by merely. 
shifting the brushes, as explained above. 

It will be seen from the above that the machine possesses the 
speed, current and speed torque characteristics of the direct- 
current series motor. 

In general it can be said that a motor laid out for brush shift 
has to be built of larger size than one with stationary brushes. 
Considering that the ratio of the cost of the control apparatus 
to the cost of the motor is, with certain exceptions, smaller in 
proportion for large motors than for smaller ones, it would. 
appear that the necessity of increasing the size of the motor— 
in case brush shifting be used, for small motor applications, less 
increase in the total-cost of the equipment than by using con=. 
trollers and transformers. =p 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2467 


MULTISPEED* 


The induction motor as usually spoken of is primarily a 
constant speed motor.. Where variable speed is required a 
motor with collector rings is used, the speed variation being 
produced by varying the amount of resistance in the secondary 
circuit. 

Many times it so happens that two or three speeds will be 
satisfactory for the operation of the machinery and these speeds 
must be independent of the load. Under such conditions, multi- 
speed motors can frequently be used. 

In these motors the different synchronous speeds are produced 
by changing the number of poles in the magnetic circuit. Each 
of these speeds is fixed, if no resistance is used in the secondary 
circuit. With multispeed motors, as with single speed motors, 
resistance may be used in the secondary circuit for varying the 
speed. 

A change in the number of poles may be produced in any one 
of the following ways: 

1. By the use of single magnetic and electric circuits, changing 
the number of poles by regrouping the coils. 

2. By the use of single magnetic circuits and independent 
electric circuits. 

3. By means of separate magnetic and electric circuits. 

1. Single Magnetic and Electric Circuits. Where two speeds 
only are required and those of ratio 2:1, the motor with single 
magnetic and electric circuit is admirably adapted, due to eco- 
nomical use of material, all of which is active at both speeds and 
simplicity of pole changing, six leads only being required for two 
or three-phase motor. For any ratios other than 2:1, the switch- 
ing and wiring becomes more or less complicated, the ordinary 
three-phase winding requiring 33 leads and two-phase requiring 
16 leads. 

2. Single Magnetic and I ndependent Electric Circuits. Where 
speed ratios other than 2:1 are required it is much more practi- 
cable to use independent electric circuits. . These motors, having 
independent windings, have three leads for each speed in the 
stator for three-phase motors and four for two-phase. motors... 

Theoretically, it is possible to obtain a number of different 
speeds, but is usually impracticable to use more than. two wind- 
ings. 

* Gee Transactions A. I. E. E., 1908. Articles by H. G. Reist and 
H. Maxwell and. H. C. Specht. 


“a 


2468 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 ; 


Obviously, it is possible to combine 1 and 2, thereby obtaining 
four speeds requiring twelve leads for a two or three-phase motor. 

In a motor with 2:1 speed ratio, using single magnetic and 
electric circuits, the material is used to the best advantage when 
the output at low speed is approximately one half of that at the 
high speed. It is possible, however, to vary the output at the 
low speed over a wide range depending upon the connections 
employed in the primary. 


Speed Connection Approx. max. output | 

| 
(1) 100 2 circuit delta 100 
50 Y delta 11 
(2) 100 2 circuit Y 100 
50 1 circuit Y 22 
(3) 100 2 circuit Y 100 
50 1 circuit delta 66 
(4) 100 1 circuit delta 100 
50 2 circuit Y 117 
(5) 100 1 circuit Y 100 
50 2 circuit Y 350 
(6) 100 Y delta 100 
50 2 circuit delta 700 


From this table it will be seen that there is a wide range of 
choice of outputs. These combinations are often valuable in 
order to maintain good efficiency and power factor at the de- 
sired loads. 

Motors of this type are adapted for driving machine tools, 
printing presses (certain cases only), pumps, blowers, etc. 

3. Separate Magnetic and Electric Circuits, (Cascade). Multi- 
speed motors as referred to under (1) and (2) become objec- 
tionable in the larger sizes, especially where it is desirable to 
change speeds frequently, or it is objectionable to open the pri- 
mary circuit. 

Where two- or three-speed motors of very low speed are 
required, two motors operating in concatenation should be used 
since the ratio of the diameter to the length of-the changeable 
pole motor becomes very great, resulting in excessively heavy 
construction to secure the necessary, rigidity, and high costs. 
With the concatenated set, one motor operates alone to obtain 
either of the high speeds and the two motors operating in 
concatenation for the low speed. These sets are also designed 
for operation at variable speed in addition to the fixed speeds. 

For the concatenated connection, they are generally of the 


~ ih alles 


Var. io 
fete » bal 


: 
“4 
3 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2469 


polar wound type, although the last motor of the set may be of 
the squirrel cage construction. The rotors are usually mounted 
on the same shaft, making a two unit set. The primary of the 
first motor is connected to the source of supply at its secondary 
to the primary of the second motor, as shown in Fig. 17. 
Considering two single-speed motors to comprise the set, the 
maximum number of speeds (not including resistance steps) 
obtainable is four, two of which consist of either motor with its 
primary connected to the line and secondary short circuited, the 
other two being obtained by direct and differential concatenation. 
Two motors are connected in direct concatenation, if they have 
a tendency to start in the same direction and differential con- 
eatenation, if they tend to start in opposite directions. 


S, 
REGULATING JOR STARTING 


Coe oe 


Synchronous speed of motors in concatenation is as follows: 


Cycles X120 


_ Speed = PEP! 


P,=poles motor A. 
_ P2=poles motor ie 
Plus sign to be used when motors are in direct concatenation 
and minus when in differential concatenation. 

Where more speeds are required, it is possible to use three 
motors, but the cost becomes prohibitive and switching com- 
plicated. A much better and cheaper proposition is to use one or 
two, two-speed motors, depending on the number of speeds 
required. ; 

The operation and control of the cascade set is simple, espe- 
cially for direct: concatenation. 

With the multispeed (pole changing) motor in changing from 
one speed to the other, it is necessary to open the primary 
circuit; this may be obviated in the cascade sets by introducing 


2470 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS {Dec. 8 


resistance in the leads between motors A and B, this resistance 
to be cut in or out step by step, in changing from one speed to 
the other. Fig. 18. 

In the concatenated motor, speed raduees somewhat as fol- 
lows: With the polar wound single-speed motor, the reduction 
in speed is accomplished by reduction in efficiency, the power 
factor remaining constant. In the concatenated motor, the 
efficiency will remain approximately constant, but the power 
factor goes down as the speed is decreased. This low power 
factor is due to the fact that the motors are underloaded when 
run in concatenation, as compared with normal rating, as in- 
dividual motors. 

Recently there has been brought out in England, the Hunt 
or internal concatenated motor. The machine is a modified 
form of the ‘‘ cascade”? motor, having two magnetic field 
systems, superimposed upon one another in the same core body. 


Fic. 18 


The second field has its origin in the rotor and consequently 
induces secondary currents in the stator windings. (See Fig. 19). 

The motor can be laid out for cascade speeds of 12, 18, 24 
poles, z.e., numbers divisible by six, the lowest number of poles 
being 12. A motor having a smaller number of poles is not 
satisfactory, as the resultant magnetic field is not symmetrical. 

Considering an eight-pole stator winding with taps brought 
out in such places that the winding can be made responsive to 
a four pole field. The motor has a winding which gives the effect 
of an eight-pole and four-pole winding in series. The motor 
can operate either in cascade with a speed corresponding to 
12 poles or as an eight-pole motor. In order to obtain three 
effective speeds, a change over switch is necessary in the stator 
circuit. This enables the connections to be changed so that 
the primary currents may produce either an eight-pole or a four- 
pole magnetic field. 


wie 8 a 


: 
& 
E 


1911] : MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2471 


The arrangement of the windings are such that if the slip 
rings are short circuited, the currents induced in the rotor give 
only one number of poles, and the machine under these condi- 
tions behaves exactly like an ordinary slip ring motor. 

When the slip rings are open circuited, a small number of the 
rotor conductors become inoperative and the currents in the 
rotors then produce two number of poles, the second of which 
acts upon the stator and causes the motor to run at cascade speed. 

Although no figures are available, it appears possible with Mr.. 


JUCduy 


SHORT CIRCUIT SWITCH 
FOR 12 POLE SPEED 


STATOR 
WINDING 


ROTOR 
WINDING 
STARTING RHEOSTAT 
FOR 8 AND 12 POLE SPEEDS 


Fic. 19.—Hunts 2-speed motor for continuous service 


Hunt’s methods to design a cheaper two-speed motor than the 
ordinary collector ring type with two primary and two secondary 
windings. On account of the whole winding being used all the 
time, this type of motor ought to have a better efficiency and 
power factor than a double-wound motor. 

With this construction, it seems possible to obtain a motor of 
smaller size and cost with better constants than a two-speed 
collector ring motor or cascade set. Continuous acceleration 


is possible by means of rheostats without opening the main 


circuit. 


2472 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


FREQUENCY CHANGERS 


For adjustable speed work, where a large number of speeds 
are not required and frequent changes not necessary, a simple 
method may be used, 7.e., by using a frequency changer set, 
consisting of an alternating-current motor and required number 
of generators for the various frequencies. 

This system is objectionable on account of high cost and large 
speed steps. It is also impracticable to change speeds while 
running. The efficiency of the source or surrty 
combined outfit is comparatively 
low. —— 

Where direct current is avail- 
able, a simple method may be 
employed affording easy methods 
of control while running. Speed 


. A.C, MOTOR GENERATORS MOTOR 
changes are obtained by chang- 12 POLE 10 POLE 8 POLE 
ing the primary frequency ap- Fic. 20 


plied to the driving motor oper- 
ating as an ordinary induction motor. 

By far the simplest method is to use a direct-current motor 
driving an alternator and by varying the speed, the frequency 
and voltage delivered by the alternator is in direct proportion 
to variations in speed. 

In this case it is necessary for the units of the set to be of 
sufficient capacity to take care of driving motor C. 

Another method of accomplishing the same result, is to use an 


M1 


D.C. MOTOR GENERATOR DRIVING MOTOR D.C,MOTOR IND. MOTOR DRIVING MOTOR 
A B Cc n B c 
Fic. 21 Fic. 22 


induction motor in place of generator B and using the secondary 


of motor B, as the source of supply for motor C. (See Fig. 22.) 


The primary of the induction motor B is connected to the 
alternating current source of supply and the speed of the set is 
controlled by the direct-current motor. The secondary of motor 
B supplies power to the motor C operating at variable speeds. 

When the frequency changer set is running at a speed cor- 
responding to the synchronous speed of motor B, the frequency 


1 


Son 


4 
V 
3 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2473 


in the motor is zero. The frequency at any other speed may be 
determined as follows: 


Cec. CGY) 

C =frequency in rotor B. 

C,=frequency source of power motor Be 

-N =synchronous speed motor B. 

N,=speed of frequency changer set. 

The minus sign in the above formula becomes plus when the 
set is running in the opposite direction to the normal operation 
of motor B. 

The voltage in the rotor B is the ratio of primary turns to 
secondary turns (neglecting losses in air gap), and varies directly 
as the frequency. 

It is obvious that it can only be used for constant torque work 
with limited speed range, otherwise the costs which are already 
high become prohibitive. The direct-current motor A supplies 
only a fraction of the power supplied the motor C, depending 
upon the speed range. 

Motor B must be of the same capacity as C. Motor A runs 
as a generator when the frequency set runs in the same direction 
as normal operation of motor B, as motor when running in the 
opposite direction. 

A number of systems have been proposed involving more or 
less complicated and expensive features. 

Another quite simple system has been proposed—differing 
from those previously referred to—in which the primary of the 
driving motor is connected to the power circuit of constant 
frequency, speed control being obtained by impressing different 
frequencies on the secondary winding of the motor. By supply- 
ing to the secondary of the driving motor, a variable frequency, 
and to the primary a constant frequency, the motor must run at 
speeds corresponding to the sum or difference of the primary and 
secondary frequencies. It is well known that the speed of an 
induction motor corresponds to the difference of primary and 

secondary frequencies. By supplying the secondary with a 
variable frequency, speed changes may be obtained correspond- 
ing to the resultant: of two frequencies in the rotor, the ‘one 
produced by the rotating field and the other from some outside 


source, 


2474 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


There are, however, a number of cases where a multispeed 
motor is not satisfactory since it does not give sufficient number 
of steps and there has been felt a real need for an alternating- 
current motor with shunt characteristics. In fact, the matter 
is very important, since the absence of such a motor often ne- 
cessitates the application of direct-current apparatus, even if 
only a few adjustable speed motors are required and all other 
conditions would warrant the use of polyphase or single-phase 
alternating-current motors. Hence, the problem is not to 
obtain a motor which is better and more efficient than the 
direct-current adjustable speed motor, but the first step and at 
present, the most important, is to obtain an adjustable speed 
motor, no matter whether it be a little inferior in characteristics 
to a direct-current motor, in order to help us out in the above 
case and all schemes which are to be described in the following, 
have to be judged in this light. 

Considerable work has already been done in this country for 


TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 23 Fic. 24 


the adjustable speed, single-phase motor.* In order to outline 
the theory of this interesting type of motor, we may refer to the 
compensating repulsion motor as covered by Fig. 8, and see 
what is happening when this motor is running at synchronous 
speed. We assume the motor has a cylindrical core without 
salient poles, in which case the mutual inductive impedance is 
equal, in all directions. Neglecting the self inductive reactance 
of both circuits, it is apparent that at synchronism the current 
flowing between the exciting brushes has to be equal and 90 degs. 
displaced in time phase to the magnetizing current flowing 
in the compensating windings (reduced to the armature circuit). 
Otherwise the requirement would not be fulfilled that the e.m.f. 
of transformation be balanced by the e.m.f. of rotation: 

In the circuit between the field brushes, a similar condition 

* See articles TRANsacTIONS A. I. E. E., 1909, Vol. XXVIII, page 475 


by F. Creedy, 1909 by E. F. Alexanderson, Vol. XXVIII, page 511 and 
paper by W. A. Layman, May 1911, National Electric Light Association, 


é a 


A bar idcan te ob Mice Wehr ee * 


; 
3 
4 
f 
4 
j 
as 
; 
4 


TOV ee MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2475 


exists. The current flowing from brush to brush induces a 
reactive voltage, which at synchronous speed is completely 
balanced by the e.m.f. induced by a rotation through the cross 
flux interlinked with the compensating windings. Hence, at 
synchronism, in order to obtain a current which will be in time 
phase with the energy current, we have merely to apply a voltage 
to the brushes of the same time phase as the voltage applied to 
the energy circuit and which has only to compensate the IR 
drop in the exciting armature circuit. 

This has been done in Fig. 23 by means of a transformer. 
The stator proper can also be used as a transformer for supply- 
ing this voltage, if a second winding has been provided on the 
same, as shown in Fig. 24, or by equipping the compensating 
winding with suitable taps, so as to use it as an auto transformer. 
In this way we have obtained a shunt motor which will run at 
constant speed. It can be started as a series motor in the con- 
nection shown in Fig. 8. 


TRANSFORMER 


Les, 43) Fic. 26 


Fig. 25 represents a compound motor. If the switch is opened, 
then only half the armature works as field winding, and in this 
way the motor can be started as a series motor. When up to 
speed, the switch can be closed and the other half of the armature 
will receive shunt excitation. 

In order to make out of the motor, according to Fig. 23, one 
which shall give equally good characteristics, at speeds differing 
from synchronous speed, we have to open the short circuit of the 
energy brushes and apply voltage to the same. This has been 
shown diagramatically in Fig. 26. 

Suppose we apply to the energy brushes a voltage which is 
equal and in time phase with the voltage formerly induced 
between the short circuited brushes by transformation. If we 


further increase the current between the exciting brushes 


414 per cent and also the speed 41} per cent, then it is clear that 
the e.m.f. of rotation induced between the energy brushes, 
which is proportional to both the field strength and the speed, 


> 


Bi 


2476 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


will be increased 100 per cent, and will balance the voltage of the 
energy circuit, which is the sum of the applied and the voltage 
induced by transformation. But also the voltage in the exciting 
circuit will be balanced. The reactive voltage being increased 
over 414 per cent, due to the increase of current and the voltage 
induced by rotation also being increased over 413 per cent, since 
the speed has only been changed and not the field interlinked with 
the compensating winding, which induces the e.m.f. of rotation 
between these brushes. By thus properly choosing the voltage 
applied to the two different sets of brushes, it is possible to obtain 
different speeds, both above and below synchronism. Of course, 
it is again possible to omit the transformer by using the stator 
for this purpose. 

Analytically, the conditions for equilibrium can be investi- 
gated in the following manner. 
Let: 


Efa= voltage applied to field brushes. 

E,j=voltage induced by transformation between the field 
; brushes. 

Eyr = voltage induced by rotation between the field brushes. 
I +=current and field circuit. 

Ea=x Eau=voltage applied to energy brushes. 
Eu=voltage induced by transformation between the energy 
brushes. 

Eer= voltage induced by rotation between energy brushes. 
In=magnetizing current in the compensating winding. 
n=speed. 

nyo=synchronous speed. 

Z=mutual inductive impedance. 


Then at standstill we have in the field circuit, e.m.f. consumed 
by mutual inductive impedance: 


Efa=TZ 


And for the energy circuit we have e.m.f. consumed by mutual 
inductive impedance: 


Ea= In Z 


At a speed n, we have in the energy circuit to meet the require- 
ment that the voltage applied to the brushes has to be equal 


we have 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2477 
. e 

E to the voltage consumed by mutual inductive impedance and 
by the e.m-f. of rotation. Hence, 

3 Ees=Im Z4j3—— LZ 

, . . Ny 

3 

If further 

: 3 

a Treg = Le 

; Then since 

- 

a 

: Eat 3 i m Z ’ 


t In Z=In Z+j — 1-2 
, In Z+I | ! 


This is only possible if 
L, =F Y I m 


or 


For the field circuit we have, that the applied voltage has to 
be equal to the sum of the voltages consumed by the e.m.fs. 


of transformation and rotation, 4.€.1 


oo 
Ep= 1p Z—j—,— Im 4, 


or since 


L=jyIm 
we have 


: is 
Efa ad Z fe Pe y) 


rae Se i Fs yh re: Mey 4 Ba: ee - Oe Oya ty 
=. x : 


ar ate ee eon; ke . . ‘iy +S = i ‘ _ Jk Aint) oy 
2478 = MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS __[Dec. 8 
- . ae: 


Neglecting the resistance of the field winding the requirements _ 
for the equilibrium of the e.m.f. in the field winding should be — 


En=0 
or 
tat ln 
» No 
Substituted in 
x=1-y Me 
gives 
2 
x=1— ( _ ) 
no 
or 


For » =1415 
mo=1000 
We would find 


or 

Fea = Ees, 

and 
oRIBN cite Bee = 
L=J [999 In =I 1.415 In x 


We thus arrive at the same result as above.* — 


*See Electro Technische Zeisabrels 1908, page 588 ‘and - pages 
[Eichberg.]} 


x 


=. - ww 


b 6 2 ole as ee ee 


A eee ee a NP ee eRe 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2479 


The above outlined method is a combination of armature and 


field control. With armature control carried out in a different 


way, the same result can be obtained. Let us suppose we apply 
to the compensating winding, 70 per cent of the voltage originally 
applied to the same, and impress on the energy brushes this very 
same voltage. Then apart from magnetic saturation conditions, 
the cross flux interlinked with the exciting current of the com- 
pensating winding will be reduced to 70 per cent of its original 


TRANSFORMER 


iniKes Pav 


value. If now again the speed increases 411 per cent, then the 
conditions for equilibrium have been obtained. The current in 
the exciting windings will be unchanged since the e.m.f. of 
rotation is the same as before, the speed being increased 414 per 
cent and the field strength being reduced to 70 per cent of its 
original value. Neither in this case do we need a transformer 
if we provide the stator with steps. 

In Fig. 27 a diagram of connections is demonstrated for a 


TRANSFORMER 


Fic. 28 


motor, which, in this connection will run at synchronous speed 
and 40 per cent above synchronous speed when connected ac- 
cording to Fig. 28. For matter of simplicity it has been assumed 
that both the armature and compensating winding have the 
same number of effective turns, in the connection of Fig. 27. 
In case we use armature control without providing special 


2480 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


means for balancing the exciting circuit, also, speed regulation 
can be obtained. Then, however, the current in the exciting 
winding will be larger, due to a wattless component which does 
not contribute to the torque. 

As long as this wattless component does not become excessive, 
so as to cause sparking, its presence is not objectionable. 

Another interesting type of motor has been described by Mr. 
Alexanderson in the paper referred to above. With one of the 
two described motors, he uses field control and he has developed 
his method in such a way that it directly can be applied to the 
compensated repulsion motor. Instead of obtaining the equi- 
librium in the field and energy circuits by the methods described 
above, he makes use of the fact that the voltage appearing at the 
terminals of the exciting winding arranged on the stator in 
quadrature to the compensating winding is 90 degs. out of time 
phase with the line voltage and consequently in time phase 
with the e.m.f. induced between the 
field brushes by rotation through the 
cross flux. This voltage, after having 
been stepped up or down by means 
of a regulating transformer, is intro- 
duced between the field brushes and 
thus regulating the current in the 
field winding, the speed can be varied. 

The variable speed motor described 
by Mr. Layman in his paper is in 
principle a combination of the different types which have been 
described above and for further reference we may refer to his 
paper. 

Of course, in case of a motor with series characteristics it is 
also possible to impress voltage on the energy brushes and obtain, 
in this way, speed regulation. The methods follow directly 
from what has been explained in regard to the shunt motor. 


Fic. 29 


_ PoLypHasE CoMMUTATOR MACHINES 


The polyphase commutator motor has a fixed winding con- 
sisting of a number of coil groups, corresponding with the 
number of phases, just like the stator of an ordinary induction 
motor, these groups of coils being displaced in space by an angle 
corresponding to the displacement of the several phases from 
one another; thus in a three-phase winding, they are separated 
by 120 deg. The revolving part of the motor is wound like a 


Ae Ae ee ee 


E 
: 
4 
‘a 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2481 


continuous current machine and provided with a commutator. 
The field of a polyphase commutator motor is produced by the 
exciting winding, which is fed by a current or pressure. If the 
energy current of a motor is used as exciting current, the rotary 
field produced will not be constant, but will depend on the output 
of the motor. Thus, if the exciting winding E, Fig. 30 is con- 
nected in series with the energy winding the motor will have series 
characteristics, the speed being a function of the torque. On 
the other hand, if the exciting winding E is fed from a constant 
voltage, Fig. 32, the field will be constant, independent of the 
load. This motor possesses a shunt characteristic and runs at 
approximately constant speed. In addition to these, combina- 
tions can also be made to give compound characteristics. 
Figs. 30 to 33 show arrangements of winding of three-phase 


motor. 


BS 


Ss i 
er 
\ id : 


Series motor with Series motor with Shunt motor with Shunt motor com- 


separate exciting combined exciting separate exciting bined exciting and 
winding and compensating winding compensating 
winding winding 


Fic. 30 Fic. 31 Fic. 32 Fic. 33 
2 Three-phase commutator motors 


The difficulty of regulating the speed of induction motors 
hitherto was that no means were. known whereby the low fre- 
quency of the rotor currents could be transformed to that of the 
mains. It was only the knowledge that the commutator always 
transformed the slip frequency to that of the motor field, thus 
to that of the supply—that made this possible, for, since the 
commutator can be directly connected to the network, energy 
can be given or taken, according to the conditions. 

It has been shown that the three-phase commutator motor of 
moderate size and designed for moderate frequencies has been 
employed extensively in such cases where speed variation over a 
wide range and shunt characteristics are required. The design 
of the three-phase commutator motor meets, however, with 
difficulties if larger sizes or higher frequencies are required. The 
commutation becomes poor and costs high. 


2482 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


KRAEMER SYSTEM* 


Previous to the introduction of the commutator motor, it 
was necessary to sacrifice efficiency for regulation, the imperfect 
method of inserting resistance in the rotor circuit being used. 

It was a happy thought that led Kraemer to supply only that 
power to the commutator motor which would otherwise be con- 
sumed in the rotor resistances. (See Fig. 34.) 

In this system the commutator machine is direct connected 
to the shaft of the main motor and the energy 
furnished by the slip rings of the main motor 
is returned as mechanical energy to the shaft, 
instead of being absorbed in resistance. This 
arrangement is of advantage in cases where a 
constant h.p. motor is required because the 
torque of the machine, which is proportional to the slip, is 
added to the torque of the main motor. 

The slip energy of the induction motor can also be recovered 
by the application of a rotary converter. This equipment has 
the disadvantage of greater complication and also special source 
of -direct current. (See Fig. 35). 

Referring to Fig. 35, the slip rings of the main motor are con- 
nected to a rotary converter, the direct current side of which 


Fic. 34 


IND. MOTOR 


SEPARATE D.C. EXCITER 
ROTARY 


Fic. 35 


feeds a direct-current shunt motor, the latter being connected 
mechanically to the main motor shaft. The speed is regulated 
by varying the field of the direct-current motor. When the 
resistance is cut out, the armature voltage and the direct current 
voltage of the converter will increase. N ecessarily the alter- 
nating current voltage will increase also, thus the speed of the 
_ main motor will decrease. For wide ranges of regulation, this 
system is particularly applicable, as the, design of the rotary 


* See the Electrician (London), August, 1910. 


le head 


Na Bes ho ee ie ee, “i 


: 
| 


1911] MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS 2483 


converter is practically independent of the speed reduction re- 
quired. 
SCHERBIUS 

Speed regulation has been worked out in a slightly different 
manner by Scherbius, employing a polyphase commutator motor. 

With reference to Fig. 36, a three-phase commutator motor 
(regulating motor) is connected to the slip rings of an induction 
motor. The regulating motor drives a generator which again 
delivers electrical energy to the line, or a regulating motor is 
direct connected or belted to the main load. Whether the slip 
energy of a main motor should be recovered as electrical or 
mechanical energy depends upon the nature and condition of the 
motor application. By adjusting the excitation of the regulating 
motors, speed variation of the main motor is obtained, as the 
slip of an induction motor is proportional to the secondary 
voltage. The speed of the regulating motor remains constant 


COM. MOTOR IND, MOTOR 
REGULATING SET 


IND, MOTOR 


Fie. 36 


between no load and full load. The speed depends upon the 


excitation only, the armature voltage being practically the same 
as the rotor voltage of the induction motor. Ordinarily the 
commutator motor has shunt windings. Where a flywheel 
is used, series or compound windings are used; the speed will 
then drop over a certain adjustable range and use be made of 
the kinetic energy of the flywheel. It should be mentioned 
that by reversing the direction of the excitation, the regulation 
can be extended over synchronous speed (special exciter re- 
quired) the regulating motor becoming a generator and delivering 
the slip energy instead of receiving it. The commutator motor 
can be designed so that it delivers wattless current and thus 
improves the power factor of the whole installation. 

The use of an independent regulating set has the advantage 
that the commutator machine can be designed for an economical 
speed and in this way becomes a cheaper proposition. 

Very considerable progress has been made of the use of the 


2484 MAIER: SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


alternating current. commutator motor in Europe. The brush 
shifting motor as originally developed was a single-phase motor 
and is now being built three-phase. The simplest arrangement 
for three-phase operation is to use two single-phase motors using 
the T connection. 

Various modifications of the Kraemer and Scherbius systems 
have been used showing excellent results as to regulation and 
economy of operation. 


— 


7 =, 


in > 


F 
, 
Z 
- 
; 
3 


1912] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2485 


Discussion ON ‘“‘ METHODS OF VARYING THE SPEED OF 
ALTERNATING-CURRENT Morors. (Mater) New York, 
DEcEMBER 8, 1911. 


H.W. Buck: There is a popular idea that alternating-current 
motors can be used only where constant speed is allowable, and 
that where variable speed is required it is necessary to convert 
the alternating current into direct current and obtain in this way 
the flexible speed variation through direct-current motors. 

Recent developments in this country and abroad in variable 
speed alternating-current motors, which have not as yet been 
extensively applied commercially, afford means for many indus- 
trial purposes of variable speed control almost as flexible as that 
obtainable with direct-current machinery. 

The variable speed alternating-current motor is a very impor- 
tant field for development work and a paper like this of Mr. Maier 
which points out the direction in which the development is tak- 
ing place, is of great value. 

Mr. Maier’s paper is an excellent resume of the art as it stands 
to-day and should be suggestive and instructive to those inter- 


ested in this branch of electrical engineering. 


R. N. Dickinson: I ask Mr. Buck if the developments he 
speaks of are in multiphase machines or single-phase machines? 

H. W. Buck: In both. 

W.N. Smith: I will ask a question which perhaps Mr. Maier 
or some of the manufacturers represented here can answer. Take 
the case of a large outfit of motors to drive machine tools in 
shops such as you have in a locomotive repair shop, or in one 
of the larger industrial plants. Which of the systems mentioned 
in the paper this evening have actually been tried on a commer- 
cial scale at the present time, and found satisfactory? Possibly 
some information, showing what has been actually accomplished 
in practice, would be worth hearing. 

G. A. Maier: At the present time in this country there is 
only one type of adjustable speed motor which is used, that is 
the multi-speed motor, which is used to a limited extent. In 
Europe they have used the adjustable speed single- and three- 
phase commutated motors but I do not think there has been 
much use made of those motors in this country up to the present 
time. The slip ring motor is used in some cases where the torque is 
constant and continuotis, such as wheel laths or boring mills doing 
certain classes of work where the load is always on; the load must 
be constant and continuous. For general machine tool work, 
the alternating-current motor has not been used to any consid- 
erable extent in this country. 

C. J. Fechheimer: An account of a system other than de- 
scribed by the author of this paper for obtaining adjustable speeds 
appeared in the Electrotechnische Zeitschrift of October 19, 1911. 
This is the system which has been brought out by A. Heyland 
and R. Ruedenberg. It is somewhat comparable to the Scher- 


2486 SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


bius and Kraemer systems and the accompanying sketch shows 
the scheme of connections. 

The large polyphase induction motor A is to have its speed 
adjusted to suit the requirements. The stator of this motor is 
connected to the line and its slip rings are connected to the 
commutator of a machine having an armature similar to that of 
a synchronous converter.’ The slip rings of this converter, or 
more properly, frequency changer, are connected to the second- 
ary of the transformer, the primary of which is connected to the 
line. 

On the same shaft with this machine is a small induction motor 
C with primaries connected to the line and secondary connected 
in parallel with the slip rings of the large induction motor. The 
speed is adjusted by changing the number of turns in the second- 
ary of the transformer, which changes the voltage between slip 
rings of the frequency changer B, which in turn alters the pres- 


sure between the brushes on the commutator end of this machine. 
As is well .known, a change in voltage between the slip rings 
of an induction motor will change its speed. The speed of the 
frequency changer is set by means of the small induction motor C. 

It is very interesting to note that the frequency changer B has 
no windings on its stator except those which are used to neu- 
tralize the unbalanced higher harmonics of armature reaction 
and thus assist commutation. 

Now when we consider whether it is advisable to use a poly- 
phase commutator motor to secure adjustable or variable speed, 
we must remember that in America it ‘s essential to design appara- 
tus which is practically fool-proof. In other words, after the 
machine is installed, it is necessary for it to do the work in- 
tended for it and not require much attention. 

Judging from the great length of time that has been required 
to successfully design direct current machines and secure satis- 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2487 


factory commutation, we may expect an equal or greater length 
of time to be able to predict satisfactorily the commutation in 
alternating-current commutator motors. It is in fact doubtful 
whether polyphase commutator motors can be designed'in large 
sizes without sparking, so that the question arises: will any vari- 
able speed systems which involve the use of alternating-current 
commutator motors for large outputs be acceptable on the Ameri- 
can market? 

It has occurred to me that we might use a system which, 
while costly, would be absolutely certain of results. This system 
is outlined in Mr. Maier’s paper and we suggest a modification 
of it—one which I have thought of employing a number of times. 
When there is a direct-current source of supply it consists of an 
inverted synchronous converter or motor-generator set. The 
speed is varied by changing the field strength of the converter 
or direct-current motor. The speed of, the induction or synchro- 
nous motor changes with the speed of the converter or motor- 
generator. Or, if the source of supply be alternating, two syn- 
chronous converters may be used, one to change from alternating 


-to direct and the other from direct to alternating. By using a 


split pole converter for the first machine and changing the field 
excitation of the second, or by having reactance coils in series 
with the first machine and varying the field strengths of both 
converters, the frequency may be altered as desired with corres- 
ponding changes in the speed of the main induction or syn- 
chronous motor. 

These systems would be especially applicable to cases to which 
direct current cannot be directly applied, such as for large ca- 
pacities and high speeds for which direct current motors cannot 
be built. We could then use synchronous or induction motors, 
and have their speeds varied as indicated above. . 

B. G. Lamme: The question was asked in this discussion, to 
what extent adjustable speed or variable speed alternating-cur- 
rent motors have been used in machine tool drive. Mr. Maier 
has replied to this question by stating that multi-speed motors 
without commutators have been used to a limited extent. 

I can cite one case where commutator type alternating-current 
motors have been used for adjustable speed, not in machine tool 
work, but in print work where print rolls had to be driven 
at various speeds between zero and full speed. The motors 
used in this case were somewhat different from any described 
in the paper of the evening, although based upon the same prin- 
ciples. 

ie a single phase commutator type motor it is obvious that 
if the field winding be connected in shunt with the armature, 
the operation of the motor will be very poor, because the shunt 
field current, and therefore the field flux, will lag practically 
90 deg. behind the armature current, whereas, for good operation 
the armature current and the field magnetism should be practi- 


cally in phase. This condition can be obtained by connecting 


2488 SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


the field winding to a supply circuit which has practically a 90 
deg. phase relation to the circuit which supplies the armature. 
This is illustrated in Fig. 1. With this arrangement the field 
current, or field flux, is still 90 deg. behind the exciting e.m.f., 
but as this latter is practically 90 deg. out of phase with the arm- 
ature e.m.f., the field or exciting flux will thus be practically in 
phase with the armature current and the machine becomes 
the equivalent of an ordinary shunt machine. Such a motor 
can be connected either across a two-phase circuit or can be 
connected to a three-phase circuit by certain arrangements of 


che windings which give the equivalent of a two-phase condition. . 


With this arrangement the speed can be controlled just as 
with a shunt-wound direct current machine, either by field con- 
trol or by control of the armature voltage. In the direct-current 
shunt machine, field control is obtained by insertion of resistance 
in the field circuit. In this alternating-current motor, field con- 
trol is obtained by insertion of reactance in the field circuit, instead 
of resistance. As the field current already lags practical'y 90 
deg. behind its supply e.m-f., the addition of reactance in series 
does not modify the phase relations materially. Added reac- 
tance thus causes weaker fields and increase in speed. 


Fic. 1 igus 


The speed of such a motor can also be varied by means of 

resistance in the armature, the same as a direct-current machine, 
to give variable speed; or can be regulated by means of adjustable 
voltage supplied to the armature terminals from a transformer 
with taps. This will give practically constant speed character- 
istics for any given adjustment. The arrangement thus becomes 
the equivalent of a direct-current shunt motor with an adjustable 
supply voltage. 
é An equivalent arrangement to this was also built and tested, 
in which the armature was not connected directly across the line 
but was closed on itself and was supplied with current from a 
transformer winding on the primary or field core. This arrange- 
ment is shown in Fig. 2. 

Several motors of the first described type were put into com- 
mercial operation. One of these motors was of 20 h.p. normal 


capacity and another of 30 h.p., both for 25 cycles. Both were ~ 


controlled by adiustable armature voltage from transformers. 
The speed was adjustable from practically zero to 1000 rev.f%per 
min. The 20-h.p. motor was in operation for about 18 months and 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2489 


was apparently a very satisfactory machine. The 30-h.p. motor 
was operated for a much shorter period and was not nearly as 
satisfactory. Later both motors were taken out of service, 


partly because the system of operation of the plant was modified. 


The equipments were expensive, due partly to the cost of the 
regulating transformer, but they could be operated successfully 
in the hands of careful men. However, the apparatus was rather 
delicate in its characteristics compared with direct-current ma- 
chines with equivalent characteristics. 

In going over this paper hurriedly, I find several points which 
are open to discussion. On the last two pages of the paper where 
reference is made to the Kraemer and Scherbius systems, certain 
features of these systems are not brought out fully. Both of 
these are forms of the so-called cascade connection in whicb the 
secondary of an induction motor feeds current to another motor. 
Here the secondary motor is of the commutator type. The 
feature of this arrangement which makes the commutator motors 
operative in general, lies in the low frequency delivered by the 
secondary of the induction motor to the commutator motor. 
At synchronism of the induction motor, the frequency of the — 


. secondary is zero. If the speed is within 10 per cent of syn- 


chronism, for instance, the secondary frequency will be 10 per cent 
of the primary frequency; that is, with 60 cycles in the primary 
the secondary frequency would be six cycles. Ataspeed of 30 per 
cent from synchronism, the secondary frequency will be 30 per 
cent, or 18 cycles, with a 60-cycle supply circuit. These low 


frequencies are particularly advantageous in the design of com- 


mutator type alternating current motors whether of the single- 
phase or three-phase type. However, the further the speed de- 
parts from synchronism the more difficult becomes the design 
and operating conditions. In consequence, such systems are 
usually built to operate within a certain limited per cent of 
synchronous speed, this per cent depending upon the frequency 
of the supply circuit. These conditions apply to the arrange- 
ment shown in Figs. 34 and 36. However, in the scheme shown 
in Fig. 35, the current from the secondary of the induction motor 
is fed to the collector rings of a synchronous converter and direct 
current from this synchronous converter is fed to a direct current 
motor, which thus absorbs the extra power of the secondary to 
the main motor. 

A little consideration will show that the synchronous converter 
should be of the same capacity as the motor to be regulated, 
if operated at the primary frequency. It is therefore necessarily 
a large and expensive machine, relatively speaking. The lower 
frequency and the lower speed at which it is normally operated 
will be of indirect advantage in somewhat reducing the cost and 
size of this synchronous converter. 

Furthermore, the direct-current motor operated from this 
synchronous converter cannot be of very economical proportions 
for it must be designed for operation over quite a wide range 


2490 SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


of voltage due to the fact that the synchronous converter will give 
different voltages with different speeds, and the direct-current 
motor must be adapted for operation at these voltages. 

Therefore, considering this scheme as a whole, it appears to 
me that equivalent results would be obtained if the synchronous 
converter were connected directly to the supply circuit, so that 
its direct-current side supplies current to a direct-current motor 
which drives the load. The synchronous converter could be of 
the synchronous booster type for varying the direct-current volt- 
age delivered by it. The size and capacity of the synchronous 
booster would be dependent upon the range of voltage, and speed 
variation desired, like the direct-current motor in Fig. 35. 
Therefore, in this arrangement the synchronous converter would 
correspond in capacity to the synchronous converter shown in 
Fig. 35, while the direct-current driving motor would-correspond 
in capacity to the induction motor, and the synchronous booster 
would correspond in capacity to the direct-current motor in the 
same figure. The scheme, as a whole, appears to me to be 
simpler than that shown and no more expensive. With either 
of these schemes the permissible range of speed could be fairly 
wide. 

C. P. Steinmetz: While the alternating-current motor has 
the reputation of being a constant speed motor, you see from 
the paper that in recent years a very large amount of work has 
been done in developing not only one but quite a number of 
types of variable speed alternating current motors, although the 
work is so recent that these motors have thus far come into 
industrial practice only to a limited extent, and there is no doubt 
that many further developments are still possible and desirable, 
There is one feature which impresses itself very forcibly, and 
that is, that in most of these variable speed alternating-current 
motors, the variable speed is connected with the use of the com- 
mutator. A commutator is not necessarily objectionable. We 
know that the direct current motor has a commutator and can 
be extremely successful. But, on the other hand, as the great 
advantage ofthe alternating-current motor has always been 
claimed its great simplicity, due to the absence of commutator 
or similar device. When we wish to get variable speed, in most 
cdses we have to accept the commutator—the same complication 
which is inherent in the direct current motor whether variable 
speed or constant speed. 

In order to see how far we have advanced, and what further 
work may still be done, it is desirable to make a classification 
of the problem. The Standardization Rules divide the motors 
in two types: constant speed and variable speed motors. Of the 
variable speed motors, three classes again are distinguished: 
multispeed motors, which have several steps of constant speed, 
hence, which can by adjustment be operated as constant speed 
motors not only at one but at two or more speeds; second, 
yarying speed motors, in which the speed varies with the load 


‘ 
j 
4 


1911] DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2491 


as a rule decreasing with increase of load. Typical thereof is 
the direct-current series motor; third, adjustable speed motors, 
in which the speed can be adjusted to any desired value within 
a certain range, but when once adjusted the motor remains at 
this speed irrespective of the load, or approximately so. Typi- 
cal of this class is the direct-current shunt motor with field 
control, where, by varying the field rheostat, you can set the 
speed at any desired value, and at that value it remains approx- 
imately from no load to over load. 

Alternating-current motors of these three types can be pro- 
duced as follows: Multi-speed motors are in industrial use to a 
considerable extent as induction motors without commutators— 
either by changing the number of poles, by some switchover 
device, or by=concatenation of two motors, or by combining 
the iwe-concatenated motors in one structure as an internally 
concatenated motor, or by a combination of several of these 
methods whereby we can thea gain a considerable number of 
speed. steps.~ : ow 

The varying speed motor also exists as a motor without com- 
mutator. It is the induction motor with slip rings and external 
rheostat. In this motor with increasing load the speed decreases. 
It has a characteristic in its’speed torque relation similar to the 
direct current series motor, except that the speed is limited to 
a definite maximum speed, the speed of synchronism. But the 
limiting feature of this motor is that when the speed falls off, 
the efficiency also falls off. That is, at fractional speed you get 
correspondingly fractional efficiencies. The varying speed al- 
ternating current motor which is free from this dropping off of 
efficiency with dropping off of speed, is the commutator motor 
of the series type, or of the repulsion type, or of the combination 
type, the series-repulsion type, but, as stated, this is not as 
simple because it has a commutator. 

_ The third type of variable speed motor is the adjustable speed 

motor, a motor which can be run at any constant value of speed, 
within a certain range. This motor does not yet exist in the 
commutatorless type, but it does exist in an almost infinite 
variety of commutator types of motor. Many of these are men- 
tioned in the paper, but there exists no adjustable speed alter- 
nating current motor yet, which does not have a commutator, 
and this field is still open for development. It is this class of 
motor, which after all, would be the most useful, because very 
often in the industry we desire to be able to vary the motor 
speed ‘over a moderate range as in cotton mills, to adjust it to 
the materials and the atmospheric conditions, so as to operate 
the mill at maximum efficiency. This means the ability of vary- 
ing the speed, say, ten or twenty per cent, up or down, and 
still at any speed to have constancy independent of the load. 
In the absence of this motor there have been developed adjustable 
speed commutator motors which are in industrial use, are emi- 
nently satisfactory, but have not yet the simplicity of the plain 
induction motor. : . 


2492 SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS : (Dec. 8 


In concluding, I may say, so far as my experience goes with 
the variable speed alternating-current motors, there are in use 
to a large extent: the induction motor with external rheostat as 
varying speed motor in hoisting work, in three-phase railroading, 
etc.; then there is in extensive use the multi-speed motor of the 
changed-pole type, and also to some extent, of the concatenated 
type; then there is in use the varying speed motor of the com- 
mutator type, as series and repulsion motor, and finally there is 


in use the adjustable speed motor of the so-called induction- 


repulsion type, especially in small units for general service. 

C. O. Mailloux: It is remarkable what a transformation of 
feeling electrical engineers have undergone, in the last few years, 
in regard to the commutator. For a time, the commutator was 
charged with all the crimes in the electrical calendar; it was con- 
sidered a great objection in connection with electrical machinery, 
in general. It was the fashion, among the partisans of the poly- 
phase induction motor, to allege, as one of its most meritorious 
features, the entire absence of acommutator. It was very pleas- 
ing to me, at the last electrical Congress, at Turin, in the dis- 
cussion on electric railways, before Section 5, where I had the 
honor to preside, to find evidence of a return to a spirit of greater 
toleration with respect to the commutator. The partisans of 
alternating-current systems of traction, at that Congress, were 
not as rabid as formerly, on the subject of ‘‘ commutators ”’. 
The reason is that, in Europe, just now, the single-phase system 
of electric traction is in vogue; and that system, as we know, 
involves the use of acommutator-motor. That, of course, makes 
some difference. It is sufficient to change the opinion of many 
men who, some years ago, thought that a commutator-motor 
was not fit for traction purposes at all. Thus the “evil” of 
former days is fast becoming a “ virtue.’”? The old French pro- 
verb says: “‘ Chassez le naturel, et il revient au gallop.” (The 
nearest English equivalent is: “‘ what is bred in the bone cannot 
be beaten out of the flesh ’’). Perhaps the commutator is much 
more ‘“‘ natural ”’ than some people have been willing to admit. 
In dealing with the problems of speed-regulation, with alter- 
nating-current motors of any phase and type, we are obliged 
to come to the commutator, in order to increase the range of 
speeds obtainable, and to realize the fullest possibilities. It is 
the most “‘ natural ”’ thing to do, and it should have been done 
long ago. It is now being done because it cannot be put off 
any longer, presumably. Whatever may be the reason, the 
result will be to make the induction motor much more “ fit ”’ 
than it was or would ever be otherwise, for many applications, 
old as well as new, in competition with the direct-current motor. 

Those of us who obtained their first practical experience with 
commutator machines, in the days when there were no others, 
were reconciled to commutator-motors. We were not afraid of 
them; and we knew that they could be made to do good work 
under any and all circumstances. For many purposes the com- 


Ss? SS eS ae Le 


1911) DISCUSSION AT NEW YORK 2493 


mutator-motor did much better work than the commutatorless 
motor, even before the advent of the commutating pole, or the 
so-called ‘“‘inter-pole ”” motor. Today, with the auxiliary or 
commutating pole, we are getting commutation which is abso- 
lutely satisfactory, if not absolutely faultless, in the case of 
direct-current motors of good design. The problem will not be 
quite as simple, however, with alternating-current motors. There 
are many difficulties here, due to electromagne tic phenomena and 
reactions which are not “‘in phase” with each other, and it is nec- 
essary to resort to compensating devices of various kinds to secure 
a line of commutation that is “‘ stable ’—which may not shift 
back and forth, describing an angle, during each period—and 
which “stays put” at least a portion of the time, same as in 
the direct-current motor. It is gratifying to find that consid- 
erable progress has been made in the adaptation of the commu- 
tator to polyphase motors, in the last few years. Inthat respect, 
the Europeans appear to be in the lead. During my recent trip 
abroad, I had occasion to learn something of the latest improve- 
ments made there in multi-speed, adjustable speed, and variable 
speed motors; and I was surprised at some of the results which 
are being obtained with alternating-current commutator motors. 
M. Latour; who is mentioned in the paper as the inventor of 
a method of speed-regulation involving the use of a commutator 
motor, has recently brought out some new methods of regulation 
which are of the greatest interest and merit. He kindly ex- 
plained some of his methods to me and also gave me some results 
of practical tests and operation. I was astonished at the wonder- 
ful range of speed obtained, with motors of all sizes, with very 
satisfactory commutation, and with good power factor and 
efficiency. His results have not been excelled, and I doubt if 
they have been equalled, in this country. They are hard to 
match, even in Europe, and his methods have been adopted and 
are being used by several manufacturers, and they are being 
imitated by others there. M. Latour is one of the few alterna- 
nating-current specialists who never had commutatorphobia. 
It was he who first made a success of the single-phase com- 
mutator motor of the compensating type. (Even the German 
Patent Office had, ultimately, to give him the priority over all 
others). His recent work with polyphase commutator motors, 
evincing great originality, and producing valuable industrial 
results shows what can be done to make the commutator appear, 
even here, as a blessing in disguise. Itis high time that the rest of 
the alternating-current designers and specialists should realize 
that the commutator not only need not, but that it should not, 
be banished from their “ repertoire.” With proper appreciation 
and treatment, its role may become as important and as useful 
here as in the case of the direct-current motors. 

Gus A. Maier: It seems that in the discussion of the paper, 
the commutator of the motor is what practically everyone objects 
to. It is not considered desirable to go back to direct-current 


2494 ‘SPEEDS OF A-C. MOTORS [Dec. 8 


practice and use the commutator. We are agreed on that point, 
but there seems to be no way of getting away from it at the 
present time. The Europeans have done a large amount of 
work on the commutator motor and use it in many places. As 
far as I can learn, the commutation is fairly good, although I 
understand that the European standards of commutation are 
not as high as the American practise. 

There is one point which has not been brought out which the 
advocates of the alternating-current motor can still hold on to, 
and that is, the voltage on the commutator is very low, compared 
to the line potential. It will probably run in the neighborhood 
of from 50 to 100 volts, and then with some sparking on the com- 
mutator, even if the commutator becomes black, it does not 
seem to affect the commutation or operation of the motor in any 
way. The Europeans are running these motors in various places, 
cotton mills, hoisting outfits, lathes, and using Scherbius sets in 
rolling mills, and Scherbius and Kraemer systems are giving 
very good results. I think it is up to the American engineers 
to follow closely the European developments and make improve- 
ments wherever possible, and I have no doubt the future will 
show some rapid progress in that direction. 


A paper communicated to the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers, by Dr. A. E. Kennelly. 
ate oS a ee ee eee 


Copyright 1911. By A.I. E. E. 


TABLES OF HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS IN REFERENCE 
é TO LONG ALTERNATING-CURRENT 
TRANSMISSION LINES 


BY A. E. KENNELLY 


The formulas relating to the behavior of long alternating- 
current lines of uniform resistance, inductance, capacitance 
and leakance, operated in the steady state, are very simply 
expressed in terms of hyperbolic functions; but are very long 
and cumbersome if expressed, with equal precision, without 
those functions. The absence of suitable tables* of hyperbolic 
functions of complex variables has, however, stood in the way 
of the general use of hyperbolic formulas. A few tables of such 
functions, in terms of real and imaginary components, have 
been published; but these are not so convenient for engineering 
purposes as tables of vector variables, using polar codrdinates. 


* The following is a list of Tables of Complex Hyperbolic Functions thus 
far published: 

1. ‘‘ Hvperbolic Functions” by Dr. James McMahon, Chapter IV 
of ‘“‘ Higher Mathematics’ by Merriman and Woodward, pp. 107-168. 
Sinh and cosh (x+j y) to x=1.5, y=1.5. Wiley and Sons, New York, 
1896. 

2. “The Alternating-Current Theory of Transmission Speed over 
Submarine Telegraph Cabies,”’ by A. E. Kennelly. Proc. Int. El. Con- 
gress. St. Louis, Sec. A, Vol. I, pp. 68-105, 1904. Table of sinh, cosh, 
tanh, cosech, sech, coth p/45°, up to p =20. 

3. “ The Distribution of Pressure and Current over Alternating-Current 
Circuits,’ by A. E. Kennelly, Harvard Engineering Journal, 1905-06. 
Tables of sinh, cosh, tanh, cosech, sech, coth p/6 up to p=1.5 for five 
particular values of é. ; 

4, ‘Formule, Constants and Hyperbolic Functions for Transmission 
Line Problems,” by W. E. Miller, General Electric Review, Schenectady, 
N. Y., May, 1910, Supplement. Sinh and cosh (x+j y) up tox=1, y=1. 

2495 


2496 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


The accompanying tables have been computed by the writer 
for particular application to transmission-line problems. They 
extend up to 0.5 in modulus, by steps of 0.1, and from 60 deg. 
to 90 deg. inclusive, of argument, by steps of single degrees. 
The results are given to five significant digits of modulus, and to 
decimals of a degree, as far as the third decimal place, or to 
about 3.6 seconds of arc. The reasons for expressing circular 
angles in degrees and decimals of a degree, instead of in degrees, 
minutes, and seconds, were first—that the results are thereby 


Bu 


Fic, 1.—Analysis of a three-phase system into three component 
single-phase systems 


more compactly expressed; second—that interpolations are 
simplified, and third—that reduction to French ‘“‘ grads ’’’ may 
be made if desired, merely by dividing with 0.9. The moduli 
results in the table, errors excepted, are correct up to the last 
digit, which is doubtful to the extent of unity. The circular 
angles resulting from the tables, errors excepted, are correct up 
to the last digit, which is doubtful to the extent of unity, repre- 
senting 0.001 degree. Such a degree of precision in the tables is 


unnecessary for ordinary alternating-current engineering re- 


ee 


— 


KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 2497 


quirements; but has been adopted because the tables are in- 
tended to form the nucleus of a subsequent and more extensive 
series, applicable to telephonic-circuit problems. The tables 
here offered suffice for the longest existing power-transmission 
lines, operated at fundamental frequencies. They do not 
purport to cover the behavior of such lines with higher har- 
monic frequencies. 


DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF THE TABLES WITH POWER- 
TRANSMISSION THREE-PHASE LINES 


Let the three-phase line considered be uniform throughout, 
and free from intermediate loads. If there be a load applied to 
the system at a substation along the line, the line must be divided 
at the substation into two distinct uniform sections, and each 
must be treated separately. 

Analyze the three-phase line system A BReALEB RRA SB; 


_ into three separate single-phase lines, 4,B)i A; Bis Avwbre 


Fig. 1, in the usual way, each such single line carrying one third 
of the load, and being operated, at star voltage, with respect to 
its enveloping surface of zero-potential. This well known step 
enables us to consider one line only, say A B, operated as 
though single-phase, with its independent linear constants. 


Find the total resistance R in the line A B (ohms). 
Find the total reactance j X=j £ w in the line A B (ohms) ; 
where £ is the wire inductance in henrys, and w is the 
angular velocity 2f, in radians per second, f being 
_ the frequency of operation, in cycles per second. 
Find the total leakance G in the line A B, if any (mhos). 
Find the total susceptance j B=j C w in the line A B, 
(mhos) ; 
where C is the total wire capacitance to zero-potential 
surface, in farads. 


Ordinarily, the leakance G is negligible, but it may be included 
for the sake of generality. 

Proceed to find the total wire impedance R+j X =Z/B, ohms, 
where Z is the vector impedance at the angle 8. The numerical 
value of Z may be called the modulus, and the value of B; the 
argument, of the plane vector impedance. 

Also find the total wire admittance G+j B=Y /®» mhos, 
where Y is the vector admittance modulus, and B2 the admittance 
argument. 


2498 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


Lay off a conductor, A B, Fig. 2, to represent the wire A B 
of the line by the well-known ‘‘split-condenser’’ method.* In 
the line A B, place an air-cored reactance coil of impedance Z 
ohms. At each end of the line, place a condenser of half the 
admittance Y mhos. Then the three-part artificial line A BGG 
will represent one wire of the line, except that it has its total 
dielectric admittance applied in two equal terminal lumps, 
instead of being applied in uniform distribution. The line 
A BGG, thus constituted, may be called the ‘‘ nominal Il” 
of one wire of the line; because the nominal values of the wire’s 
impedance and admittance are ascribed to it. A nominal J 
artificial line is unable correctly to imitate the behavior of an 
actual transmission line-wire, owing to the lumpiness error, just 


Z=R-+j X 0 
A a, B pA aa ) 
a b 
Y wl< |< 
z mee TS _|3 
n|e i [| A 
I ~~ sl 
G G 
0] : g 
Fic. 2.—Nominal J] of one Fic. 3.—Equivalent /7 of one 
line wire A B line wire of angle 0 


referred to; but it is readily possible so to modify the value 
of the impedance Z in the architrave A B, and also the value of the 
admittance Y/2 in each pillar, AG or BG, of the nominal J/, 
as will make the lumpiness error vanish, or will make the artificial 
line truly represent,at the terminals, the behavior of one line 
wire, taking distributed leakance and capacitance into account. 
Such a corrected artificial line may be called the ‘“‘ equivalent J] ”’ 
of the line-wire}; because it then becomes externally equivalent 
~* See a paper on “ Calculation of the High-Tension Line,” by P. H. 


Thomas, Transactions A. I. E. E., Part I, Vol. XXVIII, June, 1909. 
pp. 641-686. : 


t The theory and demonstration of this proposition are given in ‘‘ The 
Application of Hyperbolic Functions to Electrical Engineering Problems,” 
by A. E. Kennelly. The University of London Press. Chapter III, p. 33. 


ad 


7 
4 
j 
: 
F 
E 
4 


( 


KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 2499 


to the same in every respect, during steady operation. The 
algebraic factors that must be applied to Z and Y/2, in order to 
convert the nominal J/ into the equivalent 7, may be called the 
correcting-factors of the nominal //. 

The correcting-factor of the architrave impedance A B 


sinh 0 : : 
S a” and the corresponding correcting-factor of each pillar 
tanh ue 
admittance, A G or BG, is ea ee where @ is the hyperbolic 
‘oF 


angle subtended by the line, in hyperbolic radians,* defined by 
the relation: 

6=VZY hyperbolic radians / . 
This hyperbolic angle will be a plane-vector quantity. Its 
modulus will not exceed 0.5, with transmission lines operated 
at ordinary frequencies, and its argument will lie between 60 deg. 
and 90 deg. The equivalent // of a line-wire is represented 
diagrammatically at abgg, Fig. 3. 

Having, therefore, found the line-angle 6, enter Table IV, 
for the nearest given architrave correcting-factor, and Table V, 
for the nearest given pillar correcting-factor. In general, the 
sinh :) : 

#18 


corrected line-wire impedance, which becomes } z( 9 


slightly diminished in modulus, but slightly increased in argu- 
ment. This ordinarily represents a slight reduction in con- 
ductor resistance, associated with a very small change in con- 
ductor reactance. That is, the J? R loss on a line wire is slightly 
reduced by correcting from the nominal IT to the equivalent I/; 
or, the distributed capacity in a line produces slightly less I? R 
loss, in actual operation, than if the line had its capacity applied 
in two equal terminal lumps. Again, Table V shows that the 
pillar correcting factor slightly increases the admittance modulus, 
but slightly diminishes the admittance argument; so that some 
I? R loss appears in the terminal condensers. 

Having found the equivalent II of each wire of the line as 
above, the behavior of the wire, under any assigned normal load, 


- ean be determined by known rules for simple alternating-current 


circuits. 


*See TRANSACTIONS American Institute of Electrical Engineers, Part I, 
Vol. XVII, pp. 698, 702, June 29, 1909. Discussion on Thomas’ paper. 


2500 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


Harmonic Frequencies. It has been assumed in the foregoing 
discussion that the e.m.f. existing at each end of the 
line possesses a purely sinusoidal wave-shape; or, in other 
words, contains the fundamental frequency only. If harmonic 
frequencies in the impressed e.m.f. have to be taken into ac- 
count, the process must be repeated for each harmonic fre- 
quency in turn. That is, the impedance Z, admittance Y, 
and line angle 0=VZ Y, must be found for each harmonic 
frequency, independently. The nominal and equivalent J/s 
of the line are then found for each such frequency. Under a 
given condition of load, the distribution of pressure and current 
is thus obtained for each frequency component, as though it 
acted alone. The resulting total distribution of pressure and 
current is then derived through the superposition of the various 
component distributions, by the process of* ‘‘ crab-addition ”’, 
or equivalent methods. In general, the accompanying tables 
are not sufficiently extended in modulus to provide for cases of 
harmonics higher than of triple-frequency on very long lines; 
although they may cover cases of higher harmonics on shorter 
lines. 

Single-Phase Circuits. The analysis of a single-phase line, 
with two conductors, differs only from that of a three-phase 
line already discussed, in applying half the circuit load and 
impressed e.m.f., to each of the two wires, considered as operated 
to zero-potential surface. 

Interpolation between Tabular Values. In using the Tables, 
interpolation is required both for intermediate values of the 
modulus, and for intermediate values of the associated argu- 


ment. Thus, in finding = ak from Table IV, for the particu- 


lar value of 6=0.25/ 70.5 deg., we require to find, first, the inter- 
polated value 0.25/70 deg., which is 0.98174/0°.4 (on the 
basis of simple proportion), and then to deduce the interpolated 
value for 0.25/70°.5 by subtracting 0.00025/0.012, (the mean 


difference for 0.5 deg. of argument), obtaining, as the result, 
0.98149/0°.388. It should be observed, however, that owing 


to the rate at which the tabular values are changing, and the - 


relatively large steps of 0.1 in modulus, simple proportional 
interpolation cannot be relied upon for precision in the fifth 


ee 


The Application of Hyperbolic Functions to Electrical Engineering 
Problems’, Chapter VII, p. 101. 


ee ee ee ee ee er 


ee 


—. 


. 
§ 
: 
2 
: 
; 
g 
4 
y 


KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 2501 


digit. In other words, unless second differences are taken into 
account, which involves much labor, the interpolated values 
can only be relied on to four digits, with the last in some doubt. 
In general, a sufficiently good interpolation for most practical 
alternating-current engineering purposes can be made by direct 
inspection, at a corresponding sacrifice of attempted high preci- 
sion. 


TABLE I 
HYPERBOLIC SINES 


29563 |84.180 


29561 |85.150 
29559 | 86.120 
29557 | 87.090 


099837 | 84.020 
099836 | 85.017 


: 29555 |88.060)0. : . : 
"19867 | 89 .014|0. 29553 | 89.030 0.38944 /|89 .054 47945 | 89.085 


19867 0.000 0.29552 190.000}0.38942 | 90.000 0.47943 [86.2000 


0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
° ° ° 2 
60° |0.099917 |60.082 0. 19934| 00°31 0.29777 |a0746 0.39474 |61.330|/0.48978 |62.085 
61° |0.099912|61.081|0. 19929 161.324 0.29764 |61.731|0.39441 |62.302|/0. 48916 |63. 042 
62° |0.099907 |62.079|0. 19925 |62.317 029751 |62.715|0.39409 |63 .273/0. 48855 |63.99& 
63° [0.099902 |63.077|0. 19921 |63 .309 0.29738 |63.698|0.39379 | 64.2430. 48795 |64.95C 
64° |0.099897 |64.075|0. 19918 |64. 301 029725 |64.680|0. 39349 |65.212/0. 48738 |65.900 
65° |0.099893 165 .073|0.19914|65.293 0.29712165.661|0.39320|66.179|0. 48681 |66.84& 
66° 0.099889 |66 .071|0. 19911) 66. 284 0.29700 |66 .641|0.39293 |67.144/0. 48627 67.794 
67° |0.099885 |67 .069|0. 19908 |67 .275 0.29689 |67 .621|0.39266 |68.1C8/0.48575 68.738 
68° |0.099881 | 68.0660. 19904 |68. 265 0.29678 |68.599|0.39240169 .070|0. 48523 69.679 
69° |0.099877 |69 .064|0. 19901 69.255 0.29667 |69 .577|0.39214|70.030)0. 48473 70.617 
70° |0.099873 |70.062|0. 19898 |70. 245 0.29657 |70.555|0.39190|70.990/0. 48426 71.554 
71° 0.099869 |71.059|0. 19895 |71. 235 029647 |71.532|/0.39167 |71.948|0. 48380 72.489 
72° |0.099865 | 72 .057|0. 19892 |72.225 0.29637 |72.508|0.39145 |72.905|0. 48338 73.422 
73° |0 099861 |73 .054/0. 19889 |73.214 0. 29628173 .483/0.39123 |73 .861/0.48296 74.354 
74° |0.099858 | 74.051|0. 19887 |74 203/0.29620|74.458/0.39104|74.817 0.48257 |75.284 
75° |0.099855|75.048|0. 19885 |75 192|0.29612|75.432|0.39084|75.771 0.48220|76.212 
76° |0.099852 | 76 .045|0. 19883 |76 180|0. 2960476 .406|0.39066|76.724 0.48184|77 .138 
77° |0.099850|77.042|0. 19881 77. 168|C.29596|77 .379|0.39050|77 .676 0.48152 |78.062 
78° |0.099847 |78.039|0. 19878 78.1560 .29590|78.351/0.39034 |78.628 0.48123 |78.986 
79° |0.099845|79 .036/0. 19876 |79 144|0.29584|79 .322/0.39018|79.578 0.48095 |79 .909 
80° |0.099843 |80.033|0. 19875 |80 131|0.29578|80.294/0.39004 |80.528 0.48067 |80.830 
81° |0.099841|81.030)/0. 19873 |81 118|0.29573|81.266|/0.38993 |81.477 0.48044 |81.750 
82° 0.099839 |82 .026|0. 19872 |82 106|0 . 29569 | 82. 238|0. 38983 |82.425 0.48023 | 82.669 
83° |0.099838 |83 .023 . 29566 Pe tea 38973 |83 agi 48004 | 83.587 
Q. ; 

0 0 0 

. Os 0 0 

0 0 

0 0 

0 


0 

0 

é 0 

19868 | 86.054 . 
0 

0 


e 
i<e} 
oo 
NJ 
=; 
a 
w 
S 
© 
w 


90° |0.099831 |90.000 


=0,29612/75.°432 =0.29612/75.°25.'55" 


Example of the use of Table: sinh (0.3/75°) 


Note.—sinh p/6 =0/5 when o =0. 


UsE OF THE TABLES FOR HYPERBOLIC ANGLES BETWEEN 0.5 
AND 1.0 In MopULUS 


tanh (0/2 
Although the correcting factors me i and ee , for re- 


ducing nominal to equivalent I/s, are only tabulated up to 0.5 in 
modulus of 0; yet, with a little extra effort, they can be used 
for lines whose hyperbolic angles do not exceed 1.0 in modulus. 
That is, they can be used for doubled range. , It is evident that 
Table V is already sufficiently extended to apply to lines of 


; 2502 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


6=1; since only the semi-angle 9/2 in modulus has to be sought 
in it. It is only Table IV, therefore, which needs to be ex- 
tended for the extra range. For this purpose, we may use 
the relation: 


sinh 2 0 sinh 0 


—~— = —,— - cosh 8 numeric / 
20 0 sae 
TABLE II 
HYPERBOLIC COSINES 
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 

60° |0.99751 | 0-249/0.99012| 0°999|0.97810| 2°267\0.96191| 4.075/0.94219| 6.460 
61° (0.99736 | 0.244'0.98952| 0.979|0.97674| 2.221/0.95948| 3.998/0.93838| 6.343 
62° |0.99721 | 0.238'0.98893| 0.957\0.97541| 2.173|0.95711| 3.914|0.93465| 6.217 
63° |0.99707 | 0.232'0.98835| 0.934.0.97411| 2.123/0.95478| 3.826/0.93099| 6.083 
64° |0.99693 0.226,0.98780 0.9100.97285| 2.070\0.95251| 3.733|0.92741| 5.941 
65° [0.99679 | 0.220 0.98725] 0.885.0.97163| 2.014/0.95031| 3.635.0.92393] 5.789 
66° |0.99666 | 0.214 0.98672| 0.859/0.97044| 1.955/0.94816| 3.53210.92054| 5.631 
67° |0.99653 | 0.207 0.98621| 0.832/0.96927| 1.894/0.94608| 3.42310.91725| 5.463 
68° |0.99641 | 0.200 0.98571| 0.804|0.96814| 1.830|0.94407| 3.310/0.91407| 5.288 
69° 0.99629 | 0.193/0.98523| 0.775\0.96706| 1.764/0.94213| 3.1930.91100| 5.106 
70° 0.99617 |0.185|0.98477| 0.744'0.96601| 1.696/0.94026| 3.072/0.90805| 4.916 
71° 0.99606 | 0.177|0.98433| 0.713,0.96500| 1.626.0.93846| 2.946/0.90521| 4.718 
72° |0.99596 | 0.169|0.98391] 0.681|0.96404| 1.55310.93674| 2.81610.90248| 4.513 
73° (0.99586 | 0.161/0.98350| 0.64810.96313| 1.479 0.93510] 2.682.0.89989| 4.302 
74° |0.99576 | 0.153/0.98312| 0.614 0.96227 1.402/0.93354| 2.544/0.89742| 4.085 
75° (0.99567 | 0.144/0.98276| 0.580(0.96145| 1.324/0.93207| 2.403'0.89508! 3.861 
76° 0.99559 | 0.135/0.98242| 0.545.0.96068| 1.244/0.93069| 2.258:0.89288| 3.631 
77° |0.99551 | 0.126/0.98210| 0.509/0.95996| 1.162:0.92938] 2.11110.89081| 3.396 
78° |0.99544 | 0.117/0.98181| 0.472/0.95929| 1.078|0.92816| 1.960\0.88889| 3.155 
79° |0.99537 | 0.108/0.98154| 0.43510.95866| 0.993/0.92705! 1.80710.88711| 2.910 
80° |0.99531 | 0.099/0.98128| 0.397/0.95808| 0.908/0.92603| 1.652/0.88548| 2.660 
81° |0.99525 | 0.090/0.98105| 0.359/0.95756| 0.82110.92509| 1.494/0.88399| 2.406 
82° |0.99520 | 0.080/0.98085| 0.320/0.95710| 0.732/0/92425| 1.333/0.88266| 2.149 
83° {0.99515 | 0.070|0.98067| 0.281/0:95670| 0.643/0.92351| 1.170|0.88147| 1.888 
84° |0.99511 | 0.060/0.98051| 0. 242/0.95635| 0.552/0.92287| 1.006/0.88044| 1.624 
85° |0.99508 | 0.050/0.98037| 0.203/0.95605| 0.461/0.92233| 0.841/0.87957| 1.357 
86° |0.99506 | 0.040/0.98026] 0.163/0.95580| 0.36910.92189| 0.675/0.87886| 1.087 
87° 0.99504 | 0.030/0.98018; 0.123/0.95560| 0.2770.92154| 0.508|0.87830| 0.816 
88° |0.99502 | 0.020/0.98012| 0.082/0.95545| 0.185.0.92128] 0.34010.87790| 0.544 
89° 0.99501 | 0.010/0.98009| 0:041/0.95537| 0.093|0.92112| 0.171/0.87766| 0.272 
90° |0.99500 | 0.000/0.98007] 0.000/0.95534| 0.000/0.92106| 0.00010.87758| 0.000 


Example of the use of Table: cosh 0, 5/81° =0. 88399/2. °406 =0.88399/2. °24. 122", 


NotTe.—cosh o/b =1 .0/0°. when p =0 whatever the value of 8. 


Thus, suppose we require to find the value of the correcting-. 


factor ae for the case of a line having a hyperbolic angle 


0=1.0/76° which is beyond the direct range of Table IV. 


Find in that Table the value of ame 0 for 0.5/76, the semi-line 


angle, which gives 0.96368 /1°.138. Now find the cosine of 


a ee eee 


se 


ee 


tht 


a — — e 


KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 2503 


0.5/76 deg. in Table II. It is 0.89288/3°.631. The required 


inh 6 
value of ar ae for 1/76 deg. is then: 0.96368/1°.138 X 0.89288 


/3°.631 = 0.86045 /4°.769. 
Consequently, with the aid of this extra step, harmonic fre- 
quencies or lengths of line, can be dealt with extending up to 


1.0 modulus in the line-angle 6. 


TABLE III 
HYPERBOLIC TANGENTS 


0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 


41037 |57°255|0. 51983 [55.625 


. 54628 |88 . 813 


10033 |88.994|0.20271|88.973 30934 |88 .937|/0.42279 [88.883 ; 
.54631 oo .000 


. 10033 ree 0.20271190.000|0.30934|90.000/0.42280 90.000 


° ° ° 

60° |0.10017 |59.833|0. 20133 |59 .332/0.30444|58.479 0 0 

61° |0.10018 |60.837|0.20140|60.345|0.30473 |59 .510 0.41107 |58.305/0.52128 |56.700 
62° |0.10019 |61.841|0. 20148 |61.360|/0.30501 |60.542 0.41176 |59.359/0.52271|57.781 
63° |0.10020 |62.845|/0. 20156 |62.375|0.30528|61.575 0.41244|60.417/0.52412|58 . 867 
64° |0.10020 |63.849|0.20164 |63.391/0.30555 |62.610 0.41311 |61.479,0.52552|59.959 
65° |0.10021 |64.853/0.20171|64.408)0.30580 63 .647,0.41376 |62.544/0.52689 |61.058 
66° |0.10022 |65.857\0.20179 |65.425|0.30605 | 64.686 0.41441 |63.612|0. 52824 |62.164 
67° |0.10023 |66.862/0.20186 |66.443/0 30630 65 .727|0.41504 | 64. 685|0.52957 |63.276 
68° |0.10024 |167.866|0.20193 |67.461/0.30655 | 66.769 0.41565 |65.760/0.53085 |64.391 
69° |0.10025 |68.871|0.20199 |68 .486|0. 30678 67 .813|0.41623 |66.837|0.53209 |65.511 
70° |0.10026 |69.877|0.202@5|69.501/0.30701 68.859|0.41680|67 .918/0.53330|66 .638 
71° |0.10026 |70.882|0.20212|70.522/0.30722 69 .906/0.41735|69 .002|0. 53446 |67.771 
72° |0.10027 |71.888|0.20217 |71 .544/0.30742 70.955|0.41788 |70.089|0.53560!68.909 
73° |0.10028 |72.893/0.20223 |72 .566/0.30762 72, 005/0.41838|71.179/0.53669 |70.052 
74° |0.10028 |73.898|0.20228|73 .589/0.30781 73, .056|0.41886 |72.272\0.53773|71.200 
75° |0.10029 |74.904\0.20234|74.612/0.30799 74.108|0.41932|73.368/0.53872|72.351 
76° |0.10029 |75.910)0. 20239 |75.635 0.30816 175. 162\0.41975|74.466|0.53965 73.507 | 
77° |0.10030 |76.916/0.20243|76.659 0.30831 |76 .217|0.42016 |75.566/0. 54054 74.667 
78° |0.10030 |77.922/0.20246 77 _684|0.30846 |77 .273|0.42054.|76 .668 0.54138 |75.831 
79° |0.10031 |78.928/0.20250|78.709 0.30860 |78 .329|0.42088|77 .771|0.54215|76.999 
80° |0.10031 |79.934/0.20254|79 .734 0.30872|79.386/0.42120|78.876)0. 54285 78.170 
81° |0.10032 |80.940|0.20257 |80.759 0. 30884.180.445|0.42150!79 .983/0.54349 79.344 
82° |0.10032 |81.946|0.20260|81.785 030894181 .506/0.42177 |81.092)0. 54407 80.520 
83° |0.10032 |82.953|0.20263 |82.812 0.30904. |82.567|0. 42201 |82.203|/0. 54459 81.699 
84° |0.10033 |83.960/0. 20265 |83 .838 0.30912 |83.628|0.42222|83.315)0.54503 82.881 
85° |0.10033 |84.967|0.20267 |84.864 0.30920 |84.689|0.42239 |84.427|0.54546 84.065 
86° |0.10033 |85.974\0.20268/85.891 0. 30926 |85.751|0.42252 |85.540/0.54571 85.251 
87° |0.10033 |86.981/0.20270 86 .918/0.30930/86.313|0.42264 86 .654/0. 54596 | 86.438 
88° |0. 10033 |87.988/0.20270|87 .946 ead sla ter ibs Bee enon 87.626 

0 0 
0) 0 


Example of the use of Table: tanh 0.2/70° =0.20206/69.°501 = 0,20206/69.°3U.’04", 


Notge.—tanh o/d =0/5 when oe =0. 


Numerical Example. A three-phase transmission line has a 
length of 250 km. (155.34 statute miles), and consists of three 
No. 000 A. W. G. aerial copper wires, 0.41 inch (1.041 cm.) in 
diameter, supported symmetrically, on pole insulators, at a 
uniform interaxial distance of 72 in, (1938 cm.), Required to 
find the equivalent I of each wire, at an impressed sinusoidal 
frequency of 25 cycles per second. The following are the as- 
sumed linear constants of the line, referred to one wire: 


2504 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


Linear conductor resistance r= 0.206 ohm/km. = 0.33 ohm/mile. 

Linear conductor inductance /=1.2223 millihenry/km. = 1.967 
millihenry /mile. 

Linear dielectric leakance g=0. 

Linear dielectric capacitance c=0.0094828 microfarad/km. = 
0.01526 microfarad/mile. 


TABLE IV 
sinh 6 
CORRECTING FACTOR 
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
° ° ° | ° 
60° |0.99917 {0.082 |0.99670|0.331 |0.99257|0.746 0.98685|1.330 0.97956 /2.085 
61° |0.99912 |0.081 |0.99645|0.324 |0.99213|0.731 |0.98603|1.302 |0.97832|2.042 
62° |0.99907 |0.079 |0.99625|0.317 |0.99170|0.715 |0.98523|1.273 |0.97710)|1.998 
63° |0.99902 |0.077 |0.99605|0.309 |0.99127|0.698 (0.98448|1.243 0.97590/1.950 
64° |0.99897 |0.075 |0.99585/0.301 |0.99083|0.680 |0.98373|1.212 |0.97476|1.900 
65° |0.99893 |0.073 |0.99570|0.293 |0.99040|0.661 0.98300|1.179 |0.97364|1.848 
66° |0.99889 |0.071 |0.99555|0.284 |0.99000/0.641 |0.98232)1.144 |0.97254/1.794 
67° |0.99885 |0.069 |0.99540|0.275 |0.98963|0.621 |0.98165|1.108 0.97150/1.738 
68° |0.99881 |0.066 |0.99520|0.265 |0.98927|0.599 |0.98100}1.070 0.97046 /|1.679 
69° |0.99877 |0.064 |0.99505|0.255 |0.98891|0.577 |0.98035|1.030 |0.96946|1.617 
70° |0.99873 |0.062 |0.99490|0.245 |0.9885710.555 |0.97975|0.990 0.96852}1.554 
71° |0.99869 {0.059 |0.99475/0.235 |0.98823|0.532 |0.97918/0.948 |0.96760|1.489 
72° |0.99865 |0.057 |0.99460|0.225 |0.98790|0.508 |0.97863/0.905 |0.96676|1.422 
73° |0.99861 |0.054 |0.99445/0.214 |0.98760|0.483 |0.97808|0.861 |0.96592|1.354 
74° |0.99858 {0.051 |0.99435/0.203 |0.98733|0.458 |0.97758|0.817 |0.96514|1.284 
| 75° |0.99855 |0.048 |0.99425/0.192 |0.98707|0.432 |0.97710|0.771 |0.96440)1.212 
76° |0.99852 |0.045 |0.99415|0.180 |0.98680|0.406 |0.97665|0.724 |0.96368|1.138 
77° |0.99850: |0.042 |0.99405|0.168 |0.98653/0.379 |0.97625|0.676 |0.96304|1.062 
78° |0.99847 |0.039 |0.99395|0.156 |0.98633|0.351 |0.97585|0.628 |0.96246/0.986 
79° |0.99845 |0.036 |0.99385/0.144 |0.98613|0.322 |0.97545|0.578 |0.96190|0.909 
80° |0.99843 |0.033 |0.99375|0.131 |0.98593/0.294 |0.97512/0.528 |0.96134|0:830 
| 81° |0.99841 {0.030 |0.99365/0.118 |0.98577|0.266 |0.97483|0.477 |0.96088|0.750 
82° |0.99839 |0.026 |0.99360|0.106 |0.98563|0.238 |0.97458|0.425 |0.96046/0.669 
83° |0.99838 |0.023 |0.99355|0.093 |0.98553}0.209 |0.97433|0.373 |0.96008|0.587 
84° |0.99837 |0.020 |0.99350|0.080 |0.98543}0.180 |0.97413/0.321 |0.95974|0.505 
85° |0.99836 |0.017 |0.99345|0.067 |0.98537|0.150 |0.97395/0.268 |0.95944/0.422 
86° |0.99835 |0.014 |0.99340|0.054 |0.98530|0.120 |0.97380|0.215 |0.95920|0.338 
87° |0.99834 |0.011 |0.99335|0.041 |0.98523|0.090 |0.97370|0.162 |0.95904/0.254 
88° |0.99833 |0.008 |0.99335|0.028 |0.98517|0.060 |0.97365|0.108 |0.95894|0.170 
89° |0.99832 |0.004 |0.99335|0.014 |0.98510/0.030 |0.97360 |0.054 |0.95890/0.085 
90° |0.99831 |0.000 |0.99335|0.000 |0.98507|0.000 |0.97355|0.000 |0.95886|0.000 


sinh 0,3/80° 


Example of the use of Table: —>-57gpe— =0.98593/0.°294 =0.95803/0.°17./38” 


sinh 6 
Note. 


=1.0/0° when 6=0/5. 


From these we obtain the following wire constants: 


Total conductor resistance R= 51.5 ohms per wire. 
Total conductor inductance £=0.30557 henry per wire. 
Total dielectric capacitance C= 2.3707 microfarads per wire. 


At the frequency f=25, the impressed angular velocity 
is w=157.08 radians/sec. so that the total conductor reactance 


a eee ee 


a 


ls 


KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 2505 


i X=j £L w=j 47.999 ohms per wire, and the total dielectric 
susceptance j B=j C w= j 3.72396 X10“ mho per wire. The 
conductor impedance is Z=51.5+ j 47.999 =70.4/ 42°.985 ohms 
per wire. The dielectric admittance is Y=0-+ 7 3.72396 x 10 
= 3.7239 X 10-4/90° mho per wire. With these data, we obtain 


the nominal JT of each wire A BGG, Fig. 4. 


TABLE V 
CORRECTING FACTOR 


tanh 4 


Note.—All the angles found in this table are negative 


0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
Ces om | on aS o- 
60° | 1.0017 |0.167 | 1.0067|0.668 | 1.0148)1.521 1.0259|2.745 | 1.0397|4.375 
61° | 1.0018 |0.163 | 1.0070|0.655 | 1.0158|1.490 1.0278|2.695 | 1.0425|4.300 
‘ 62°| 1.0019 |0.159 | 1.0074|0.64C | 1.0167 1.458 | 1.0294|2.641 | 1.0454)4.220 
63° | 1.0020 10.155 | 1.0078|0.625 | 1.0176 1.425 | 1.0311|2.583 | 1.0482)4.133 
64° | 1.0020 |0.151 | 1.0082|0.609 | 1.0185 1.390 | 1.0328|2.521 | 1.0510|4.041 
65° | 1.0021 |0.147 | 1.0086 /0.592 | 1.0193 1.353 | 1.0344|2.456 | 1.0538|3.942 
66° | 1.0022 |0.143 | 1.0090|0.575 | 1 0202|1.314 | 1.0360|2.388 | 1.0564/3.836 
67° | 1.0023 |0.138 | 1.0093|0.557 1.0210|1.273 | 1.0376!2.315 | 1.0591|3.724 
68° | 1.0024 10.134 | 1.0097!0.539 1.0218 |1.231 | 1.0391|2.240 | 1.0617)3.609 
69° | 1.0025 |0.129 | 1.0109|0.520 | 1.0226 1.187 | 1.0406|2.163 | 1.0642)3.489 
70° | 1.0026 |0.123 | 1.0103|0.499 | 1.0234 1.141 | 1.0420|2.082 | 1.0666|3.362 | 
3 71°| 1.0026 |0.118 | 1.0106|0.478 | 1.0241 1.094 | 1.0434|1.998 | 1.0689 |3.229 
72° | 1.0027 |0.112 | 1.0109|0.456 1.0247|1.045 | 1.0447|1.911 | 1.0712 3.091 
73°| 1.0028 |0.107 | 1.0112]0.434 | 1.0254 0.995 | 1.0460]1.821 | 1.0734|2.948 
74°| 1.0028 |0.102 | 1.0114)0.411 | 1 0260|0.944 | 1.0472|1.728 Ds oa 
75°| 1.0029 |0.096 | 1.0117|0.388 1.0266/0.892 | 1.0483|1.632 | 1.0774/2.649 
76° | 1.0029 |0.090 | 1.0120}0.365 | 1 0272|0.838 | 1.0494|1.534 | 1.0793|2.493 
77°| 1.0030 |0.084 | 1.012210.341 | 1 0277 10.783 | 1.0504|1.434 | 1.0811)2.333 
73° | 1.0030 |0.078 | 1.0123/0.316 1.0282]0.727 | 1.0513|1.332 | 1.0828)2 169 
79°| 1.0031 |0.072 | 1.0125|0.291 | 1 0287|0.671 | 1.0522|1.229 | 1.0843)2.001 
g0°| 1.0031 |0.066 | 1.0127|0.266 1.0291|0.614 | 1.0530|1.124 | 1.0857 1.830 
gi°| 1.0032 |0.060 | 1.0129|0.241 1.0295|0.555 | 1.0538]1.017 | 1.0870)1.656 
s g2°| 1.0032 |0.054 | 1.0130)0.215 1.0298|0.494 | 1.0544|0.908 | 1.0881 1.480 
83°| 1.0032 |0.047 | 1.0132|0.188 | 1 0301|0.433 | 1.0550|0.797 | 1.0892)1.301 
34° | 1.0033 10.040 | 1.0133]0.162 1.030410.372 | 1.0555|0.685 | 1.0901)1.119 
35° | 1.0033 |0.033 | 1.0134 /0.136 1.0307|0.311 | 1.0560|0.573 | 1.0908 0.935 
86° | 1.0033 |0.026 | 1.0134!0.109 1.0309|0.249 | 1.0563|0.460 | 1.0914 0.749 
87° | 1.0033 [0.019 | 1.0135 |0.082 1.031 |0.187 | 1.0566|0.346 | 1.0919 0.562 
38° | 1.0033 |0.012 | 1.0135/0.054 1.0311|0.125 | 1.0568|0.232 | 1.0923 0.374 
. g9° | 1.0033 |0.006 | 1 Gigi 024 1.0311|0.063 | 1.0570]0.117 | 1.0926 0.187 
90° | 1.0033 |0.000 broke aaa 1.0311]0.000 | 1.0570|0.000 Dee aoe 


"— > 


tanh 0.4/71° Bsr 
Example of the use of Table: —o4a/71° =1,0434 (1.°998 = 1.0434 \1.°59.’53”. 


tanh 6 


NOTE. =1.0/0° when 6=0/5. 


We next proceed to find the line angle @ as follows: 


9 = V'70.4/42°.985 X3.7239 X 10-4/90° 


4 
q 
4 
E 
¢ 
q 


= V0.0262167 /132°.985 
=0.161915 /66°.492 hyp. 


2506 KENNELLY: HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS 


Entering Table IV with the line angle 0.162/69°.5, we find the 
architrave correcting factor to be 0.997/0°.18. Also, entering 
Table V with the semi-line angle 0.081/ 66°.5, we find the pillar 
correcting factor 1.0016\0°.10°. The corrected value of line 
impedance becomes therefore 70.4/42°.985 X0.997/0°.18 = 70.19 


/43°.165, and that of each pillar admittance 1.862 10-*/90°X 


1.0016 \0°.10 = 1.865/89°.9X 10-4 mho. These values produce 
the equivalent // of each line-wire, as shown in Fig. 5. That is, 
the external behavior of the actual line at any load could not be 


Z=104 | 42.985 


re 70.19 [432165 


o 


ol< »|< e a 
wt Ul gi & 
t ° 5k tad * 
$ 9=0.162 | 66,5 & 2 = 
iad 7) = - - 
S| t S| B & 
~ = tect ee 
Ee g 
G G g g 
Fic. 4.—Nominal /7 of line wire Fic. 5.—Equivalent IT of line wire 
in numerical example in numerical example 


distinguished from that of an artificial line of three equivalent 
ITs, each having, as architrave, an impedance coil of 70.19/43°.165 
ohms, and terminal pillar admittances, each of 1.865 X10-4/89°.9 
mhos, such as might be produced by a condenser of 2.375 micro- 
farads in series with a resistance of 9.73 ohms. The voltage 
regulation and efficiency of the three-phase line in the steady 
state of operation can now be determined by known methods, 
since the actual line is replaced by definite groups of reactance 
coils and condensers. 


le a es lie ame A Oe Det 


4 
2 


A provisional report from the American Committee, 
subject to, and until such time as the official 
report of the Commission shall appear. 


Covfestioti, By A. LE.E. 


TURIN MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION 
SEPTEMBER 7-13, 1911* 


HISTORICAL OUTLINE 


It was voted by the Chamber of Government Delegates at 
the International Electrical Congress of St. Louis in 1904, that 
an international electrotechnical commission should be estab- 
lished to carry on the work commenced at that Congress. The 
commission came into official existence in 1906, owing, in large 
measure, to the work of Colonel R. E. Crompton, C.B., who has 
served as its honorary secretary from its inception. The initia- 
tion of the organization was thus a sequel to the work of the St- 
Louis Congress. The first meeting of the commission, for 
organization, took place at London in 1906, and was attended 
on behalf of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
by Messrs. F. B. Crocker, C. O. Mailloux, and C. H. 
Sharp. Lord Kelvin was elected the first President of the 
Commission, an organization was formed, and statutes adopted 
M. C. leMaistre was appointed General Secretary, with an office 
in London, at 28 Victoria St. 

A council meeting of the Commission was held in London in 
1908, and was attended by Mr. C. O. Mailloux on the part of 
the United States Committee, appointed by the American 
Institute. of Electrical Engineers. Professor Elihu Thomson 
was elected President on the demise of M. Mascart. Work was 
commenced at this meeting. Inasmuch as a principal difficulty 
in the deliberations of any internationally selected body lies in 


*A provisional report from the U. S. National Committee to the 
Board of Directors of the A.I.E.E., and subject to such official reports 
of the meeting as may be issued by the Commission. 

2507 


2508 TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 


diversities of language, two languages—French and English— 
were chosen by vote, as the official languages of the assembly; so 
that all reports, transactions and publications of the commission 
have to be prepared, delivered, and printed in these two languages 
simultaneously. French was voted for, instead of German, 
because the French language was more generally known to, 
and used by, the delegates, than the German. A single language, 
had it been possible, would have been much easier to deal with 
officially; because there is necessarily great difficulty in ob- 
taining strictly equivalent renderings of any statement or resolu- 
tion in two languages simultaneously. So great is this difficulty 
of bilingual renderings, that any attempt to introduce a third 
official language, and so to maintain three mutually equivalent 
renderings of all the proceedings, would probably break down in 
failure. 

The meeting of 1908 saw work commenced on international 
nomenclature or lists of equivalent electrotechnical terms in one 
or more pairs of languages. Incidentally, it was decided as a 
matter of practical necessity, that all the quantitative resolutions 
of the commission should be stated and published in the inter- 
national metric system of weights and measures, non-metric 
countries being allowed to employ their local equivalents of 
such values in parentheses. 

In August, 1910, an unofficial meeting of the commission was 


held at Brussels, at the invitation of the Belgian committee, and © 


under the acting presidency of Professor Eric Gerard. Messrs. 
A. E. Kennelly and Charles F. Scott attended this meeting 
on behalf of the United States Committee, appointed by the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers. Active discussion 
took place, and good progress was made, in several technical 
directions, namely: 

(1) International electrotechnical nomenclature and term- 
inology. 

(2) International symbols. 

(8) International rating of machines. 

The American Committee also reported the vote of the 
A. I. E. E., taken at the Jefferson convention, June, 1910, to 
refer to the commission the question of the direction of phase 
advance in alternating-current vector diagrams, for an interna- 
tional decision. The meeting accepted the proposition, and 
referred the question to all the national committees for con- 
sideration, and report at the next meeting. 


TURIN MEETING OF I.E. C. 2509 


It had been proposed to hold the next meeting at Berlin in 
1911; but, in view of the proposal to hold an International 
Electrotechnical Congress at Turin in 1911, in connection with 
the Turin-Rome Exhibition, the German committee postponed 
its invitation, and the Italian committee’s invitation was then 
accepted, to hold the next meeting of the Commission at Turin, 
in connection with the date of the Congress. 

During the year 1910-1911, the central office in London cir- 
culated the questions raised at the Brussels meeting among the 
various national committees. The report of the Brussels 
meeting was published* in the PROCEEDINGS of the A. I.E. E., 
and the American committee reported the actions at Brussels 
to the Board of Directors of the A. I. E. E. 

At the date of the Turin meeting of the Commission, the 
following countries had organized national committees of the 
Commission, sharing alike annually in the expenses of the 
Commission: 


(1) Austria (8) Germany (15) Mexico 

(2) Belgium (9) Great Britain (16) Spain 

(3) Brazil (10) Holland (17) Sweden 

(4) Canada (11) Hungary (18) Switzerland 
(5) Chile (12) India (British) (19) United States 
(6) Denmark (13) Italy (20) Uruguay 

(7) France (14) Japan 


In some of these countries, such as British India, the com- 
mittee is appointed by the government alone. In others, such 
as the United States, it is appointed by a single dominant 
electrotechnical Institution. In others, such as France, it is 
appointed by a number of electrotechnical societies, in coopera- 
tion. In all cases, however, the central office of the Commission 
recognizes and communicates solely with the local committee of 
each country, to the exclusion of any societies or institutions in 
that country. In other words, a national committee is organized 
in each country by the electrotechnical forces resident therein; 
but once the national committee is formed to represent that 
country, the central office deals exclusively with the committee, 
and communicates with that country through no other channel. 


THE TURIN MEETING 
The attendance at the Turin meeting by National Committees 
and their delegates was as follows: 
*PRrocEEpINGs of the A.I. E.E., December 1910, pages 10-11. 


2510 TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 


President of the Commission, Dr. Elihu Thomson. 

Belgium. MM. Armand Halleux, G. A. L’Hoest, E. Gevaert, O. De Bast 
(secretary). : 

British Indian Government. M. F. H. Meares, Government Delegate. 

Canada. Professor L. W. Gill. 

Denmark. M. S. A. Faber, Professor Absalon Larsen (secretary). 


Ecuador. Sr. Richard Muller, Professor of Electrical Engineering at 


University of Quito. 

France. MM. R. V. Picou (President), H. Armagnat, P. Boucherot, 
E. Brunswick, M. J. Blondin, Ch. David (secretary), Paul Janet, 
F. Laporte (Adjunct Secretary), R. Legouez, G. Roux. 

Germany. Herr Professor Dr. E. Budde (President) President of the 
Verband Deutscher Elektrotechniker, Herr Georg Dettmar (Secre- 
tary), Herr Geh. Ober Postrat Professor Dr. D. K. Strecker, President 


of the Committee on Units and Symbols of the Verband Deutscher 


Electrotechniker. 

Great Britain. MM. Alexander Siemens (President), British Government 
Delegate, W. Duddell, F. R. S., Major W. A. J. O’Meara, C.M.G., 
C.B., British Government Delegate, M. R. K. Gray, Dr. Silvanus 
P. Thompson F.R.S. British Government Delegate, Professcr T. 
Mather, M. P. F. Rowell (Secretary) 

Holland. Professor Clarence Feldmann, President of the Electrical 
Section of the Dutch Society of Engineers. M. L. M. Barnet Lyon. 

Hungary. Professor Dr. Moritz de Hoor-Tempes. 

Italy. Professor Luigi Lombardi (President), President of the Asso- 
ciazione Elettrotecnica Italiana, Signor C. Clerici, Professor Guido 
Grassi, Signor E. Jona, Signor C. Montu, Parliamentary Deputy, 
Signor G. Semenza (Secretary), Signor P. Verole. 

Japan. Professor Dr. A. Oya. 

Mexico. Senor. Alfonso Castello. 

Panama. The Consul of Panama at Turin. 

Portugal. Il Barone Nasi, the Portuguese Consul at Turin. 

Spain. Senor Don Luis de la Pe“a. 

Sweden. MM. C. A. Rossander (President), E. C. Ericson (Secretary). 

Switzerland. M. le Professor J. Landry (Secretary), K. Tauber. 


United States. MM. C. O. Mailloux (President) U. S. Government Dele- 
gate, Gano Dunn, President of the American Institute of Electrical 
Engineers and U. S. Gov. Delegate, Dr. A. E. Kennelly (Secretary), 
Dr. Clayton H. Sharp. 


GENERAL OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION : 
Colonel R. E. Crompton, C.B., (Honorary Secretary), M. C. leMaistre, 
General Secretary, M. E. Litton, Assistant. 


Nineteen countries, and eleven languages, were thus repre- 
sented by 51 delegates, including the Presidents of the American, 


Dutch, German and Italian Institutions of electrical engineers. 


The meetings at Turin were held in the handsome council 
chamber of the Provincial Palace of the Prefecture. 


a 


é 
. 
4 
. 


- 


TURIN MEETING OF I.E. C. 2511 


OFFICIAL First SESSION, SEPTEMBER 7TH 


At the first meeting, on September 7, after a reception by 
President Elihu Thomson, an address of welcome was given 
by His Excellency Signor Calissano, Italian Minister of Posts 
and Telegraphs. President Thomson then read an address, in 
which he complimented the influence of Italian genius upon the 
philosophy science and art of the world, and offered the con- 
gratulations of the Commission to the Italian nation on the 
fiftieth anniversary of its political union. He called at- 
tention to the growth and development of the Commis- 
sion, the importance of its work, and the desirability of 
appointing various international sub-committees to carry on the 
work during the interim periods between successive meetings. 
This suggestion was very cordially received by the assembly. 

After the report of Honorary Secretary Colonel Crompton, 
indicating the recent progress of the Commission, an election 


_ was held for officers of the ensuing period. M. Picou, the Presi- 


dent of the French Committee, indicated the importance of 
Dr. Budde’s past services to electrotechnics and to the 
Commission. He moved that Dr. E. Budde,» the President 
of the German Committee, and of the Verband Deutscher 
Elektrotechniker, should be elected as President of the Com- 
mission, to succeed President Elihu Thomson. This motion 
was carried unanimously with acclamation. The Honorary 
Secretary and General Secretary were reappointed also with 
acclamation. Professor Lombardi was also unanimously elected 
to preside over the unofficial meetings, on September 8 and 9. 
After an official photograph of the assembly had been taken, 
the meeting adjourned. 


UNOFFICIAL SECOND SESSION, SEPTEMBER 8 


At the unofficial meeting of the 8th, the first matter consid- 
ered was international nomenclature. A subcommittee of one 
delegate from each of the countries—Belgium, France, Germany 
and Great Britain,—had been charged at the Brussels meeting, 
with the preparation of a report on this subject, and had met, 
earlier in the year, at Cologne. This sub-committee presented 
a list of 56 electrotechnical terms in general use, in connection 
with dynamo-electric machinery, drawn up in English and 
French, with their respective definitions in those official lan- 
guages. 

It may be said that it has hitherto been the policy of the 


2512 TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 


American Committee to leave nomenclature in the English 
language to their confréres in Great Britain, rather than to 
attempt a separate American nomenclature. In cases, however, 
where the American usage of a term differed appreciably from 
the British usage, notice of the fact was sent to the British Com- 
mittee, which had then proceeded either to find a modification in 
terms suitable to the engineers of both countries; or to specify 
the distinction between the respective usages. 

After some discussion, the report of the sub-committee was 
accepted, and provisionally adopted, by the meeting; with an 
order to print the same in both alphabetical and logical orders. 
A subcommittee on nomenclature consisting of one delegate 
from the British, French and German committees, was then 
voted, to continue the work, and to report at the next meeting 
of the Commission. The Danish and Spanish committees were 
especially invited to send delegates to follow the work of this 
subcommittee. Delegates from any or all national committees 
were held to be free to attend the meetings of this or other special 
subcommittees. The central office was, however, to arrange 


solely with the special subcommittee members for the dates of. 


their meetings, the national committees being then informed of 
the dates selected. 

The French committee submitted printed copies of its 
“Vocabulaire Electrotechnique ’’ of 323 electrotechnical French 
terms, and their definitions in French, a task executed with a 
view to assisting in the work of the I. E. C. 

The British committee also submitted printed copies of its 
latest work on nomenclature ‘‘ Terms commencing with the 
letters F to M”’ being a list of 182 English terms in alphabetical 
order, with their English definitions, and also with unofficial 
definitions in French. 

International Symbols. The report of the Brussels conference 
on symbols was then taken up. This report had been printed, 
and circulated among the various national committees, for 
nearly a year. The proposals were, after considerable dis- 
cussion, adopted provisionally in the following form: 

1. Instantaneous values of electrical quantities which vary 
with the time are to be represented by small letters. 

2. Virtual or constant values of electrical quantities to be 
represented by capital letters. 

3. Maximum values of periodic electrical quantities to be 
represented by capital letters followed by the subscript ‘‘ m”’. 


el 


r 


TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 2513 


; 4. Magnetic quantities, whether constant or variable, to be 
represented by capital letters of either script, Gothic, heavy- 
faced, or of any other special type. 

5. Maximum values of magnetic quantities to be represented 
by capital letters of either script, Gothic, heavy-faced, or of 
any special type, followed by the subscript ‘‘m”’. 

6. The following quantities to be represented by the following 
letters: 


Electromotive force 1B CG 
Electric quantity Q, @ 
Self-inductance* — eal + 
Magnetic force a, H } 
Magnetic flux density 6, B) 
Length Leal 
Mass M, m 
Time TL 


Dr. Budde, in the name of the German committee, and Mr. 
Alexander Siemens, in the name of the British Committee, pro- 
posed the definite adoption of the letters 7, E and R to represent, 
respectively, the current, the electromotive force, and the 
resistance, in the simple algebraical expression for Ohm’s law. 
This proposition was unanimously adopted. 

M. Picou proposed, and Dr. Feldmann seconded, the proposi- 
tion that in questions relating to alternating currents, the term 
““ reactive power ’’ be adopted to designate the quantity UI sing 
where U is the virtual alternating potential difference, I the 
virtual current, and @ the difference of phase between them. 
This proposition was adopted. 

A subcommittee consisting of one member from each of the 
following countries was appointed, to continue the study of the 
question of international symbols. 

Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Holland, Italy, 
Spain, Switzerland, United States. 

Certain supplementary propositions of the French committee 
were referred to this subcommittee for consideration, and, at the 
suggestion of Mr. Feldmann, the question of special terms of a 
similar nature to ‘‘ reactive power ’’ was also referred to this 


subcommittee. 
Summing up then the action of the assembly on symbols, the 


*Coefficient of self-induction. +See Articles 4 and 5 as to font. 


, 2514 TURIN MEETING OF 1. E. C. 


recommendations of the Brussels conference were not only 
provisionally adopted, with minor amendments; i.e. adopted 
subject to possible revision, in detail, at some future commission 
meeting, but, owing to the loyal international cooperation of 
Germany and Great Britain, an international symbolic state- 
ment was definitely adopted for Ohm’s law. 


UNOFFICIAL THIRD SESSION, SEPTEMBER 9 


Diagrams for Alternating-Current Quantities. The question 
as to the direction of phase advance in the graphic representation 
of alternating-current quantities was taken up, as proposed by 
the Brussels conference, and in pursuance of the action originally 
taken by the American Institute of Electrical Engineers at its 
Jefferson Convention in 1910. 

After a brief discussion, in which unanimity of opinion was 
manifested, it was moved by Professor S. P. Thompson, that 
the direction of phase advance should be in the counter-clockwise 
direction, as originally taken by Dr. Fleming. The following 
proposition was then unanimously adopted. 

In the graphical representation of alternating electric and 
magnetic quantities, advance in phase shall be represented in the 
counter-clockwise direction. 


NotEe.—The impedance of a reactive coil, of resistance R, 
and inductance L, is R+./—1L w, and that of a condenser 


of capacity C, is -, where w is E 


1 
ec te 4 
equal to 2 m Xfrequency. 

It follows also that the diagram herewith 
represents the phase relations in a simple 
-alternating-current circuit containing an im- 
pressed electromotive force O E and a lagging 6 
current O J. 

Summing up, then, the action of the assembly concerning 
alternating-current diagrams, or so-called vector diagrams, there 
was complete unanimity of opinion among all of the national 
committees, after a year of consideration for the subject, that 
the order of advance in phase in such diagrams should be counter- 
clockwise. All reference to the methods for deriving such dia- 
grams was carefully avoided. That is to say, the question as to 
whether a ‘‘crank diagram”, or a polar “time diagram ”’, 
should be used, was not entered into, and only the relations of the 


a. 


a er ed 


‘TY Ve 


; 


TURIN MEETING OF Tie C. 2515 


final vector-diagram were discussed. This leaves to engineers 
entire freedom to arrive at the internationally standardized 
vector diagram in any desired manner. 

Ratings of Electrical Machinery and Apparatus. The proposi- 
tions of the Brussels conference in regard to rating were adopted 
without modification as follows: 

1. The output of electric generators is defined as the electric 
power available at the terminals. 

2..The output of electric motors is defined as the mechanical 
power available at the shaft. 

3. Both the electric and mechanical powers to be expressed 
in international watts. 

A subcommittee consisting of one member from each of the 
following national committees was appointed to study the subject 
of the international rating of electrical machinery and apparatus: 

Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United States. 

Professor Elihu Thomson drew attention to a printed docu- 
ment “ Extract from the Rules of various countries in reference 
to the rating of electrical machinery,” published by the central 
office. This work, the value of which he was glad to recognize, 
would be likely to prove of great utility to the subcommittee. 

In the name of the Italian committee, Mr. Jona presented “ 
report dealing with this subject and especially with the question 
of prime movers, when closely related to electrical machinery. 

The report was referred to the special committee, with in- 
structions to give most careful consideration to the proposals 
of the Italian committee. 

The national committees were requested to put themselves 
into communication with the technical societies of their re- 
spective countries, in order to facilitate the work of the Com- 
mission. 

Summing up then the actions of the assembly in regard to 
international rating, although but little has yet been accom- 
plished in this ditection; yet the special subcommittee is now in 
a fair way to accomplish much, that has hitherto been im- 
possible owing to differences of language, of national customs, 
of construction, and of viewpoint. ‘ 


Furure MEETINGS oF THE I. E. OF 
The proposition of Signor Lombardi and Mr. Alexander 
Siemens, that the next official meeting of the I. E. C. be held 


2516 TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 


at Berlin, in 1913, was adopted, the exact date to be fixed by the 
central office, after consultation with the national committees. 
An unofficial meeting may be arranged in the meantime, if 
necessary. 

Mr. Gano Dunn, as President of the A. I. E. E., cordially 
invited the I. E. C. to hold an official meeting at San Francisco, 
in 1915, on the occasion of the Panama Pacific Exposition, to 
be held in celebration of the opening of the Panama Canal. He 
announced that the A. I. E. E. was desirous of holding, at the 
same time, an International Electrical Congress, that the Board 
of Directors of the A. I. E. E. had already taken official action, 
had passed resolutions authorizing the Congress, and had in- 
structed him to appoint a Committee on Organization, provided 
that an expression of opinion favorable to the holding of such a 
Congress were obtained from the I. E. C. at its meeting in Turin. 

The meeting thanked Mr. Gano Dunn for the very cordial 
invitation of the A. I. E. E., and on the proposition of Mr. 
Feldmann, seconded by Mr. Duddell, adopted the following 
resolution: 

“The I. E. C. expresses its willingness to hold an official 
meeting at San Francisco in 1915, and instructs the Central 
Office, on the request of the A. I. E. E., to codperate with it in 


the organization of the International Electrical Congress in San 


Francisco at the same time.”’ 

As will be noted later, in relation to the Council Meeting of 
September 13, the I. E. C. undertook, at the request of the 
International Electrical‘Congress of Turin, the task of assigning 
and appointing future International Electrotechnical Congresses, 
in so far as concerns their times and places of meeting, so that 
the invitation of the A. I. E. E., as extended through Mr. Gano 
Dunn of the American Committee, was accepted in its entirety, 
both as to the holding of a meeting of the I. E. C., and of an 
International Electrotechnical Congress, at San Francisco, in 
1915. 

ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY 


The Honorary Secretary of the I[luminating Engineering 
Society of London, Mr. Leon Gaster, personally invited to attend 
the meeting of the Commission, raised the question of the 
Commission studying the terms employed in matters of illumina- 
tion, and requested that the national committees put themselves 
in communication with the Societies dealing with these questions 
in their respective countries. 


— 


EE 


5 
3 


TURIN MEETING OF I.E. C. 2517 


Dr. Kennelly, speaking as President of the Illuminating Engi- 
neering Society of the United States, and Dr. Clayton H. Sharp, 
as a Past President, favored th’s idea, and the meeting expressed 
an opinion favorable to the suggestion. 


OFFICIAL FOURTH SESSION, PLENARY MEETING, SEPTEMBER 11 


At the plenary meeting of September 11, the various resolu- 
tions of the unofficial meetings on the 8th and 9th, were pre- 
sented in writing, were read over in both of the official languages, 
and were formally voted without dissent. Many of these 
resolutions have been quoted at large, in this report. 


CounciL MEETING OF THE I. E. C., SEPTEMBER 13 


The council of the I. E. C. is a species of executive committee, 
to which, by statute, the affairs of the Commission are en- 
trusted, when no plenary meeting is in session. It consists of 
the President of the Commission, the Honorary Secretary, the 
Presidents of the various National Committees, and one addi- 
tional delegate from each national committee. At this meeting, 
the communication was received from the International Electro- 
technical Congress of Turin, to the effect that in view of the 
authority, permanence, and international organization of the 
1. E. C., the latter body was especially qualified to determine the 
relations between succeeding international electrotechnical 
congresses. The said Commission was therefore requested to 
undertake the task of organizing such congresses in future, in 
so far as relates to their times and places of convention, the 
details of organization being referred in each case to the par- 
ticular committee and country in which the congress is to be held. 

The council expressed its thanks to the congress, and under- 
took to comply with the request. 

The meeting then adjourned, after passing votes of thanks to 
the officers of the Commission, and to their hosts, Professor 
Lombardi and the Italian Committee. 


SocIAL FEATURES OF THE CoMMISSION MEETING 


Although the sessions of the I. E. C. occupied the working 
hours of the days on which they occurred; yet the official and 
technical duties of the delegates were delightfully relieved by the 
cordial and assiduous attentions of their Italian hosts, who spared 
no pains to make the visit to Turin memorable for social 
pleasure as well as for electrotechnical accomplishment. The 
Italian committee held a banquet in honor of the delegates on 


2518 TURIN MEETING OF I. E. C. 


September 9, at which mutual toasts and congratulations were 
offered on the success of the meetings. At this banquet, a 
souvenir of the convention, in the form of a Japanese work of 
Art, was presented to the retiring President Professor Elihu 
Thomson, by a number of the delegates, who desired to testify 
their appreciation of the valuable services he had rendered to the 
commission during his term of office. Colonel Crompton acted 
as Master of the Ceremonies during this presentation. 

Over and above the official resolutions adopted by the Com- 
mission, the Turin meeting brought about very successful results 
in active and cordial coéperation, which are bound to manifest 
themselves in the actions of the standing subcommittees. The 
real requisite in any international undertaking is cordial codpera- 
tion, without which all endeavors may be nugatory, but with 
which success becomes assured. To the labors of the permanent 
staff of the Commission, its Honorary and General Secretaries, 
this spirit of cordiality is largely due, aided by President Thom- 
son, and the Italian Committee. President Mailloux of the 
American Committee, moreover, gave most valuable service to 
this, as to past meetings, of the I. E. C., by his very unusual 
linguistic abilities. Although, theoretically, any delegate can 
share in the work of the meetings, who can speak either English 
or French; yet, practically, no delegate can take an active part 
in the proceedings, who is not familiar with both these languages. 
Mr. Mailloux being thoroughly well acquainted with the German, 
Spanish, and Italian languages, besides English and French, has 
on many occasions been able to bring about unity of thought and 
action among delegates of different countries, which might 
otherwise have been impossible. 


In conclusion, electrical engineers all over the world, thanks. 


to the work of the I. E. C., now possess an internationally ratified 
symbolic expression of Ohm’s law, a list of other international 
symbols, a good start toward international rating of machinery, 
a good nucleus of official international electrotechnical nomen- 
clature, and an international decision on the long debated ques- 
tion of phase rotation in alternating-current vector diagrams. 
Moreover, largely owing to the personal incentive of President 
Dunn of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the way 
has been officially paved for holding a commission meeting and a 
congress at San Francisco in 1915. 
A. E. KENNELLY, 
Secretary of U. S. National Committee. 


a eee eee 


SS - =." 


[~s-2e f e NS 


“Sa +t eh ee 


4 
4 
e 
: 


Report to the American Institute of Electrical En- 
gineers from its Delegation to the Congress, and 
subject to the official report of the Congress. 


Copyright 1911. By A. I.E. E. 


THE INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL 
CONGRESS OF TURIN* 


HISTORICAL OUTLINE 


Information was laid before the American Institute of Elec- 
trical Engineers in 1910, that an International Congress of the 
Applications of Electricity would be held, at Turin, from the 
10th to the 17th of September, 1911, under the auspices of the 
Associazione Electrotecnica Italiana (A. E. I.) and of the Italian 
Electrotechnical Committee of the I. E. C., in connection with 
the Turin-Rome International Industrial Exhibition. 

International Electrical Congresses since the year 1900, in- 


clusive, have been held as follows: 
In 1900, at Paris, in connection with the Paris Exposition 


Universelle. 

In 1904, at St. Louis, in connection with the World’s Fair of 
St. Louis. 

In 1908, at Marseilles, in connection with the Marseilles - 
Exhibition. 


In connection with the Congresses of 1900 and 1904, there 
had been appointed a chamber of Government Delegates, 
charged with the work of international electrotechnical agree- 
ment, in addition to the Congress at large, in which papers were 
read and discussed. In pursuance of a vote taken in the chamber 
of Delegates at the St. Louis Congress of 1904, the duties of such 
Chambers were relegated to a special international commission. 
This International Electrotechnical Commission—the I. E. C.— 
was formed with a permanent organization in 1906, and no 


Gf the A. I. E. E. from its Dele- 


*A report to the Board of Directors 
orts as the 


gation to the Turin Congress, and subject to such official rep 


Congress may publish. 
2519 


2520 TURIN CONGRESS 


chamber of government delegates was formed at the Marseilles 
Congress. 

In connection with the Turin Congress, it was arranged that 
a meeting of the I. E. C. should be held at Turin, immediately 
before (7th-12th Sept.) the convention of the Congress. 


ORGANIZATION OF THE TURIN CONGRESS 


The Turin Congress was organized under (1) A Committee of 
Honor. (2) An Organizing Committee. (3) An Executive 
Committee nominated by the General Council of the A. E. I. 

(1) The Committee of Honor was headed by H. R. H. the 
Duke Degli Abruzzi, and included 28 members, among whom 
were Professor Elihu Thomson, President of the I. E. C., Colonel 
Crompton, Honorary Secretary of the I. E. C., and Signor 
Antonio Pacinotti, Honorary President of the A. E. I. 


(2) The Committee of Organization comprised 30 members 
as follows: ' 
President Professor Luigi Lombardi, President of the. A. E. I. 
Vice-President Professor Guido Grassi, President of the Turin 
Section of the A. E. I. 
Secretaries, Signori C. A. Curti, and G. Semenza. 


Members, Messrs. M. Ascoli, E. Jona, Q. M. Calatabiano, L. 
Amaduzzi, F. Fusco, G. Cesare, A. Vivarelli, A. Panzarasa, 
M. Pizzuti, G. Amati, S. Pagliani, C. Esterle, L. Pontiggia, 
L. A. Herdt, C. A. Rossander, A. Siemens, R. V. Picou, 
M. G. A. Hagemann, E. Budde, E. Gerard, O. T. Blathy, 
J. Alonso y Millan, F. Drexler, C. Feldmann, K. P. Tauber, 
C. Zipernowsky, H. Armagnat. 

A sub-committee for the United States was formed as follows: 
President, J. W. Lieb, Jr.; Members, D. C. Jackson, A. E. 
Kennelly, C. O. Mailloux, T. C. Martin, H. G. Stott, S. W. 
Stratton. 


(3) The Executive Committee comprised 23 members as follow: 

President Professor Guido Grassi. 

Secretaries Signori G. Lignana, and F. Nizza. 

Treasurer, A. Luino. ; 

Members, Messrs. E. Morelli, V. Tedeschi, C. Montu, 
O. Trossarelli, E. Soleri, P. Forster, A. Rostain, G. G. Ponti, 
R. Arno, V. Treves, A. Miolati, L. Ferraris, T. Chiesa, 
P. Prat, G. Schultz, G, Bisazza, (Hh . Lauchard. “Ey De- 
Benedetti, R. Pinna. 


—S 


‘ 
$ 
‘ 

? 
} 


TURIN CONGRESS 2521 


The technical work of the Congress was divided among eight 
sections. Thirty-one specific official topics were selected, and 
announced in advance, by the Committee of Organization, and 
papers or reports on these topics were secured, in advance, from 
as many authors in 10° countries: viz., Austria, Belgium, Den- 
mark, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Sweden, Switzer- 
land and the United States. 

In addition to the officially prepared papers or reports on 
specified topics, about fifty independently offered papers on 
various subjects were accepted by the Organizing Committee. 

The subscription for membership in the Congress was fixed 
at 25 Lire ($5), entitling the holder to all the publications and 
privileges of the organization. A reduced subscription of 10 Lire 
($2), entitled a holder to attend the technical meetings, as a 
listener, but to the exclusion of all publications or privileges. 

The technical meetings of the Congress were of two kinds— 
plenary and sectional. There were three plenary meetings, one 
of opening, the second, intermediate, and the third of closing. 
The sectional meetings were for the reading and discussion. of 
papers. They took place between the first and third plenary 
meetings. 

Four official languages were selected for the reception of papers 
and reports: namely, French, Italian, English and German. 
All papers in Italian, English, or German, were required to be 
accompanied by a summary in French. The official bulletins 
of the Congress were issued daily in Italian and French. Votes 
and resolutions in plenary meetings were presented in both 
Italian and French. When a single language was employed as a 
vehicle of discussion, 1t was most frequently the French; al- 
though discussions were admitted in any of the four official 
languages. All the technical meetings of the Congress were 
held at its headquarters—the Reale Politecnico, via Ospedale, 
Turin—a large technical college granting degrees, following 
five-year courses of instruction in civil engineering, mechanical 
engineering, (including electrical engineering), chemical engi- 
neering, and architecture. . 

The greater number of the reports and papers communicated 
to the Congress were printed, and circulated in advance of each 
day’s sessions. 

About 450 full-membership adhesions were published before 
the close of the Congress, and the total registration of members 
in both classes amounted to about 650. 


2522 : TURIN CONGRESS 


The following is a list of the foreign government delegates 
and of the delegates from technical institutions. 


REPRESENTATIVES OF FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS 


Austria. Messrs. Alfredo Graf, Alfredo Deinlein. 

Belgium. Messrs. Ernest Gerard, D. L’Hoest, Il’Ing. Colson, Eugene 
Gevaert. 

Denmark. Ing. Joh. Rasch. 

France. Messrs. M. Barbillion, Swyngedauw. 

Japan. Mr. Atsushi Oya. 

British India. J. W. Meares. 

Great Britain. Major W. A. J. O’Meara, Dr. R. T. Glazebrook, A. Sie- 
mens, Dr. S. P. Thompson. : 

Luxemburg. Mr. Charles Eydt. 

Mexico. Ing. Alfonso Castello. 

Portugal. Baron Nasi di Cossombrato. 

Ecuador. Messrs. Richard Muller, Alfredo Gerard. 

Russia. Messrs. Pierre Ossadtchy, Colonel de Mouromtzew. 

Spain. Messrs. Alfredo Lasala, Jose Abbad Boned, Luis De La Pena, 
Manuel de Justo y Sanches Blanco. 

United States. Messrs. Gano Dunn, C. O. Mailloux, H. B. Brooks. 

Switzerland. Messrs. Gustavo Sulzberger, Christian Brunnschweiler, 
E. Vanoni. 

Hungary. Frederic Koromzay. 


DELEGATES OF TECHNICAL SOCIETIES 
Austria. 
Elektrotechnischer V2rein, Vienna: Ing. Alfredo Griinhut. 
Osterreichischer Ingenieur und Architekten Verein di Vienna: Ing, 
Alfredo Deinlein. 


Belgium. 
Association des Ingenieurs Electriciens sortis de l'Institut Montefiore 
de Liege: Omer de Bast. 


Denmark. 
Den Tekniske Ferening, Copenhagen: P. O. Pedersen. 
Dansk Ingenierferening, Copenhagen: P. O. Pedersen, Ing. Valdemar 
Poulsen. 


France. 
Société Internationale des Electriciens de Paris: Bouter ne Armagnat, 
Brunswick, Janet, Legouez, Blondin. 
Syndicat Professionnel des Usines d’Electricité de Paris: Eschwége, 
Legouez, Brylinski, Berthelot. 
Société des Ingénieurs Civils de Paris: Paul Lecler. 
Société des Agriculteurs de France: Paul Lecler. 


Germany. 


Verband Deutscher Electrotechniker: Page Dr. E. Budde, G. Dett- 
mar. 


TURIN CONGRESS 2523 


Great Britain. 

The Institution of Electrical Engineers: S. Z. Dz Ferranti, 
Colonel R. E. Crompton, Dr. R. T. Grazebrook, R. Haye Gray, 
A. Siemens, S. P. Thompson, W. Duddell, W. A. J. O'Meara, R. 
Hammond, 2. H. Patchell. 

The Illuminating Engineering Society :Prof. S. P. Thompson, Leon 
Gaster, R. J. Wallis-Jones, Justuk Eck. 

The Institution of Mechanical Engineers: W. H. Patchell. 

Electrical Section, London Chamber of Commerce: Leon Gaster, 
Charles P. Sparks, A. Bruce Anderson. 


Italy. 
Accademia delle Scienze Fisiche e Matematiche di Napoli: Prof. 


Guido Grassi. 
Collegio degli Ingegneri ed Architetti di Milano: Ing. Denti Eugenio. 
Collegio Ingegneri ed Architetti di Napoli: Ing. G. D. Cangia. 
Associazione Amichevole fra gli Ingegneri ex-Allievi della Scuola di 
E . Torino: Ing. Comm. Oreste Lattes. 
Reale Istituto Lombardo di Scienze e Lettere di Milano: Prof. 
Riceardo Arns, Prof. Francesco Grassi. 
: Socizta Ingegneri ed Architetti Italiani di Roma: Ing. Prof. Giuseppe 
Revessi. 
Collegio Veneto degli Ingegneri di Venezia: Ing. Cav. Filippo Danioni. 
Collegio Nazionale degli Ingegneri Ferroviari Italiani di Roma: 
Comm. Lattes Oraste. 
Collegio Ingegneri ed Architetti Pugliesi di Bari: Ing. Nicola Stea. 


Associazione Elettrotecnica Italiana: 
Sezione di Roma: Prof. Comm. Guglielmo Mengarini, Ing. Ulisse 


c Del Buono. 
; Sezione di Genova: Cav. Vittorio Capellint. 
Holland. 
: Institut van Ingenieurs d’Olanda: L. M. Barnet-Lyon Clarence 
; Feldmann. 


Argentine Republic. 


Sociedad Cientifica Argentina di Buenos Ayres: Dr. Ing. Angel 
3 Gallardo, Ing. Domingo Selva. as 
g Russia. Sezione elettrotecnica della Societa Imperiale Russa di Pie- 
e- troburgo: Prof. M. de Chatelain. 
, Istituto elettrotecnico di Pietroburgo: Prof. Graftio. 

Spain. 
» Sociedad Espanola de Fisica y Quimica di Madrid: A. Gabasso, 
: Luis de la Pena, Enrique Hauser. 


Instituto de Ingenieros Civiles di Madrid: Ing. Luis de la Pena, 
Ing. Don Antonio Gonzales Echorte. 


Switzerland. 
Physikalische Gesellschaft Zurich: Dr. H. Behn-Eschenburg, 


Dr. Ing. S. Guggenheim. 


2524 TURIN CONGRESS 


United States. 


American Institute of Electrical Engineers: Prof. E.Thomson, 
C. O. Mailloux, Dr. A. E. Kennelly, Gano Dunn, Prof. C. A. 
Adams, H. B. Brooks, E. P. Burch, G. Faccioli, Etienne 
de Fodor, R. O. Heinrich, Francis Jehl, Hirayoshi Oshima, C. H. 
Sharp, J. F. Stevens, Philip Torchio. 

Association of Edison Illuminating Companies: Philip Torchio. 

American Electrochemical Society: C. O. Mailloux. 

Franklin Institute: G. Faccioli, A. E. Kennelly. 


PLENARY MEETINGS 

(1) The opening plenary meeting took place at 10:30 a:m. on 
Sunday, September 10.. An address of welcome was read by 
Senator P. Boselli, President of the Royal Academy of Sciences 
at Turin, in the presence of a number of official delegates. This 
was followed by an address by Professor Luigi Lombardi, 
who, in welcoming the members, set forth the hopes and purposes 
of the Congress, as well as the arrangements made for showing 
the most interesting electrotechnical plants, exhibits, and fea- 
tures of importance to visitors. A fine address was then de- 
livered by the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs Signor Calissano, 
who was elected honorary president of the Congress. The fol- 
lowing elections of officers were then made: 


President—Prof. Luigi Lombardi, President of the A. E. I. 


Vice-Presidents—Prof. Guido Grassi. 
Ing. Emanuele Jona. 


General Secretary—Ing. Guido Semenza. 


Honorary Vice-Presidents—Antonio Pacinotti for Italy. 

Silvanus P. Thompson and Alex- 
ander Siemens for England. 

Gano Dunn for the United States. 
Paul Janet for France. 
Karl Strecker for Germany. 
Alfred Graf for Austro-Hungary. 
Pierre Ossactchy for Russia. 
Gustave L’Hoest for Belgium. 
Behn-Eschenburg for Switzerland. 
De La Pena for Spain. 
Poulsen for Denmark. 


TURIN CONGRESS 2525 


The following Section officers were then elected, after which 
the plenary meeting adjourned. 


| Section Subject President Vice-Presidents ~ Secretary 
Jie Electrical Machines and| Boucherot Morelli (Italy) C. Palestrino 
Transformers. (France) Feldmann (Holland) 
ite Electrical Installations De Bast Ferraris (Italy) Del Buono 
and Networks (Belgium) Landry (Switzerland) Boccardo 
TLL Instruments, Apparatus Kennelly Dina (Italy) Emmanueli 
and Switching Devices. | (U. S. A.) Armagnat (France) Barbagelata 
IV. Lighting and Heating | Rossander Mengarini (Italy Danioni 
by Electricity. (Sweden) Sharp (U. 5S. A.) 
Vv. Electrical Traction and Mailloux Sartori (Italy) Fenzi 
Propulsion. (UR SeaAs) Barnet Lyon (Holland) Ponti 
VI. Telegraphy and Tele- O’ Meara Larsen (Denmark) Bellini 
phony. (Grt. Britain) Di Pirro (Italy) 
| VI. Accumulators, Electro-| Beckmann Miolati (Italy) 
| Chemistry, Electro- | (Germany) Duddell (Grt. Britain) 
| metallurgy and other Rumi (Italy) 
applications. 2 
VIII. | Tariffs, Taxation and Arno Dettmar (Germany) Botto 
| Legislation in regard to (Italy) Bonghi (Italy) Guiletti 
the distribution of elec- 
| trical energy. 


(2) The Intermediate Plenary Meeting of September 13. After 
gome discussion by President Lombardi on the subject of the 
organization of future electrotechnical congresses, the following 
resolution was put by M. Clarence Feldmann (Holland), and 
carried unanimously, after being seconded by Messrs. Boucherot 
(France), S. P. Thompson (Great Britain), Mailloux (U.S. A.), 
L’Hoest (Belgium), Strecker (Germany), De Chatelain (Russia), 
and Grassi (Italy). 

Whereas, the provisional committee appointed by the Inter- 


national Electrotechnical Congress of Marseilles for the 


purpose of forming a permanent international committee 


of organization for electrotechnical congresses has made no 
report. 

and Whereas, The International Electrotechnical Commission, 
permanently organized since 1906, is by its position, au- 
thority and statutes especially adapted to be the permanent 
organization for securing the connecting link between inter- 


national electrotechnical congresses and to give effect to their 


labors. 
The International Electrotechnical Commission is requested 
to accept the task of organizing future electrotechnical Congresses 


so far as concerns their dates, places of meeting, and objects, 


2526 TURIN CONGRESS 


the details of the organization of each congress being confided to 
the: electrotechnical committee of the country in which the 
congress is to be held, with the assistance of its technical societies, 
if necessary. 

The meeting then adjourned. 

The request was accepted by the Council of the I. E. C. on 
the 13th. 

(3.) The Closing Plenary Meeting of Saturday, September 16. 
The following resolutions were presented to the plenary meeting 
after having been published in the official bulletin. All were 
adopted. 

(1) From Section III. rf 

The International Electrotechnical Congress of Turin compli- 
ments the American Institute of Electrical Engineers on the 
practice it has adopted of inserting in its publications the metric 
equivalent value, in parentheses, after each expression of values 
in English measures. 

And since this procedure greatly facilitates the reading of 
these publications in all the countries using the metric system, 
while constituting a worthy example towards and in view of the 
much desired complete international unification of weights and 
measures. 


Resolved, that the technical societies of all countries in 


which the metric system is not yet official, are invited to follow 
the above-mentioned example of the American Institute of 
Electrical Engineers. 

This vote was carried with much acclamation. 
(2) From Section IV. 

The Congress favors the appointment of an International 
Commission for the general study of systems of illumination, and 
of all technical problems connected with illumination, proposing 
that the Illuminating Engineering Society of London be charged 
with the formation of this International Commission, placing 
itself for that purpose in communication with all other existing 
national and international photometric committees. 

(3) From Section V. 

The committee of the fifth section charged with the duty of 
examining the proposition of Mr. Mailloux concerning the 
definition and industrial determination of train acceleration 
reports as follows: ; 

Whereas, in industrial traction, the speed of trains is always 
measured in kilometers per hour, (or in local equivalent values), 
and 


TURIN CONGRESS 2527 


Whereas, it is logical to start with such a definition of train 
velocity, in order to express the acceleration per second, and 

Whereas, such definitions of train acceleration are invariably 
used in America, and are also largely used in other countries. 
and, 

Whereas, a similar proposal has already been recommended 
favorably by the International Electrotechnical Congress of 
Marseilles (1908). 

Resolved by this Congress that: 

(1) Train accelerations be expressed in kilometers per hour per 
second. ; 

(2) That the International Electrotechnical Commission be 
informed of this resolution. 

(4) From Section VIII. 

Two resolutions relating to political and fiscal questions of 
European rather than American interest. 

(5) From certain individual members: 

That the next International Electrotechnical Congress should 
form a section devoted to the subject of electrotechnical in- 
struction. 

Closing reports and addresses were then made by the Presi- 
dent, the Section-Presidents and various government delegates, 
who expressed the general thanks of the assembly to the officers 
of the Congress, the President and Secretary, and the Italian 
committee for their attentions and courtesies during the exercises 
of the Congress. 

The Congress than finally adjourned. 


MEETINGS OF THE SECTIONS 


A list of the reports and papers presented as to the different 
sections is appended herewith. The contributions numbered 
80 in all, from writers in 14 different countries, 11 contribu- 
tions being presented from America. 

Meetings in Honor of Senator Antonio Pacinotti, and of Pro- 
fessor Galileo Ferraris. A meeting of the A. E. I., attended by 
a large number of members of the Congress, was held on Sep- 
tember 13, to celebrate the semi-centennial anniversary of his 
invention of the Pacinotti-ring dynamo-electric machine, the 
original model of which was displayed in the electrical depart- 
ment of the Turin Exhibition. The President of the A. E. L., 
Professor Lombardi, with a very appropriate address, delivered 
to Signor Pacinotti a handsomely framed and illumined parch- 


2528 TURIN CONGRESS 


ment, on which was reproduced, in miniature, the classic paper 


published by him on the dynamo-electric machine in ‘‘ Il Nuovo— 


Cimento” of 1865. An illuminated album accompanied the gift, 
containing the testimonial signatures of most of the members of 
the A. E. I., as well as of many Congress members. 

Professors Mengarini and Silvanus P. Thomson expressed 
the admiration and respect of the electrotechnical world, both 
in Italy and abroad, for the work of the illustrious Italian 
scientist. 


A brief and modest reply was made by Signor Pacinotti, 


which was enthusiastically received, after which the meeting 
adjourned. 

At another hour, an unofficial gathering took place in the 
large public square, called the ‘‘ Piazza Castello,” at the foot of 
the monument erected to Galileo Ferraris, the well-known Turin 
scientist, teacher and electrician, who discovered and first 
applied the principal of the rotating magnetic field. Three 
wreaths were laid on the pedestal, one offered by the French 
delegation, another by the American delegation, and the third 
by the city of Frankfort on Maine. : 

The Mayor of Turin made an eloquent speech in tribute to 
the work of Ferraris, and responses were made by M. Ferdinand 
Meyer on behalf of the French electricians, Mr. Philip Torchio, 
on behalf of American electricians, and Mr. Hartmann of Hart- 
mann & Brown, on behalf of the city of Frankfort. 

Technical Visits. On Thursday September 14, an all-day trip 
was taken from Turin to Genoa and back, inspecting en route 
the ‘‘ Giovi’’ lines and system. This is a three-phase electric 
railway {running from Busalla through Pontedecimo to Compasso. 
The locomotives are of European ‘‘ Westinghouse ’’ construc- 
tion, supplied through overhead trolley lines with alternating 
currents at 3,000 volts pressure, at a frequency of 15 cycles per 
second. The locomotives are regenerative, and return power to 
the system when descending grades of 0.7 per cent or more. 

Another visit was arranged for September 17 to Mont Cenis, 
where the Societd delle Forze Idrauliche del Moncenisio has 
hydraulic plants that transmit three-phase power, at 30 kilovolts, 
to Turin and beyond, at a frequency of 50 cycles per second. 

Entertainments. ‘The social features of the Congress were pre- 
pared and carried out with great care by the Italian committee, 
each day being provided with some special social event. There 
was also a special committee of Italian ladies to-meet the ladies 


as 


eS 


TURIN CONGRESS 2529 


of the guests, and arrange for their entertainment. The pre- 
vailing pleasant weather aided the entertainment committees 
on all occasions. 

On the 10th, a dinner was given to the official delegations at 
the Superga, on the top of a hill 420 meters in height, about 
10 kilometers north of Turin, with a rare and magnificent view of 
the Piedmontese Alps. On the 11th, an evening reception was 
given to the Congress by the Turin Municipality at the Circolo 
degli Artisti. On the 12th, a dinner was given by the City of 
Turin to the official delegates of the Congress, and another 
dinner, at the Exposition was given to the Congress members on . 
the 13th. A lunch was also given by the Italian Committee, 
to the American delegation, which will be memorable to all who 
attended it, for the charm of the occasion and the sentiments 
it elicited. 

There can be no doubt that not only the Congress guests as a 
whole; but also the American guests in particular, are under 
many obligations to their Italian hosts at Turin for attentions 
and courtesies during their very pleasant visit. The hope was 
expressed by President Dunn of the A. I. E. E., that many of 
the members of the Italian Society would be able to attend the 
Congress of 1915 at San Francisco, under the auspices of the 
American Institute. Mr. C. O. Mailloux, as the President of the 
American Delegation had frequent occasion to use his well 
known linguistic abilities, not only at the Congress sessions; but 
also at the social reunions, where his speeches in French and 
Italian were much applauded. 


CONCLUSIONS 

The permanent results of the Turin Congress may be sum- 
marized as follows: 

(1) The record of some 80 reports and papers with discussions 
on the same, destined to be published in due season by the 
Congress, and distributed among the members. 

(2) The resolutions of the plenary sessions of the Congress 
which bring its conclusions to a focus. As already detailed 
these particularly contain: 

(a) A provision for the regular convocation of future inter- 
national electrotechnical congresses, by assigning 
them to the jurisdiction of the I. E. C. 

(b) The adoption of the kilometer-per-hour-per-second as 
the industrial unit of train acceleration. 


2530 TURIN CONGRESS 


(c) A formal vote of thanks to the A. I. E. E. for its help to 
foreign engineers, in printing parenthetical metric 
equivalents. 

(d) That an international illuminating-engineering commis- 
sion should be formed. 

(3) Over and above the records of the Congress, there remains 
with all the members who attended it, the wealth of memories 
and experiences derived from meeting confréres of other coun- 
tries, and from a sympathetic insight into the solutions of the 


problems which confront them. 
A. E. KENNELLY, 


Secretary American Delegation. 


LIST OF REPORTS AND PAPERS* PRESENTED BY SECTIONS 
SEcTION I : 


ELECTRICAL MACHINES AND TRANSFORMERS 
Reports. 
Dr. H. Behn-Eschenburg. Electrical and mechanical characteristics 
of modern generators. Y 
Ing: G. P. Clerici. The problem of cooling transformers of medium 
size. 
‘Dr. S. P. Thompson. Converters, rectifiers and motor-generators. 
Paul Bunet. The problem of frequency transformation. 
Ing: C. Sarli. Variable speed three-phase motors, with special 
reference to rolling mills. 
Papers. 
Dr. Hallo. Motor-converters. 
Boucherot. Electromagnetic phenomena resulting from the sudden 
short-circuit of an alternator. 
R. Legouez. Commutator motors. 


Section II 
INSTALLATIONS, CENTRAL STATIONS, SWITCHBOARDS, CONDUCTING LINES 
Reports. 
Philip Torchio. The selection of voltage and the construction of 
switchboards and of substations in large electric systems. 
J. Grosselin. High-tension underground networks in metallic con- 
nection with overhead lines. 
E. Ragonot. The construction and use of automatic circuit breakers. 
G. Semenza. The synchronous operation of several central stations 
feeding the same network. 
Papers. 
S. Q. Hayes. Commercial Electrical apparatus for 100,000 volt ser- 
vice. 
Ing: E. Soleri. The extreme limits of high-t2nsion employed in cables. 


*The titles are here given in English when presented in another language. 


TURIN CONGRESS 2531 


Dr. Ing. Leon Lichtenstein. Recent experiments and tests on high- 
tension cables. 

Dr. Osuke Asano. Progress in electrical installations in Japan. 

Etienne de Fodor. The present state of the problem of sewage dis- 
posal in connection with electric stations. 

J. Routin. Automatic regulation. 

Dr. Ing. W. Weicker. Protection against over voltag2 on aerial 
lines, especially with suspension insulators. 

E. Hubet Stockar. Aluminum for electrical conductors. 

Paul Lecler. Electrotechnical applications to reinforced concrete. 


SecTIon III 


INSTRUMENTS AND METHODS OF’ MEASUREMENT, PROTECTION OF IN- 
STALLATIONS, MISCELLANEOUS 
Reports. 
G. Faccioli. High-tension switching phenomena. 
Dr. C. H. Sharp. Electricity Meters, with special reference to 
different kinds of loads. 
A. Durand. Electricity meters. 


Papers. 
Ing: Alberto Dina. The measurement of insulation-resistance in an 


alternating-current system during its operation. 
Prof. Riccardo Arné. Watt-volt ampere meters. 
Ingg. A. Barbagelata and L. Emanueli. Zero methods of alter- 
nating-current measurement. 
Prof. G. Revessi. A contribution to the study of stray currents. 
A. E. Kennelly. The rotating electric current field. 
Vladimir Karapetoff. Some practical calculations of electrostatic 
fields. . 
Jules Neher. Multiple-rate electricity meter. 
C. O. Mailloux. Method of determination of the constant current 
producing the same heating effect as a variable current. 
Dr. C. P. Steinmetz. The nature of electric transient phenomena. 
Prof. E. E. F. Creighton. Protection of electric systems. 
Ing. Alberto Dina. On methods of preventing internal over voltages. 
Ing. Gino Campos. The propagation of oscillatory over voltages. 
Ing. G. Martinez. Some new industrial alternating-current instru- 
ments. ; 
J. L. Farny. Ona new oscillographic process with the Braun tube. 
M. de Chatelain. Ona laboratory for the study of high-tension 
currents up to 500 kilovolts. ; 
G. Neuhaus. Protective relays. 


SrecTIon IV 
ILLUMINATION AND HEATING 


= eeen 


= 
al 


~ 


LY ae NE Pe SNe Pe ae ee. 
\ v 1 en 3 is ~*~ s, 


Reports. 

Prof. D. Wedding. The influence of incandescent and arc lamps 
on the illuminating industry. 

C. A. Rossander. The present and future of electric heating. 


Papers. 


Ing. C. Herrgott. On the heating of textiles by electricity. 


2532 C- TURIN CONGRESS 


Dr. Ing. Monasch. Manufacture and operation of metallic-filament 


lamps. 
Ing. Adolfo Hess. Practical results with a system of high tension 
intensive arc-lamps. 
Leon Gaster. The international outlook in scientific illumination. 
Dr. Luigi Pasqualini. Parabolic mirrors for electric arc projectors. 
Prof. R. Swyngedauw. An electric heating apparatus using Foucault 
currents. 
SECTION V 


ELECTRIC TRACTION 
Reports. 
Ing. Giorgio Calzolari. Single phase and three phase traction on 
lines of heavy traffic. 
‘Gustave L’Hoest. Overhead line construction on electric railroads. 
Ing. Agostino Bezzi. Electric applications in submarine vessels. 
Papers. 
Ing. Guillaume Gyaros. Electric traction on suburban lines. 
Dr. W. Kummer. On the development of single phase locomotives. 
C. O. Mailloux. Electrification of railroads. ; 
C. O. Mailloux. The industriai definition and measurement of 
train-acceleration. 


SECTION VI 
TELEGRAPHY AND TELEPHONY 
Reports. 
F. V. Jewett. Long distance telephony in America. 
Dr. Giovanni di Pirro. Long distance telephony. 
Dr. Valdemar Poulsen. Wireless telephony. 
H. Milon, Automatic and semi-automatic telephonic systems. 
Prof. P. O. Pedersen. Secrecy in radiotelegraphic communications. 
Major W. A. J. O’Meara. The different systems of multiple tele- 
graphy. 
Papers. 
Prof. A. Majorana Calatabiano. Wireless telephone research. 
J. Erksine Murray. A definition of the efficiency of a wireless 
telegraph system. 
Ing. Ettore Bellini. The Hertzian azimuth compass. 


SEcTION VII 


STORAGE-CELLS, ELECTROCHEMISTRY, ELECTROMETALLURGY AND OTHER 
APPLICATIONS 
Reports. 
Dr. H. Beckmann. The present state of the electric storage cell. 
Ing. Remo Catani. The direct prodacwen of steel from its ores in 
the electric furnace. 
Dr. Erlwein. The sterilization of water by electrical processes. 
Paul Lecler. The distribution of electrical energy in farming. 
Papers. 
Dr. Sigm. Guggenheim. The electric results furnished by the chief 
induction furnaces of the steel industry. 


= 


AS cee es 


- Tae A  - -! 


3 
5 
“4 
a 
- 
. 
E 
¥ 
f 
a 
A 
J 
a 


TURIN CONGRESS - 2533 


Ing. Luigi De Andreis. The sterilization of water in the Rovigo 
aqueduct. 

J. A. Montpellier. The technique of the electric storage-cell ex- 
pecially with reference to the iron-nickel cell. 

Prof. Oscar Scarpa. On the sterilization of water by ultraviolet rays. 

Dr. M. Recklinghausen. The sterilization of city water supplies by 
ultraviolet rays. 

Section VIII 
TARIFFS, LEGISLATION FOR AND TAXATION OF ELECTRIC SUPPLY 
Reports. 

Dr. A. Denzler. The government control of electricity meters. 

Ing. G. G. Ponti. Rational methods for the commercial measure- 
ment of electric power. 

Ing. Prof. Giuseppe Sartori. The problem of increasing the load 
factor of central stations. 

Ing. Mario Bonghi. Comparative study of direct and indirect 
taxation of electricity in different countries. 

Dr. H. Schreiber. Government regulations on the electric trans- 


mission of power. 
E. C. Ericson. Government regulations on the electric transmission 


of power. 
L. M. Barnet-Lyon. Government regulations on the electric trans- 
mission of power. 


Papers. 
Prof. Riccardo Arno. A solution of the problem of a rational charge 


for electric energy. 
Louis Prat. Mechanical problems in central stations. 


STANDARDIZATION RULES 


OF THE 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


HISTORY OF THE STANDARDIZATION RULES. 


The first step taken by the Institute toward the standardization of 
electrical apparatus and methods was a topical discussion on “‘ The Stand- 
ardization of Generators, Motors and Transformers,’’ which took place 
j simultaneously in New York and Chicago on the evening of January 26, 
* 1898. The discussion appears in the Institute TRANSACTIONS, Vol. 


Z XV, pages 3 to 32. The opinions expressed were generally favorable to 

; the scheme of standardization of electrical apparatus, although some 

- members feared that difficulties might arise. As a result of this dis- 

a cussion, a Committee on Standardization was appointed by the Council 

: of the Institute, consisting of the following members: 

Francis B. Crocker, Chairman. 

: Cary T. HUTCHINSON CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 

4 ARTHUR E. KENNELLY Lewis B. STILLWELL 

4 Joun W. Lies, JR. ELinu THOMSON 

4 After a careful consideration of the matter and consultation with the 
z members of the Institute and interested parties generally, a “ Report 
r of the Committee on Standardization,” was presented and accepted by 
EB the Institute, June 26, 1899. Those original rules appeared in the In- 
3 stitute TRANSACTIONS, Vol. XVI, pages 255 and 268. 

2 As a result of changes and developments in the electric art, it was 
3 subsequently found necessary to revise the original report, this work 
4 being carried out by the following Committe on Standardization: 

3 Francis B. CRockER, Chairman. 

q ARTHUR E. KENNELLY CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 

4 Joun W. Lies, JR. Lewis B. STILLWELL 

y C. O. MAILLOUX ELinu THOMSON 

2 This revised report was adopted at the 19th Annual Convention at 
Great Barrington, Mass., on June 20, 1902, and appears in the Institute 
 §©6s PRANSACTIONS, Vol. XIX, pages 1075 to 1092. 


In consequence of still further change and development in electrical 
apparatus and methods, it was decided in September, 1905 that a second 
revision was needed, and the following Committee was appointed to do 
this work. 

Francis B. CROCKER, Chairman. 
Artuur E. KENNELLY, Secretary. 
HENRY S. CARHART CHARLES F. Scott 
Joun W. Lies, Jr. CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
C. O. MAILLOUX Henry G. STOTT 
Ropert B. OWENS S. W. STRATTON 
2535 


2536 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


This Committee held monthly meetings and carried on extensive corre- 
spondence with manufacturers, consulting and operating engineers and 
other interested parties, and as a result, presented its report at the 23d 
Annual Convention, held at Milwaukee, May 28-30, 1906. After con- 
siderable discussion the report was accepted and referred back to the 
Committee for amendment and rearrangement in form. It was then 
to be submitted to the Board of Directors for final adoption. In Septem- 
ber, 1906, the following Standardization Committee was appointed: 

Francis B. CROCKER, Chairman. 
ARTHUR E. KENNELLY, Secretary. 


A. W. BERRESFORD CHARLES F. Scott 

DuGALpD C. JACKSON CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
C. O. MAILLoux HENRY G. STOTT 

ROBERT B. OWENS S. W. STRATTON 


ELinu THOMSON 

This Committee held monthly meetings, also sub-committee meetings, 
and carefully referred the rules as a whole, and each part of them to 
the members of the Institute. The rules were also entirely rearranged 
as to form, and put in shape to facilitate ready reference to them and 
enable future revisions to be made without breaking up the logical ar- 
rangement. Thus amended the rules were submitted to the Board of 
Directors and approved by it on June 21, 1907. The Board also directed 
that the rules should be presented, as accepted by the Board, at the 
Annual Convention held at Niagara Falls, June 24 to 27, 1907, which ac- 
tion was taken by President Sheldon on June 26, 1907. By the Con- 
stitution which went into effect on June 10, 1907, this Committee has been 
made a standing Committee with the title ‘‘ Standards Committee,’’ con- 
sisting of nine members. 

On August 12, 1910 the Board of Directors increased the size of the 
committee from nine to twelve members; on October 14 from twelve to 
fourteen, and on March 10, 1911 from fourteen to sixteen. The com- 
mittee thus constituted is given below. 

Comrort A. ADAMS, Chairman. 
ARTHUR E. KENNELLY, Secretary. 


H. W. Buck W. S. Moopy 

GAaNo DUNN R. A. PHILIP 

H. W. FISHER W. H. POWELL 

H. B. GEAR CHARLES ROBBINS 

J. P. JACKSON E. B. Rosa 

W. L. MERRILL CHARLES P. STEINMETZ 
RateH D. MERSHON CALVERT TOWNLEY 


This committee and several sub-committees held numerous meetings 
at which the general revision of the Standardization Rules of the Institute 
was considered. The complete Standardization Rules as revised by this 
committee, were presented to and approved by the Board of Directors on 
June 27th, 1911, at the Annual Convention held at Chicago, IIl. 


— 


a II. 


en, eT ewe 


% 


, 


ORI wr 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


GENERAL PLAN. 


DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL DATA 


DEFINITIONS—CURRENTS AND E.M.F.’S......-----+-> 
DEFINITIONS—ROTATING MACHINES. ......---+++++5+> 
DEFINITIONS—STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS..... 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF APPARATUS.......+-+->- 
Motrors—SPEED CLASSIFICATION.....--.--+++ ser cecs 
DEFINITIONS—INSTRUMENTS. .....-++-+>- j aS Broke 
DEFINITION AND EXPLANATION OF TERMS......-.-.--- 
(I) Load Factor, Diversity Factor, Demand Factor. 
(Il) Non-Inductive and Tnductiyeslboaden cei. a-rilo: 
(III) Power-Factor and Reactive Factor.........-5--- 
(IV) Saturation-Factor.........:-.0- sees e sere rete 


(V) Variation and Pulsatlonene sem serves ears enuneaen 


PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS 


[XS SOPGR RO Soe oe les De 1 OOO ae a alee 
UMVVPA VIE ROTA PEA ses sie ciesslir tate enstci erates ectols eaniet sesame sae 2) 
ee LC TEMG Unt petits tet ere een OS RE ns ee 
(ge ABS Ret eS scr ree: ia ae ga a aa 

(Il) Measurement of Efficiency sccmakems cane ns ae 
(III) Measurement of Losses. ....--.-s0+ ses uerse ttt 
(IV) Efficiency of Different Types of Apparatus...... 

(A) Direct current Commutating Machines...... 

(B) Alternating-Current Commutating Machines. 

(C) Synchronous Commutating Machines........ 

(D) Synchronous NMachiness oetacaee: etree mit on 

(EZ) Stationary Induction Apparatus.........+--: 

(F) Rotary Induction Apparatus......-...250+-> 

(G) Unipolar or Acyclic Machines. ......---+--- 

(H) Rectifying Apparatus......-----+++eserer ee 

(1) Transmission Lines......-.--++++s+e sree 

(J) Phase-Displacing Apparatus. .....-.---++--- 


PE eS ETON ihe geet vise ys en HEE 
(I) Insulation Resistance marisa: scien) tolertle sar! fae 
(II) Dielectric Srrenyt lawl ghee he: se ee re ee tS 

CA) Dente volta gesane ve aloe -hiar ee se Aes Geng 

(B) Methods of GWasivere acoso dee cn soe omer ea 

(C) Methods for Measuring the Test Voltage...... 

(D) Apparatus for Supplying Test Voltage...... f 
2537 


Paragraph 


118 
127 
1 


TON 


2538 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


BS “CGCONDUCTIVITY.ne ooo es Gee ole nail tate oaks acta eee 2 
G4 Risk -on) TEMPERATURE. hae alostenee aati maeeerat eaeh aeons 261 to 292 
(I) Measurement of Temperature. . S TnL od pune a2 OL ann 
(A). Methods ioe Sern eae eee as ee 261 to 266. 
(B) Normal Conditions’ for Tests......3.-.- 32. <= 267 to 271 
(II) Limiting Temperature Riserastuist. mins tems 272 to 292 
(A) Machines in General.. : i Se ath eae a eee 
(B) Rotary Induction Apparatus. . oy coe eigl eke Sie LD Oban 
(C) Stationary Induction Apparatus. BA eS Sed AO Ge 283 to 286 
(D) Rheostats.. a 287 Stowe 
(EZ) Limits Recommended in “Special. Cases....... 289 to 292 
H>> OVERLOAD. CAPACITIES? sa ae eee a eee etre ter nntenes 293 to 304 

III. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES 

A. . Wonr Gees. - baie aespeean ce ea 
B. FREQUENCIES. . be Ee aah Se SR LR SEO I) 
IV. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS. 2 Aiiic SS Ae Aloe tahoe 313 to 323 


V. APPENDICES AND TABULAR DATA 
APPENDIX. A-—NOTATIONG:. « oct: bine See aaa ee 


APPENDIX’ B.-—-RAIL WAY. MOTORS)... cc © 24.0 closer on ae 325 to 340 
(I) Rating. tose nae tee eee te to 327 
(II) Selection of Motor for Specified Service:. .....828 to 340 

APPENDIX C.—PHOTOMETRY AND LAMPS............%0+.--- 341 to 357a 

APPENDIX D.—SPARKING DISTANCES..<.............-..s.:009 toldoQm 

APPENDIX E.—TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENTS. . ae A 

APPENDIX .f:i—HorsE POWERS. ne St ens oe ee eee eee 

PAGE 

APPENDIX G.—INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF THEI. E.C. 2571 

(Adopted at the Turin Congress in 1911.) 
APPENDIX H.—RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY...... 2572 to 2584 
(Comparative Rules of Different Countries.) 
APPENDIX I.—HEATING AND GUARANTEES.............. 2584 to 2585. 


(Additional Comparative Rules.) 
be 


we 


: 
3 
a 
Z 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.I. E. E. 
As APPROVED JUNE 27, 1911. 


I. DEFINITIONS AND TECHNICAL DATA. 


1 Note: The following definitions and classifications are intended to be prac- 
tically descriptive and not scientifically rigid. 


A. DEFINITIONS. CURRENTS AND Bees: 


2 A Direct CurRENT is a unidirectional current. 

3 A Continuous CURRENT is a steady, or non-pulsating, direct current. 
4 A PULSATING CURRENT is a current equivalent to the superposition of an 
- alternating current upon a continuous current. 

5 An ALTERNATING CURRENT OR E.M.F. is a current or e.m.f. which, 


when plotted against time in rectangular coérdinates, consists of half- 
eee of equal area in successively opposite directions from the zero 
ine. 

ba CycLe. Two immediately succeeding half-waves constitute a cycle. 

Bb PERIOD. The time required for the execution of a cycle is called a period 

5c ‘FREQUENCY. The number of cycles per second is called the frequency. 

Bd WaAveE-FoRM. The shape of the curve of e.m.f. or current plotted against 
time in rectangular codrdinates, is ordinarily referred to as the wave-form or 
wave-shape. Two alternating quantities are said to have the same wave- 
shape if their corresponding phase ordinates bear a constant ratio. The 
wave-shape, as ordinarily understood, is thus independent of the scales to 
which the curve is plotted. 

be SIMPLE ALTERNATING WAVE. Unless otherwise specified an alternating 
current or e.m.f. is assumed to be sinusoidal, and the wave a sinusoid, 
sine-wave or curve of sines. On this account a complete cycle is taken as 
360 degrees, and any portion of a cycle may be expressed in degrees 
from any convenient reference point, such as the ascending zero-point. 

5f A CompLEX ALTERNATING WAVE is a non-sinusoidal wave. 
complex alternating wave is capable of being resolved into a single 
sine wave of fundamental frequency, with superposed odd-frequency 
harmonic waves, or ripples, NT ae Pale n+1) times the 
fundamental frequency, each harmonic having constant amplitude, and 
a definite starting phase-relation to the fundamental sine-wave. It is 
customary when analyzing a complex wave, to neglect harmonics higher 
than the 11th; z.e., of frequency higher than 11 times the fundamental. 
In special cases, however, frequencies still higher may have to be considered. 
In certain exceptional cases even harmonics are present. 

5g Root-MEAN-SQUARE VALUE (sometimes called the Virtual or Effective 
Value). Unless otherwise specified, the rating of an alternating-current or 
e.m.f., in amperes or volts, is assumed to be the square root of the mean 
square value taken throughout one or more complete cycles. This is 
sometimes “abbreviated to r.m.S. - The term root-mean-square is ‘tobe 
preferred to the terms virtual or effective. The root-mean-square value 
is indicated by all properly calibrated alternating-current voltmeters and 
ammeters. In the case of a sine-wave, the ratio of the maximum to the 


_r.m.s. value is /2. 
2539 


2540 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


Bh Form-Factor OF AN ALTERNATING WAVE. The ratio of the root-mean- 
square to the arithmetical mean ordinate of a wave, taken without regard to 
sign, is called its form-factor. The form-factor for a purely rectangular 
wave is the minimum, 1.0; for a sine wave it is 1.11, and for a wave 
more peaked than a sine wave it is greater than 1.11. 

5i THE EQUIVALENT SINE WAVE is a sine wave having the same frequency 
and the same r.m.s value as the actual wave. : 

5j The Deviation of wave-form from the sinusoidal is determined by super- | 
posing upon the actual wave, (as determined by oscillograph), the equiva- 
lent sine wave of equal length, insuch a manner as to give the least dif- 
ference, and then dividing the maximum difference between corresponding 
ordinates by the maximum value of the equivalent sine wave. , 

5k PHASE DIFFERENCE. When corresponding cyclic values of two sinu- 
soidal alternating quantities such as two alternating currents or e.m.fs. or 
of a current and ane.m.f., of the same frequency, occur at different instants, 
the two alternating quantities are said.to differ in phase, their phase dif- 
ference being the time interval, expressed in degrees or as a fraction of a 
cycle, between the occurrence of their corresponding values; e.g. their 
ascending zeros or their positive maxima. : 

61 EQUIVALENT PHASE DIFFERENCE. If two alternating quantities are 
non-sinusoidal, and of different wave shapes, the preceding definition of 
phase-difference is inapplicable, and phase-difference ceases to have exact 
significance. However, when the two complex alternating quantities 
are the voltage E and current J in a given circuit, the effective power P of 
which is known, it is customary to define the equivalent phase difference 
by the angle whose cosine is the power-factor, P/EI, of the circuit. See 
Sections 54 and 324. 

5m SINGLE-PHAsE. A term characterizing a simple alternating current 
circuit energized by a single alternating e.m.f. Such a circuit is usually 
supplied through two wires. The currents in these two wires counted 
pent yely outwards from the source, differ in phase by 180 degrees or half 
a. cycle. 

bn THREE-PHASE. A term characterizing the combination of three circuits 
eee by alternating e.m.fs. which differ in phase by one third of a cycle; 
4:6, : 

5o QUARTER-PHASE, also called Two-pHaseE. A term characterizing the 
combination of two circuits energized by alternating e.m.fs. which differ 
in phase by a quarter of a cycle; i.e., 90°. 

Bp Six-pHAsE. A term characterizing the combination of six circuits ener- 
eee alternating e.m.fs. which differ-in phase by one sixth of a cycle; 
1.€., ; 

5q POLYPHASE is the general term applied to any alternating system with 
more than a single phase. 

6 An OSCILLATING CURRENT is a current alternating in direction, and of 
decreasing amplitude. 


B. DEFINITIONS, ROTATING MACHINES. 


7 A GENERATOR transforms mechanical power into electrical power. 
8 A DrREcT-CURRENT GENERATOR produces a direct current that may or 
may not be continuous. 
9 An ALTERNATOR is an alternating-current generator, either single-phase 
or polyphase. 
9a A SYNCHRONOUS ALTERNATOR comprises a constant magnetic field and 
an armature delivering either single-phase or polyphase current in syn- 
chronism with the rotation of the machine. 
10 A PoLyPHASE GENERATOR produces currents differing symmetrically 
in phase; such as quarter-phase currents, in which the terminal voltages of 
the two circuits differ in phase by 90 degrees; or three-phase currents, in 


which the terminal voltages of the three circuits differ in phase by 120 
degrees, 


a 


LN 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.I.E.E. 2541 


11 =A DouBLE-CuRRENT GENERATOR supplies both direct and alternating 
currents from the same armature-winding. 

11a An INDUCTOR ALTERNATOR is an alternator in which both field and 
armature windings are stationary. 

11b, AN INDUCTION GENERATOR is a machine structurally identical with an 
induction motor, but driven above synchronous speed as an alternating- 
current generator. 

12 A Moror transforms electrical power into mechanical power. 

12a A Drrect-CurRENT Moror transforms direct-current power into me- 
chanical power. 

12b AN ALTERNATING-CURRENT Moror transforms alternating-current 
power into mechanical power. 

12c A SyncHROoNous Moror is a machine structurally identical with a 
synchronous alternator, but operated as a motor. 

12d ASyNcHRONOUS PHASE MopDIFIER, sometimes called a Synchronous Con- 
denser, is a synchronous motor, running either idle or under load, whose field 
excitation may be varied so as to modify the power-factor of the circuit, 
or through such modification to influence the voltage of the circuit. 

12e AN INpDUcTION MorToris an alternating-current motor, either single-phase 
or polyphase, comprising independent primary and secondary windings, 
one of which, usually the secondary, is on the rotating member. The 
secondary winding has no conductive connection with the supply circuit. 

12f A REPULSION MorTor is an induction motor, usually single phase, in which 
the magnetic axis of the secondary, (a closed coil winding mounted on the 
rotor), is maintained at a certain fixed angle with respect to the stationary 
primary coil by means of a multisegmental commutator and short-circuit- 
ing brushes. 

12g A SINGLE-PHASE SERIES CoMMUTATOR Moror is structurally similar 
to a series direct-current motor, except that it is usually provided in ad- 
dition with a series compensating winding distributed around the outer air- 
gap periphery and supported in slots in the pole faces, for the purpose of - 
diminishing the armature leakage reactance. 

13 A BoosTeER is a machine inserted in series in a circuit to change its 
voltage. It may be driven by an electric motor (in which case it is termed 
a motor-booster) or otherwise. 

14 A Moror-GENERATOR is a transforming device consisting of a motor 
mechanically connected to one or more generators. 

15 A Dynamoror is a transforming device combining both motor and 
generator action in one magnetic field, either with two armatures, or with 
one armature having two separate windings and independent commutators. 

16. A CONVERTER is a machine employing mechanical rotation in changing 
electrical energy from one form into another. A converter may belong 
to either of several types, as follows: 

17. a. A Direct-CuRRENT CONVERTER converts from a direct current to 
a direct current, usually with a change of voltage. 

18 »b. A SyNcHRONOUS CONVERTER (commonly called a rotary converter) 
converts from an alternating to a direct current, or vzce versa. 

19 c. A Moror-ConvERTER is a combination of an induction motor with 
a synchronous converter, the secondary of the former feeding the arma- 
ture of the latter with current at some frequency other than the impressed 
frequency; 7.e., it is a synchronous converter concatenated with an in- 
duction motor. 

20 2d. A FREQUENCY CHANGER converts the power of an alternating-current 
system from one frequency to another, with or without a change in the 
number of phases or in the voltage. 

21 e. A Rotary PHASE CONVERTER converts from an alternating-current 
system of one or more phases to an alternating-current system of a dif- 
ferent number of phases, but of the same frequency. 

Q1a EQUALIZING CONNECTIONS are low resistance connections between 
equipotential points of multiple-wound closed-coil armatures to equalize 
the induced voltage between brushes. 


2542 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.l.E.E. 


C. DEFINITIONS. STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS. 


22 STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS changes electric energy to electric 
energy through the medium of magnetic energy. It comprises several 
forms, distinguished as follows: eee 

23. a. TRANSFORMERS, in which the primary and secondary windings are ~ 
insulated from one another. 


23a A PRIMARY WINDING is that winding of a transformer, or of an 
induction motor, which receives power from an external source. 

23b A SECONDARY WINDING is that winding of a transformer, or of an 
induction motor, which receives power from the primary by 
induction. 


Note: The terms ‘‘ High-voltage winding"? and “ Low-voltage 
winding '’ are suitable for distinguishing between the windings of a 
transformer, where the relations of the apparatus to the source of 
power are not involved. 

24 b. AuTO-TRANSFORMERS, also called compensators, in which a part 

of the primary winding is used as a secondary winding, or conversely. 
25 c. PoTENTIAL REGULATORS, in which one coil is in shunt and one 
in series with the circuit, so arranged that the ratio of transformation 
between them is variable at will. They are of the following three classes: 


26 1. Contact VOLTAGE REGULATORS, also called Compensator Reg- 
ulators, in which the number of turns in use of one of the coils is 
adjustable. 

27 (2) INpucTION POTENTIAL REGULATORS in which the relative 
positions of the primary and secondary coils are adjustable. 

28 (3) MAGNETO POTENTIAL REGULATORS in which the direction 


of the magnetic flux with respect to the coils is adjustable. 

29 «+d. REAcTORS or REACTANCE COILS, also called choke coils, are a form of 
stationary induction apparatus used to supply reactance or to produce phase 
displacement. 

29a e. AN INDUCTION STARTER is a device used in starting induction motors, 
converters, etc., by voltage control, consisting of an auto-transformer com- 
bined with a suitable switching device. 

29b A LEAKAGE REACTANCE or SERIES REACTANCE is a portion of the reac- 


tance of any induction apparatus which is due to stray or purely self-in- 
ductive flux. 


D. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION OF APPARATUS. 


30 COMMUTATING MACHINES. Under this head may be classed the follow- 
ing: Direct-current generators; direct-current motors; direct-current boost- 
ers; motor-generators; dynamotors; converters; compensators or balancers; 
closed-coil arc machines, and alternating-current commutating motors. 

31 Commutating machines may be further classified as follows: 

32 a. Direct-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES, which comprise a mag- 
netic field of constant polarity, a closed-coil armature, and a multiseg- 
mental commutator connected therewith. ; 

33. b. ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES, which comprise 
magnetic field of alternating polarity, a closed-coil armature, and a multi- 

_,. segmental commutator connected therewith. 

34  c. SYNCHRONOUS CoMMUTATING MACHINES, which comprise synchronous 
converters, motor-converters and double-current generators. 

35 SyNcHRONOUS MACHINES, comprise a constant magnetic field, and 
an armature receiving or delivering alternating-currents in synchron- 
ism with the motion of the machine; z.e., having a frequency equal to the 


product of she number of pairs of poles and the speed of the machine in 
revolutions per second. 

386 STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS, include transformers, auto-trans- 
formers, potential regulators, and reactors or reactance coils. 

37 Rorary JNDUCTION AppaRATUS, or INDUCTION MACHINES, include ap- 
paratus wherein the primary and secondary windings rotate with re- . 


{ 


| : : 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2543 


spect to each other; i.e., induction motors, induction generators, frequency 
converters, and rotary phase converters. 

UNIPOLAR or AcycLic MAcuIngEs, direct-current machines, in which the 
voltage generated in the active conductors maintains the same direction 
with respect to those conductors. 

RECTIFYING APPARATUS, PULSATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 

ELECTROSTATIC APPARATUS, such as condensers, etc. 

ELECTROCHEMICAL APPARATUS, such as batteries, etc. 

ELECTROTHERMAL APPARATUS, such as heaters, etc. 


42a REGULATING APPARATUS, such as rheostats, etc. 
42b SwitTcHING APPARATUS. 


44 


- 46 


46 


47 


48 


49 


PROTECTIVE APPARATUS, such as fuses, circuit-breakers, lightning 
arresters, etc. 
LUMINOUS SOURCES. 


EB; MOTORS. SPEED CLASSIFICATION. 


Motors may, for convenience, be classified with reference to their speed 
characteristics as follows: 

a. CONSTANT-SPEED Motors, in which the speed is either constant or 
does not materially vary; such as synchronous motors, induction motors 
with small slip, and ordinary direct-current shunt motors. 

b. MuLTIsPpEED Motors (two-speed, three-speed, etc.), which can be 
operated at any one of several distinct speeds, these speeds being practi- 
cally independent of the load, such as motors with two armature windings, 
or induction motors with controllers for changing the number of poles. 

c. ADJUSTABLE-SPEED Motors, in which the speed can be varied grad- 
ually over a considerable range; but when once adjusted remains prac- 
tically unaffected by the load, such as shunt motors designed for a con- 
siderable range of field variation. 

d. VARYING-SPEED Motors, or motors in which the speed varies with 
the load, decreasing when the load increases; such as series motors. 


F. DEFINITIONS. INSTRUMENTS. 


49a An AMMETER is a current-measuring instrument, indicating in amperes] 
49b A VOLTMETER is a voltage-measuring instrument, indicating in volts. 
49c A WatTTMETER is an instrument for measuring electrical power, and 


indicating in watts. 


49d RECORDING AMMETERS, VOLTMETERS, WATTMETERS, etc., are instru- 


ments which record graphically upon a time-chart the values of the quan- 
tities they measure. 


49e A WatTtT-HOUR METER is an instrument for registering total watt-hours. 


This term is to be preferred to the term ‘‘ integrating wattmeter ”’. 


49f A VoOLTMETER COMPENSATOR is a device in connection with a volt- 


meter, which causes the latter to indicate the voltage at some other point of 
the circuit. — 


49g A SyNcHROSCOPE is a synchronizing device which, in addition to 


50 


51 


indicating synchronism, shows whether the machine to be synchronized is 
fast or slow. 


G. DEFINITION AND EXPLANATION OF TERMS. 


(I) LOAD FACTOR. 

The Loap Factor of a machine, plant or system is the ratio of the 
average power to the maximum power during a certain period of time. 
The average power is taken over a certain period of time, such as a day 
or a year, and the maximum is taken over a short interval of the maxt- 
mum load within that period. ‘ 

In each case the interval of maximum load should be definitely spect- 
fied. The proper interval is usually dependent upon local conditions and 
upon the purpose for which the load factor is to be determined. 


, 


2544 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


(Il) DIVERSITY FACTOR. 


5la Driversity Factor is the ratio of the sum of the maximum power — 
demands of the subdivisions of any system or part of a system, to the maxi- 
mum demand of the whole system or of the part of the system under con- 
sideration, measured at the point of supply. 


(IIl) DEMAND FACTOR. 


bib DEMAND Factor is the ratio of the maximum power demand of any_ 
system or part of a system to the total connected load of the system or of 
the part of system under consideration. 


(IV) NON-INDUCTIVE LOAD AND INDUCTIVE LOAD. 

52. A non-inductive load is a load in which the current is in phase with the 
voltage across the load. 

63 ~=An inductive load is a load in which the current lags behind the voltage 
across the load. A load in which the current leads the voltage across the 
load is sometimes called a condensive or anti-inductive load. 

53a When voltage and current waves are sinusoidal but not in phase, . 
the voltage may be resolved into two components one in phase with the 
current, and the other in quadrature therewith. The former is called the 
effective component (sometimes the energy component), and the latter 
the reactive component of the voltage. The current may be similarly 
subdivided with respect to the voltage, and the two components similarly 
named. 


(V) POWER-FACTOR AND REACTIVE FACTOR. 

54 The Power-Factor in alternating-current circuits or apparatus is the 
ratio of the effective (t.e. the cyclic average) power in watts to the appar- 
ent power in volt-amperes. It may be expressed as follows: 

effective power _ effective watts effective current effective voltage 

apparent power total volt-amperes total current ~ total voltage 

65 The Reactive-Factor is the ratio of the reactive volt-amperes (ices, 
the product of the reactive component of current by voltage, or reactive 
component of voltage by current) to the total volt-amperes. It may be 
expressed as follows: 

reactive power _ reactive watts __reactive current reactive voltage 
apparent power total volt-amperes total current ~— total voltage 

66 Power-Factor and REAcTIVE-FAcTOR are related as follows: 


If p=power-factor and q=reactive-factor, then with sine waves of voltage 
and current, 


pr+g=l 


_ With distorted waves of voltage and current, g ceases to have definite 
significance. ‘ 


(VI) SATURATION-FACTOR. 


57 The SarurATION-FacTor of a machine is the ratio of a small percentage 
increase in field excitation to the corresponding percentage increase in 
voltage thereby produced. The saturation factor is, therefore, a criterion 
of the degree of saturation attained in the magnetic circuit at any ex- 
citatiori selected. Unless otherwise specifiéd,. however, the saturation 
factor of a machine refers to the excitation existing at normal rated speed 
and voltage. It is determined from measurements of saturation made on 
open circuit at rated speed. 

58 The PERCENTAGE OF SATURATION of a machine at any excitation may 
be found from its saturation curve of generated voltage as ordinates, against 
excitation as abscissas, by drawing a tangent to the curve at the ordinate © 
corresponding to the assigned excitation, and extending the tangent to 
intercept the axis of ordinates drawn through the origin. The ratio ot 
the intercept on this axis to the ordinate at the assigned excitation, when 
expressed in percentage, is the percentage of saturation and is indepen- 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2545 


dent of the scale selected for excitation and voltage. This ratio is equal 
to the reciprocal of the saturation-factor at the same excitation, deducted 
from unity. Thus, if f be the saturation-factor and p the percentage of 
saturation, 
1 
Px oeiin 


(VII) VARIATION AND PULSATION. 


59 The VARIATION IN PRIME Movers which do not give an absolutely 
uniform rate of rotation or speed, as in reciprocating steam engines, is 
the maximum angular displacement in position of the revolving member ex- 
pressed in degrees, from the position it would occupy with uniform rota- 
tion, and with one revolution taken as 360 degrees. 

60 The PULSATION IN PRIME Movers is the ratio of the difference between 
the maximum and minimum velocities in an engine-cycle to the average 
velocity. 

61 The VARIATION IN ALTERNATORS or alternating-current circuits in general 
is the maximum difference in phase of the generated voltage wave from a 
wave of absolutely constant frequency of the same average value, 
expressed in electrical degrees (one cycle equals 360 degrees) and may 
be due to the variation of the prime mover. 

62 The PULSATION IN ALTERNATORS or alternating-current circuits, in gen- 
eral, is the ratio of the difference between maximum and minimuin fre- 
quency during an engine cycle to the average frequency. 


63 RELATION OF VARIATION in prime mover and alternator. If p=num- 


ber of pairs of poles, the variation of an alternator is p times the variation 
of its prime mover, if direct-connected, and pm times the variation of 
the prime mover if rigidly connected thereto in the velocity ratio m; so that 
the speed of the alternator is m times that of the prime mover. 


II. PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS. 
Aen LING: 


665 Ratinc By Output. All electrical apparatus should be rated by output 

“and not by input. Generators, transformers, etc., should be rated by 

electrical output: motors by mechanical output, and preferably in kilo- 

watts. 

65a The following four classes of rating are recognized and recommended: 
they do not cover the rating of railway motors which is treated in 
Appendix B, and there are other large though less definitely definable classes 
of service in which each case must be treated by itself. Some of these 
may be later reduced to fairly simple terms and introduced into these Rules. 

65b 1. Continuous RATING in which under load there is the attainment of 
approximately stationary temperature, and no other limit of capacity is 
exceeded. 

65c 2. INTERMITTENT RATING in which one minute periods of load and rest 
alternate until the attainment of approximately stationary temperature 
and no other limit of capacity is exceeded. 

65d Notre:—Since the temperature depends upon the losses and the capacity 
of the apparatus to emit them, a constant load may be substituted for the 
intermittent load in determining the temperature, provided the losses are 
equivalent. ; 

65e 3. Minute RATING in which under load for one minute, no mechanical, 
thermal, magnetic, or electrical limit of capacity is exceeded and no perma- 
nent change is wrought in the apparatus. : 

65f 4. VARIABLE SERVICE RaTING. It is desirable here to recognize this 
class of rating which is intended to cover the rating of motors for machine- 
tool and similar service, in which the thermal absorptive capacity plays a 
part. The specifications for this rating have not been fully determined 
at the time that this edition of the Rules goes to press. 


’ 


2546 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.T.E.E. 


66 Ratinc 1x Krowatts. Electrical power should be expressed in kilo- — 
watts, except when otherwise specified. } ‘ 
67 APPARENT POWER, KILOVOLT-AMPERES. Apparent power in alternating- 
current circuits should be expressed in kilovolt-amperes as distinguished 
from effective power in kilowatts. When the power factor is 100 per 
cent, the apparent power in kilovolt-amperes 1s equal to the kilowatts. 
68 The RaTED (FULL-LoAD) CURRENT is that current which, with the rated 
terminal voltage, gives the rated kilowatts, or the rated kilovolt-amperes. 
In machines in which the rated voltage differs from the no-load voltage, 
the rated current should refer to the former. 
69 DETERMINATION OF RATED CURRENT. The rated current may be de- 
termined as follows: If P=rating in watts, or volt-amperes if the power 
factor be other than 100 per cent, and E=full-load terminal voltage, 
the rated current per terminal is: 


AUS = 2E -7 amperes, in a direct-current machine or single-phase alternator. 


1 
71 I Re ote amperes, in a three-phase alternator. 
ae 
Ie : 
72 I= 2 E amperes, in a quarter-phase alternator. 


73 Norma Conpitions. The rating of machines or apparatus should be- 
based upon certain normal conditions to be assumed as standard, or to be 
specified. These conditions include voltage, current, power-factor, fre- 
quency, wave shape and speed; or such of them as may apply in each par- 
ticular case. Performance tests should be made under these standard 
conditions unless otherwise specified. 

74 a. Power Factor. Since the inherent capacity of alternating current 
generators, synchronous motors, and transformers, depends upon their 
voltage and their current, they should be rated in kilovolt-amperes. If 
the apparatus is rated in kilowatts without specification as to the power 
factor, a power factor of 100 per cent shall be understood. ; 

If rated in kilowatts and a power factor other than 100 per cent be 

_ specified, this should be understood as defining only the nature of the load, 

and not as implying an increase in the ampere rating of the apparatus, which 
should be based upon the kilowatt rating at 100 per cent power factor. 

75 bd. Wave SuHare. In determining the rating of alternating-current ma- 
chines or apparatus, a sine wave shape of alternating current and voltage 
is assumed, except where a distorted wave shape is inherent to the appar- 
atus. See Secs. 79-80. 

76 Fuses. The rating of a fuse should be the maximum current which it 
will continuously carry. 

77  Crrcurt-BREAKERS. The rating of a circuit-breaker should be the max- 
imum current which it is designed to carry continuously. 

77a Nore. In addition thereto, the maximum current and voltage at 
which a fuse or a circuit-breaker will open the circuit should be specified. 
It is to be noted that the behavior of fuses and of circuit-breakers is much 
influenced by the amount of electric power available on the circuit. 

78 INDICATING METERS should be rated according to their full-scale 
reading of volts, amperes, or watts. In wattmeters the rated volts and 
rated ampetes should also be included; i.e., the volts and amperes which 
can be safely and continuously carried by the voltage and current coils 
respectively. : 

78a Wartt-HOoUR METERS should be rated in volts and amperes. 


B. WAVE SHAPE. 


79 _The SINE Wave should be considered as standard, except where a de- 
viation therefrom is inherent in the operation of the apparatus 
80 A Maximum DEviaTION of the wave from sinusoidal shape not exceeding 


10 per cent is permissible, except when otherwise specified. See Section 5). 
81, 82, 83. See Sections 5e to 51. 


84 


86 


87 


88 


89 


90 


91 


92 


93 


94 


95 


96 


97 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2547 


€. EPPICIENCY. 
(I) DEFINITIONS. 


The EFFICIENCY of an apparatus is the ratio of its output to its input. 
The output and input may be in terms of watt-hours, watts, volt-amperes, 
amperes, or any other quantity of interest, thus respectively defining 
energy-efficiency, power-efficiency, apparent-power-efficiency, current-effi- 
ciency, etc. Unless otherwise specified, however, the term is ordinarily 
assumed to refer to power-efficiency. An exception should be noted in the 
case of luminous sources, (see Sec. 346). 

_ APPARENT EFFICIENCY. In apparatus in which a phase displacement is 
inherent to their operation, apparent efficiency should be understood as 
the ratio of net power output to volt-ampere input. 

a. Note. Such apparatus comprises induction motors, synchronous 
phase modifiers, synchronous converters controlling the voltage of an 
alternating-current system, potential regulators, open magnetic circuit 
transformers, etc. 

b. Notre. Since the apparent efficiency of apparatus delivering electric 
power depends upon the power-factor of the load, the apparent efficiency, 
unless otherwise specified, should be referred to a load power-factor of unity, 


(II) MEASUREMENT OF EFFICIENCY. 


MetuHops. Efficiency may be determined by either of two methods, 
viz.: by measurement of input and output; or, by measurement of losses. 

a. METHOD OF INPUT AND OuTpUT. The input and output may both 
be measured directly. The ratio of the latter to the former is the efficiency. 

b. METHOD By LossEs. The losses may be measured either collectively 
or individually. The total losses may be added to the output to derive 
the input, or subtracted from the input to derive the output. 

COMPARISON OF METHODS. The output and input method is preferable 
with small machines. When, however, as in the case of large machines, 
it is impracticable to measure the output and input; or when the per- 
centage of power loss is small and the efficiency is nearly unity, the method 
of determining efficiency by measuring the losses should be followed. 

ELEectric Power should be measured at the terminals of the appar- 
atus. In tests of polyphase machines, the measurement of power should 
not be confined to a single circuit but should be extended to all the cir- 
cuits in order to avoid errors of unbalanced loading. 

MECHANICAL POWER in machines should be measured at the pulley, 
gearing, coupling, etc., thus excluding the loss of power in said pulley, 
gearing or coupling, but including the bearing friction and windage. The 
magnitude of bearing friction and windage may be considered, with con- 
stant speed, as independent of the load. The loss of power in the belt and 
the increase of bearing friction due to belt tension should be excluded. 
Where, however, a machine is mounted upon the shaft of a prime mover, 
in such a manner that it cannot be separated therefrom, the frictional 
losses in bearings and in windage, which ought, by definition, to be included 
in determining the efficiency, should be excluded, owing to the practical 
impossibility of separating them from those of the prime mover. 

In AuxILIARY APPARATUS, such as an exciter, the power lost in the 
auxiliary apparatus should not be charged to the principal machine, but 
to the plant consisting of principal machine and auxiliary apparatus 
taken together. The plant efficiency in such cases should be distinguished 
from the machine efficiency. 

NorMAL ConpiTions. Efficiency tests should be made under normal 
conditions herein set forth, which are to be assumed as standard. 
These conditions include voltage, current, power-factor, frequency, wave 
shape, speed, temperature and barometric pressure, or such of them as 
may apply in each particular case. Performance tests should be made 
under these standard conditions unless otherwise specified. See Secs. 

—75. 
ea TEMPERATURE. The efficiency of all apparatus, except such as may 
be intended for intermittent service, should be either measured at, or re- 


* 2548 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.I.E.E. 


98 
99 


100 


101 
102 


103 


104 


105 


106 


107 


108 


109 


110 


duced to, the temperature which the apparatus assumes under continuous 
operation at rated load, referred to a room temperature of 25 deg. cent. 
See Secs. 267-292. f ; ‘ 

With apparatus intended for intermittent service, the efficiency should 
be determined at the temperature assumed under specified conditions. 

b. Power Factor. In determining the efficiency of alternating-current 
apparatus, the electric power should be measured when the current is in 
phase with the voltage, unless otherwise specified, except when a definite 
phase difference is inherent in the apparatus, as in induction motors, 
induction generators, frequency converters, etc. ; 

c. WAVE SHAPE. In determining the efficiency of alternating-current 
apparatus, the sine wave should be considered as standard, except where a 
difference in the wave form from the sinusoidal is inherent in the operation 
of the apparatus. See Sec. 80. 


(III) MEASUREMENT OF LOSSES. 


Lossrs. The usual sources of losses in electrical apparatus and the 
methods of determining these losses are as follows: 


(A) BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. 


The magnitude of bearing friction and windage (which may be consid- 
ered as independent of the load) is conveniently measured by driving 
the machine from an independent motor, the output of which may be 
suitably determined. See Sec. 94. 


(B) ComMMUTATOR BRusH FRICTION. 


The magnitude of the commutator brush friction (which may be con- 
sidered as independent of the load) is determined by measuring the dif- 
ference in power required for driving the machine with brushes on and 
with brushes off (the field being unexcited). 

(C) CoLLecTor-RING BRUSH FRICTION. 


Collector-ring brush friction may be determined in the same manner 
as commutator brush friction. It is usually negligible. 


(D) Morecucar MAGNETIC FRICTION AND EppY CURRENTS. 


These losses include those due to molecular magnetic friction and eddy 
currents in iron and copper and other metallic parts, also the losses due 
to currents in the cross-connections of cross-connected armatures. 

In MacuHINEs these losses should be determined on open circuit and 
at a voltage equal to the rated voltage +J rin a generator, and —Irina 
motor, where J denotes the current strength and r denotes the internal 
resistance of the machine. They should be measured at the correct 
speed and voltage, since they do not usually vary in any definite pro- 
portion to the speed or to the voltage. 

Note. The Torav Lossks ‘in bearing friction and windage, brush fric- 
tion, magnetic friction and eddy~currents can, in general, be determined 
by a single measurement by driving the machine with the field excited, 
either as a motor, or by means of an independent motor. 

RETARDATION METHOD. The no-load iron, friction, and windage losses 
may be segregated by the Retardation Method. The generator should 
be brought up to full speed (or, if possible, to about 10 per cent above 
full speed) as a motor, and, after cutting off the driving power and 
excitation, frequent readings should be taken of speed and time, as the 
machine slows down, from which a speed-time curve can be plotted. A 
second curve should be taken in the same manner, but with full field ex- 
citation; from the second curve the iron losses may be found by subtracting 
the losses found in the first curve. 


The speed-time curves can be plotted automatically by belting a small 


separately excited generator (say 1/10 kw.) to the generator shaft and 


connecting it to a recording voltmeter. 
(E) ARMATURE-RESISTANCE LOss. 
This loss may be expressed by p J? r; where r=resistance of one arma- 


ture circuit or branch, J =the current in such armature circuit or branch, 
and p=the number of armature circuits or branches, 


111 


112 


_113 


114 


116 


116 


117 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2549 


(F) CommuTaTor, BrusH AND BrusH-ContTact RESISTANCE Loss. 


It is desirable to point out that with carbon brushes these losses may 
be considerable in low-voltage machines. 


(G) COLLEcTOR-RING AND BrusH-ConTAcT RESISTANCE Loss. 


This loss is usually negligible, except in machines of extremely low 
voltage or in unipolar machines. 


(H) Fieip-Excitation Loss. 


With separately excited field, the loss of power in the resistance of the 
field coils alone should be considered. With either shunt- or series-field 
windings, however, the loss -of power in the accompanying rheostat should 
also be included, the said rheostat being considered as an essential part 
of the machine, and not as separate auxiliary apparatus. 


(1) Loap LossgEs. 


The load losses may be considered as the difference between the total 
losses under load and the sum of the losses as above specified and de- 
termined. 

a. In COMMUTATING MacHINEs of small field distortion, the load losses 
are usually trivial and may, therefore, be neglected. When, however, the 
field distortion is large as in commutating-pole machines; or, as is shown, 
for instance, by the necessity for shifting the brushes between no load and 
full load on non-commutating pole machines; these load losses may be 
considerable, and should be taken into account. In this case the effi- 
ciency may be determined either by input and output measurements, 
or the load losses may be estimated by the method of Sec. 116. 

b. ESTIMATION OF Loap LossEs. While the load losses cannot well be 
determined individually, they may be considerable and, therefore, their 
joint influence should be determined by observation. This can be done 
by operating the machine on short-circuit and at full-load current, that 
is, by determining what may be called the “ short-circuit core loss.””. With 
the low field intensity and great lag of current existing in this case, the 
load losses are usually greatly exaggerated. 

One-third of the short-circuit core loss may, as an approximation, and 
in the absence of more accurate information, be assumed as the load loss. 


(IV) EFFICIENCY OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF APPARATUS. 


(A) DirEcT-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES. 
In Drrect-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES the losses are: 
a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses 


(A), Sec. 102. 
b. MOLECULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND EDDY CURRENTS. See 


Measurement of Losses (D), Sec. 105. 


c. ARMATURE RESISTANCE LossEs. See Measurement of Losses (£), 
Sec. 110. 

d. CommutTator BrusH Friction. See Measurement of Losses (B), 
Sec. 103. 


e. COMMUTATOR, BRUSH AND BRUSH-CONTACT RESISTANCE. See Meas- 
f Losses (F), Sec. 111. 

Pp eis ieee Loss. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 113. 

g. Loap Losses. See Measurement of Losses (J), Sec. 114. 

Nore. 6 andc are losses in the armature or ‘‘ armature losses’; d and ¢ 
‘‘ commutator losses’; f ‘‘ field losses.”’ 
(B) ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES. 

In ALTERNATING-CURRENT COMMUTATING MACHINES, the losses are: 

a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
ors Beas Loss, measured with the machine at open circuit, the 
brushes on the commutator, and the field excited by alternating cur- 
rent when driving the machine by a motor. — 

This loss includes molecular magnetic friction and eddy currents, 
caused by rotation through the magnetic field, J?r losses in cross-con- 


2550 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


131 


132 


133 


134 
135 


136 


137 
138 
139 
140 


141 
142 
143 
144 


145 
146 


147 


148 
149 


150 


> 


nections of cross-connected armatures, /?r and other losses in armature- 
coils and armature-leads which are short-circuited by the brushes as far 
as these losses are due to rotation. 

c. ALTERNATING or TRANSFORMER Loss. These losses are measured 
by wattmeter in the field circuit, under the conditions of test b. They 
include molecular magnetic friction and eddy-currents due to the alter- 
nation of the magnetic field, J*r losses in cross-connections of cross-con- 
nected armatures, /2r and other losses in armature coil and commutator 
leads which are short-circuited by the brushes, as far as these losses are 
due to the alternation of the magnetic flux. ‘ ey 

The losses in armature-coils and commutator leads short-circuited by 
the brushes, can be separated in }, and ¢, from the other losses, by run- 
ning the machine with and without brushes on the commutator. ; 

d. I2R Loss, other load losses in armature and compensating wind- 
ing and Jr loss of brushes, may be measured by a wattmeter connected 
across the armature and compensating winding. 

e. FIELD ExciTATION Loss. ‘ See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 113. 

f. CommMuTATOR BrusH-Friction. See Measurément of Losses (B), 
Sec. 1038. 


(C) SyNcHRONOUS COMMUTATING MACHINES. 


1. In DousLE-CURRENT GENERATORS, the efficiency of the machine 
should be determined as a direct-current generator, and also as an alter- 
nating-current generator. The two values of efficiency may be different, 
and should be clearly distinguished. 

2. In CoNvERTERS the losses should be determined when driving the 
machine by a motor. These losses are: 

Q a. BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
ec. 102. 

b. MOLECULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND EppY CURRENTS. See Meas- 
urement of losses (D) Sec. 105. 

c. ARMATURE-RESISTANCE Loss. This loss in the armature is g Jr, 
where J=direct current in armature, r=armature resistance and gq, a 
factor which is equal to 1.47 in single-circuit single-phase, 1.15 in double- 
circuit single-phase, 0.59 in three-phase, 0.39 in two-phase, and 0.27 in 
six-phase converters. 
5B d. CMe ARO ECeE FrIcTION. See Measurement of Losses (B), 

ec. 103. 
: é. PSB BSTO SRS BrusH FrRIcTION. See Measurement of Losses (C), 
wec. . 

f. ComMMuUTATOR, BRUSH AND BrusH-CONTACT RESISTANCE Loss. See 
Measurement of Losses (F) Sec. 111. 

g. COLLECTOR-RING BRUSH-CONTACT RESISTANCE Loss. See Measure- 
ment of Losses (G), Sec. 112. : 

h. FreELp-ExciTaTION Loss. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 109. 

1. Loap LossEs. These can generally be neglected, owing to the ab- 
sence of field distortion. 

3. THE EFFICIENCY OF Two SIMILAR CONVERTERS may be determined 
by operating one machine as a converter from direct to alternating, and 
the other as a converter from alternating to direct, connecting the alter- 
nating sides together, and measuring the difference between the direct- 
current input and the direct-current output. This process may be modi- 
fied by returning the output of the second machine through two boosters 
into the first machine and measuring the losses. Another modification 
is to supply the losses by an alternator between the two machines, using 


potential regulators. 
(D) SyncHRONOUS MACHINES. 
In SYNCHRONOUS MACHINEs the losses are: 


k a. ceca FRICTION AND WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
ec. . 


b. MOLECULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND Eppy CURRENTS. See Mea- 
surement of Losses (D), Sec. 105. 


ae 


161 
162 
153 
154 
155 


156 
157 


158 


159 


160 
161 


162 
163 


164 


165 


166 


167 


168 
169 


170 
171 


172 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2551 


a ARMATURE-RESISTANCE Loss. See Measurement of Losses (EB), Sec. 
d. COLLECTOR-RING BrRuSH : 

fir ar FRICTION. See Measurement of Losses 
e. COLLECTOR-RING BRUSH-CONTACT RESISTANCE Loss. See Measure- 

ment of Losses (G), Sec. 112. 
f. FiELp-ExciTaTion Loss. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 113. 
g. LoAp LossEs. See Measurement of Losses (J), Sec. 114. 


(EZ) STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS. 


In STATIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS, the losses are: 

a. MOLECULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND Eppy CURRENTS measured at 
open secondary circuit, rated frequency, and at rated voltage —I r, where 
I=rated current, r=resistance of primary circuit. 

b. RESISTANCE Losses, the sum of the J?r losses in the primary and 
in the secondary windings of a transformer, or in the two sections of the 
coil in a compensator or auto-transformer, where J=rated current in 
the coil or section of coil, and r =resistance. 

c. Loap LossEs, 7.e., eddy currents in the iron and especially in the 
copper conductors, caused by the current at rated load. For practical 
purposes they may be determined by short-circuiting the secondary of 
the transformer and impressing upon the primary a voltage sufficient to 
send rated load current through the transformer. The loss in the trans- 
former under these conditions, measured by wattmeter, gives the load 
losses +/? r losses in both primary and secondary coils. 

In CLosED MAGNETIC CrRCUIT TRANSFORMERS, either of the two circuits 
may be used as primary when determining the efficiency. 

In POTENTIAL REGULATORS, the efficiency should be taken at the max- 
imum voltage for which the apparatus is designed, and with non-inductive 
load, unless otherwise specified. ; 


(F) Rotary INDUCTION APPARATUS, or INDUCTION MACHINES. 


In Rorary INDUCTION APPARATUS, the losses are: 

a. BEARING FRICTION AND-WINDAGE. See Measurement of Losses (A), 
Sec. 102. 

b. MoLecULAR MAGNETIC FRICTION AND Eppy CURRENTS in iron, copper 
and other metallic parts; also [27 losses which may exist in multiple- 
circuit windings. a and 6 together are determined by running the motor 
without load at rated voltage, and measuring the power input. 

c. Primary J? R Loss, which may be determined by measurement of 
the current and the resistance. 

d. SEconDARY J? R Loss, which may be determined as in the primary. 
when feasible; otherwise, as in squirrel-cage secondaries, this loss is meas- 
ured as part of e. 

e. LOAD LossEs; i.e., molecular magnetic friction, and eddy currents 
in iron, copper, etc., caused by the stray field of primary and secondary 
currents, and secondary J? R loss when undeterminable under (d). These 
losses may for practical purposes be determined by measuring the total 
power, with the rotor short-circuited at standstill and a current in the 
primary circuit equal to the primary energy current at full load. The 
loss in the motor under these conditions may be assumed to be equal to 
the load losses +J?7 losses in both primary and secondary coils. 


(G) UNIPOLAR oR ACYCLIC MACHINES. 

In UNIPOLAR MACHINES, the losses are: 

(a) BEARING FRICTION AND WINDAGE. ‘See Measurement of Losses 
(A), Sec. 102. 

(6) MorecuLarR MacGnetic FRICTION AND Eppy CURRENTS. See 
Measurement of Losses (£), Sec. 106. 

(c) ARMATURE-RESISTANCE LossEs. See Measurement of Losses (£), 
Sec. 110. 

(d) Cottector-BrusH Friction, See Measurement of Losses (C);, 
Sec. 104, 


2552 


173 


174 
176 


176 
177 


178 


179 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.LE.E. 


(e) CoLLECTOR BRUSH-CONTACT RESISTANCE. See Measurement of 
Losses (G), Sec. 112. 

(f) FIELD-EXCITATION. See Measurement of Losses (H), Sec. 113. 

(g) Loap LossEs. See Measurement of Losses (J), Sec. 114. 


(H) RECcTIFYING APPARATUS, PULSATING-CURRENT GENERATORS. 


This division includes: open-coil are machines and mechanical and 
other rectifiers. ier : 

In RectiFIERS the most satisfactory method of determining the efficiency 
is to measure both electric input and electric output by wattmeter. The 
input is usually inductive, owing to phase displacement ‘and to wave dis- 
tortion. For this reason the power factor and the apparent efficiency 
should also be considered, since the latter may be much lower than the 
true efficiency. The power consumed by auxiliary devices, such as the 
synchronous motor or cooling devices, should be included in the electric 
input. - 


In CONSTANT-CURRENT RECTIFIERS, transforming from constant poten- — 


tial alternating to constant direct current, by means of constant-current 
transforming devices and rectifying devices, the losses in the transforming 
devices are to be included in determining the efficiency and have to be 
measured when operating the rectifier, since in this case the losses may be 
greater than when feeding an alternating secondary circuit. In constant- 
current transforming devices, the load losses may be considerable, and 
therefore, should not be neglected. 

In OpEN-Com Arc MACHINES, the losses are essentially the same as in 
direct-current (closed coil) commutating machines. In this case, how- 
ever, the load losses are usually greater, and the efficiency should prefer- 
ably be measured by input- and output-test, using wattmeters for measur- 
ing the output. 


179a in alternating-current rectifiers, the output’ should, in general, be 


180 


183 
184 


185 


186 


measured by wattmeter and not by voltmeter and ammeter, since 
owing to pulsation of current and voltage, a considerable discrepancy 
may exist between watts and volt-amperes. If, however, a direct-current 
and an alternating-current meter in the rectified circuit (either a volt- 
meter or an ammeter) give the same reading, the output may be measured 
by direct-current voltmeter and ammeter. The type of alternating-cur- 
rent instrument here referred to should indicate the effective or root-of- 
mean-square value and the type of direct-current instrument the arith- 
metical mean value, which would be zero on an alternating-current circuit. 


(I) TRANSMISSION LINEs. 


The EFFICIENCY of transmission lines should be measured with non- 
inductive load at the receiving end, with the rated receiving voltage and 
frequency, also with sinusoidal impressed wave form, except where ex- 
pressly specified otherwise, and with the exclusion of transformers or 
other apparatus at the ends of the line. 


(J) PHAsSE-DISPLACING APPARATUS. 


In SyNcHRONOUS PHASE-MobpIFIgERs and exciters of induction generators, 
the determination of losses is the same as in other synchronous machines. 

In Reactors the losses are molecular magnetic friction, eddy losses 
and J?r loss. They should be measured by wattmeter. The losses of 
reactors should be determined with a sine wave of impressed voltage 
except where expressly specified otherwise. 

In ConpDENSERS, the losses are due to dielectric hysteresis and leak- 
age, and should be determined by wattmeter with a sine wave of voltage 
or by an alternating-current bridge method. 

In POLARIZATION CELLS, the losses are those due to electric resistivity 
and a loss in the electrolyte of the nature of chemical hysteresis. These 
losses may be considerable. They depend upon the frequency, voltage 


: 


and temperature, and should be determined with a sine wave of impressed — 


voltage, except where expressly specified otherwise. 


187 


188 
189 
190 


191 


192 
193 


194 


195 


196 


197 
198 
199 
200 


201 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2553 


D. REGULATION. 
(I) DEFINITIONS. 


The REGULATION of a machine or apparatus in regard to some 
characteristic quantity (such as terminal voltage, current or speed) 
is the ratio of the deviation of that quantity from its normal value at rated 
load to that normal value. The term “ regulation,’’ therefore, has the 
same meaning as the term ‘‘ inherent regulation,’’ occasionally used. 

CONSTANT STANDARD. If the characteristic quantity is intended to re- 

main constant (e.g., constant voltage, constant speed, etc.) between rated 
load and no load, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum variation 
from the rated-load value to the no-load value. 
_ VARYING STANDARD. If the characteristic quantity is intended to vary 
in a definite manner between rated load and no load, the regulation is 
the ratio of the maximum variation from the specified condition to the 
normal rated-load value. 

(a) Note. If the law of the variation (in voltage, current, speed, etc.) 
between rated load and no load is not specified, it should be assumed to be 
a simple linear relation; i.e., one undergoing uniform variation between 
rated load and no load. 

(b) Note. The regulation of an apparatus may, therefore differ ac- 
cording to its qualification for use. Thus, the regulation of a compound- 
wound yenerator specified as a constant-potential generator, will be dif- 
ferent from that which it possesses when specified as an over-compounded 
generator. 

In CoNSTANT-POTENTIAL MACHINES, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference of terminal voltage from the rated-load value (occur- 
ring within the range from rated load to open circuit) to the rated load 
terminal voltage. : 

In CONSTANT-CURRENT MACHINES, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference of current from the rated-load value (occurring 
within the range from rated-load to short-circuit, or miniinum limit of 
operation), to the rated-load current. . 

In ConsTANT-PoWER APPARATUS, the regulation is the ratio of maxi- 
mum difference of power from the rated load value (occurring within the 
range of operation specified) to the rated power. 

In ConsTANT-SPEED DrrECT-CURRENT Morors and INpucTION MorTors 
the regulation is the ratio of the maximum variation of speed from its 
rated load value (occurring within the range from rated load to no-load) 
to the rated load speed. j : : 

The regulation of an induction motor is, therefore, not identical with 
the slip of the motor, which is the ratio of the drop in speed from syn- 
chronism, to the synchronous speed. : 

In CONSTANT-POTENTIAL TRANSFORMERS, the regulation is the ratio of 
the rise of secondary terminal voltage from rated non-inductive load to 
no-load (at constant primary impressed terminal voltage) to the secondary 
terminal voltage at rated load. ' ; 

In Over-ComMPouNDED Macuines, the regulation is the ratio of the 
maximum difference in voltage from a straight line connecting the no-load 
and rated-load values of terminal voltage as function of the load current, 
to the rated-load terminal voltage. 

In CONVERTERS, DyNAMOTORS, MoTOR-GENERATORS AND FREQUENCY 
CoNnvERTERS, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum difference of ter- 
minal voltage at the output side from the rated-load voltage, to the rated- 
load voltage on the output side. oot . 

In TRANSMISSION LINES, FEEDERS, ETC., the regulation is the ratio of 
the maximum voltage difference at the receiving end, between rated non- 
inductive load and no load to the rated-load voltage at the receiving end 
(with constant voltage impressed upon the sending end). 9. : 

In STEAM ENGINES, the regulation is the ratio of the maximum varia- 
tion of speed in passing slowly from rated-load to no-load (with constant 
steam pressure at the throttle) to the rated-load speed. For variation 


and pulsation see Secs. 59-64. 


2554 STANDARDIZATION RULES. OF THE A.L.E.E. 


902 In a HyprauLic TURBINE or OTHER Warter-Moror, the regulation is 
the ratio of the maximum variation of speed in passing slowly from rated- 
load to no-load (at constant head of water; i.e., at constant difference of 
level between tail race and head race), to the rated-load speed. For 
variation and pulsation see Secs. 59-64. : ; : 

203. In a GENERATOR-UNIT, consisting of a generator united with a prime- 
mover, the regulation should be determined at constant conditions of the 
prime-mover; %.e., constant steam pressure, head, etc. It includes the 
inherent speed variations of the prime-mover. For this reason the regu- 
lation of a generator-unit is to be distinguished from the regulation of 
either the prime-mover, or of the generator contained in it, when taken 
separately. 


(Il) CONDITIONS FOR AND TESTS OF REGULATION. 


204. SPEED. The REGULATION OF GENERATORS is to be determined at con- 
stant speed, and of alternating apparatus at constant impressed frequency. 

206 Non-InpuctTIVE Loap. In apparatus generating, transforming or trans- 
mitting alternating currents, regulation should be understood to refer to 
non-inductive load, that is, to a load in which the current is in phase with 
the e.m.f. at the output side of the apparatus, except where expressly 
specified otherwise. 

206 Wave Form. In alternating apparatus receiving electric power, regu- 
lation should refer to a’sine wave of e.m.f., except where expressly speci- 
fied otherwise. 

207. ExcITATION. In commutating machines, rectifying machines, and syn- 
chronous machines, such as direct-current generators and motors, alter- 
nating-current and polyphase generators, the regulation is to be deter- 
mined under the following conditions: 

(1) At constant excitation in separately excited fields. 

(2) With constant resistance in shunt-field circuits, and 

(3) With constant resistance shunting series-field circuits; 4.e., the 
field adjustment should remain constant, and should be so chosen as to 
give the required rated-load voltage at rated-load current. 

208 IMPEDANCE Ratio. In alternating-current apparatus, in addition to the 
non-inductive regulation, the impedance ratio of the apparatus should be 
specified; i.e., the ratio of the voltage consumed by the total internal im- 
pedance of the apparatus at rated-load current, to its rated-load voltage. 
As far as possible, a sinusoidal current should be used. 

209 CompuTaTION oF REGULATION. In synchronous machines the open- 
circuit exciting ampere-turns corresponding to terminal voltage plus arma- 
ture-resistance-drop, and the exciting ampere-turns at short-circuit for 
rated-load current should be combined vectorially to obtain the result- 
ant’ ampere-turns, and the corresponding internal e.m.f. should be taken 
from the saturation curve. 


(I) INSULATION RESISTANCE. 


210 INSULATION RESISTANCE is the ohmic resistance offered by an insulating 
coating, cover, material or support to an impressed voltage, tending to 
produce a leakage of current through the same. 

211 Onmic RESISTANCE AND DIELECTRIC STRENGTH. The ohmic resistance 
of the insulation is of secondary importance only, as compared with the 
dielectric strength, or resistance to rupture by high voltage. Since the 
ohmic resistance of the insulation can be very greatly increased by baking, — 
but the dielectric strength is liable to be weakened thereby, it is preferable 
to specify a high dielectric strength rather than a high insulation resist- 

| 


3 
E. INSULATION. 


sie The high-voltage test for dielectric strength should always be ap- 

plied. 

212 RECOMMENDED VALUE OF RESISTANCE. The insulation resistance of 
completed apparatus should be such that the rated terminal voltage of the 


i il 
apparatus will not send more than 1,000,000 of the rated-load current, 


213 


214 


215 


216 


217 


218 


219 


220 


221 


222 


SPANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.JI.E.E. 2555 


through the insulation. Where the value found in this way exceeds one 
megohm, it is usually sufficient. 

INSULATION RESISTANCE Tests should, if possible, be made at the 
pressure for which the apparatus is designed. 


Chi) eee CRS GeS IRE ING.LT 
(A) TEsT VOLTAGEs. 


DEFINITION. The dielectric strength of an insulating wall, coating, 
cover or path is measured by the voltage which must be applied to it in 
order to effect a disruptive discharge through the same. 

Basis FOR DETERMINING TEST VOLTAGES. The test voltage which 
should be applied to determine the suitability of insulation for commer- 
cial operation is dependent upon the kind and size of the apparatus and 
its normal operating voltage, upon the nature of the service in which it 
is to be used, and the severity of the mechanical and electrical stresses to 
which it may be subjected. The voltages and other conditions of test 
which are recommended have been determined as reasonable and proper 
for the great majority of cases and are proposed for general adoption, 
except when specific reasons make a modification desirable. 

CONDITION OF APPARATUS TO BE TESTED. Commercial tests should, in 
general, be made with the completely assembled apparatus and not with 
individual parts. The apparatus should be in good condition and high-. 
voltage tests, unless otherwise specified, should be applied before the 
machine is put into commercial service, and should not be applied when 
the insulation resistance is low owing to dirt or moisture. High-voltage 
tests should, in general, be made at the temperature assumed under nor- 
mal operation. High-voltage tests considerably in excess of the normal 
voltages to determine whether specifications are fulfilled are admissable 
on new machines only. Unless otherwise agreed upon, high-voltage tests 
of a machine should be understood as being made at the factory. 

Points oF APPLICATION OF VOLTAGE. ‘The test voltage should be suc- 
cessively applied between each electric circuit and all other electric cir- 
cuits including conducting material in the apparatus. 

The FREQUENCY of the alternating-current test voltage is, in general, 
immaterial within commercial ranges. When, however, the frequency has 
an appreciable effect, as in alternating-current apparatus of high voltage 
and considerable capacity, the rated frequency of the apparatus should 
be used. 

TABLE OF TESTING VOLTAGES. The following voltages are recommended 
for testing all apparatus, lines and cables, by a continued application 
for one minute. The test should be with alternating voltage having a 
virtual value (or root mean square referred to a sine wave of voltage) 
given in the table, and preferably for tests of alternating apparatus at 
the normal frequency of the apparatus. 


Rated Terminal Voltage of Circuit. Rated Output. Testing Voltage. 
Not exceeding 400 volts..... “estes. Under 10 ky. ......1,000,volts. 
“4 ys s er ee Oli omancyovenr 1, D00= = 
400 and over, but less than 800 volts..Under 10 IoWialanuss 500s 
e € vs i TOikwe and over. 52,000) > 
s00 “ “ y P00 GARY, bs atl o iin weep S000 us 
1,200 “ £ i D FOO Mee SMA TNY ob sa.l ear pease OOO e 
2,500 “ My Any.. Double the normal rated 
voltages. 


EXCEPTION.—TRANSFORMERS. ‘Transformers having primary pressures 
of from 550 to 5,000 volts, the secondaries of which are directly con- 
nected to consumption circuits, should have a testing voltage of 10,000 
volts, to be applied between the primary and secondary windings, and 
also between the primary winding and the core. : 

EXCEPTION.—FIELD WINDINGS. The tests for field windings should be 
based on the rated voltage of the exciter and the rated output of the 


- machine of which the coils are a part. Field windings of synchronous 


motors and converters, which are to be started by appiying alternating 
current to the armature when the field is not excited and when a high 
voltage is induced in the field windings, should be tested at 5,000 volts, 


2556 


223 


224 


225 


226 


227 


228 


229 


230 
231 


232 


233 


234 


235 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


RATED TERMINAL VOLTAGE.—DEFINITION. The rated terminal voltage 
of circuit in the above table, means the voltage between the conductors 
of the circuit to which the apparatus to be tested is to be connected,—for 
instance, in three-phase circuits the delta voltage should be taken. In 
the following specific cases, the rated terminal voltage of the circuit is 
to be determined as specified in ascertaining the testing voltage: 

(a) TRANSFORMERS. The test of the insulation between the primary and 
secondary windings of transformers, is to be the same as that between 
the high-voltage windings and core, and both tests should be made simul- 
taneously by connecting the low-voltage winding and core together during 
the test. If a voltage equal to the specified testing voltage be induced 
in the high-voltage winding of a transformer it may be used for insulation 
tests instead of an independently induced voltage. These tests should be 
made first with one end and then with the other end of the high-tension 
winding connected. to the low-tension winding and to the core. 

(b) CONSTANT-CURRENT APPARATUS. The testing voltage is to be 
based upon a rated terminal voltage equal to the maximum voltage which 
may exist at open or closed circuit. 


(c) APPARATUS IN SERIES. For tests of machines or apparatus to be 


operated in series, so as to employ the sum of their separate voltages the 
testing voltage is to be based upon a rated terminal voltage equal to the 
sum of the separate voltages except where the frames of the machines 
are separately insulated, both from the ground and from each other, in 
which case the test for insulation between machines should be based upon 
the voltage of one machine, and the test between each machine and ground 
to be based upon the total voltage of the seriés. 


(B) MeEtTHops OF TESTING. 


CLASsEs OF Tests. Tests for dielectric strength cover such a wide 
range in voltage that the apparatus, methods and precautions which are 
essential in certain cases do not apply to others. For convenience, the 
tests will be separated into two classes: 

Cuass 1. This class includes all apparatus for which the test voltage 
does. not exceed 10 kilovolts, unless the apparatus is of.very large static 
capacity, e.g., a large cable system. This class also includes all apparatus 
of small static capacity, such as line insulators, switches and the like, for 
all test voltages. 

MetuHop oF TEST FoR CLAss 1. The test voltage is to be continuously 
applied for the prescribed interval,—(one minute unless otherwise speci- 
fied). The test voltage may be taken from a constant-potential source 
and applied directly to the apparatus to be tested, or it may be raised 
gradually as specified for tests under Class 2. 

Cuass 2. This class includes all apparatus not included in Class 1. 

METHOD OF TEsT FOR CLAss 2. The test voltage is to be raised to the 
required value smoothly and without sudden large increments and is then 
to be continuously applied for the prescribed interval,—(one minute, 
unless otherwise specified), and then gradually decreased. 

CONDITIONS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR CLASs 1 and CLAss 2. The follow- 
ing apply to all tests: 

The WAVE SHAPE should be approximately sinusoidal and the apparatus 
in the testing circuits should not materially distort this wave. 

The SuprLy Circuit should have ample current-supply capacity so that 
the charging current which may be taken by the apparatus under test 
will not materially alter the wave form nor materially affect the test volt- 
age. The circuit should be free from accidental interruptions. 

RESISTANCE OR INDUCTANCE in series with the primary of a raising 
transformer for the purpose of controlling its voltage is liable seriously to 
affect the wave form, thereby causing the maximum value of the volt- 
age to bear a different and unknown ratio to the root mean square value. 
This method of voltage adjustment is, therefore, in general, undesirable. 
It may be noted that if a resistance or inductance is employed to limit 
the current when burning out a fault, such resistance or inductance should 
be short circuited during the regular voltage test. 


| 
| 
| 
. 


i 


236 


237 


238 


239 


240 


241 


242 
243 


244 


245 


246 


247 


248 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2557 


The INSULATION under test should be in normal condition as to dry- 
ness and the temperature should when possible be that reached in normal 
service. 

ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR CLAss 2. The following 
conditions and precautions, in addition to the foregoing, apply to tests 
of apparatus included in Class 2. 

SUDDEN INCREMENT OF TESTING VOLTAGE on the apparatus under test 
should be avoided, particularly at high voltages and with apparatus having 
considerable capacity, as a momentarily excessive rise in testing voltage 
will result. 

SUDDEN VARIATIONS IN TESTING VOLTAGE of the circuit supplying the 
voltage during the test should be avoided as they are likely to set up 
injurious oscillation. 

Goop CONNECTIONS in the circuits supplying the test voltage are es- 
sential in order to prevent injurious high frequency disturbances from 
being set up. When a heavy current is carried by a small water rheostat, 
arcing may occur, causing high-frequency disturbances which should be 
carefully avoided. 

TRANSFORMER Colts. In high-voltage transformers, the low-voltage 
coil should preferably be connected to the core and to the ground when 
the high-voltage test is being made, in order to avoid the stress from 
low-voltage coil to core, which would otherwise result through condenser 
action. The various terminals of each winding of the high-tension trans- 
former under test should be connected together during the test in order 
to prevent undue stress on the insulation between turns or sections of the 
winding in case the high-voltage test causes a break-down. ; 


(C) MeEtHops ror MEASURING THE TEST VOLTAGE. 


For MEASURING THE TEST VOLTAGE, two instruments are in common 
use, (1) the spark gap and (2) the voltmeter. 

1, Tue Spark Gapis ordinarily adjusted so that it will break down witha 
certain predetermined voltage, and is connected in parallel with the in- 
sulation under test. It ensures that the voltage applied to the insulation 
is not greater than the break-down voltage of the spark gap. A given 
setting of the spark gap is a measure of one definite voltage, and, as its 
operation depends upon the maximum value of the voltage wave, it is 
independent of wave form and is a limit on the maximum stress to which 
the insulation is subjected. The spark gap is not conveniently adapted 
for comparatively low voltages. 

In SpARK-GAP MEASUREMENTS, the spark gap may be set for the re- 
quired voltage and the auxiliary apparatus adjusted to give a voltage at 
which this spark gap just breaks down. The spark gap should then be 
adjusted for, say, 10 per cent higher voltage, and the auxiliary apparatus 
again adjusted to give the voltage of the former breakdown, which is to 
be the assumed voltage for the test. This voltage is to be maintained 
for the required interval. ; 

The SpaRK Pornts should consist of new sewing needles, supported 
axially at the ends of linear conductors which are each at least twice the 
length of the gap. There should be no extraneous body near the gap 
within a radius of twice its length. A table of approximate striking dis- 
tances is given in Appendix D. This table should be used in connection 
with tests made by the spark-gap methods. 

A Non-INDUCTIVE RESISTANCE of about one-half ohm per volt should be 
inserted in series with each terminal of the gap so as to keep the discharge 
current between the limits of one-quarter ampere and 2 amperes. The pur- 
pose of the resistance is to limit the current in order to prevent the surges 
which might otherwise occur at the time of break-down. 

2. The VOLTMETER gives a direct reading, and the different values of the 
voltage can be read during the application and duration of the test. It is 
suitable for all voltages, and does not introduce disturbances into the test 
circuit. , 

In VoLTMETER MEASUREMENTS, the voltmeter should, tn general, derive 
its voltage from the high-tension testing circuit either directly or through 


2558 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


249 


250 


261 
252 


253 
254 
255 
256 
257 


258 


259 


260 


an auxiliary ratio transformer. It is permissible, however, to measure the 
voltage at other places,—for example, on the primary of the transformer, 
provided the ratio of transformation does not materially vary during the 
test; or that proper account is taken thereof. 

SpaRK GAP AND VOLTMETER. The spark gap may be employed as a 
check upon the voltmeter used in high-tension tests in order to determine 
the transformation ratio of the transformer, the variation from the sine 
wave form and the like. It is also useful in conjunction with voltmeter 
measurements to limit the stress applied to the insulating material. 


(D) APPARATUS FOR SUPPLYING TEST VOLTAGE. 


The GENERATOR OR CIRCUIT supplying voltage for the test should 
have ample current carrying capacity, so that the current which may 
be taken for charging the apparatus to be tested will not materially alter 
the wave form nor otherwise materially change the voltage. 

The TESTING TRANSFORMER should be such that its ratio of trans- 
formation does not vary more than 10 per cent when delivering the charg- 
ing current required by the apparatus under test. (This may be deter- 


mined by short-circuiting the secondary or high voltage winding of the test-. 


ing transformer and supplying 1/10 of the primary voltage to the primary 
under this condition. The primary current that flows under this condition 
is the maximum which should be permitted in regular dielectric test.) 

The VoLTAGE CONTROL may be secured in either of several ways, which 
in order of preference, are as follows: 

1. By generator field circuit. 

2. By magnetic commutation. 

3. By change in transformer ratio. 

4. By resistance or choke coils. 

In GENERATOR VOLTAGE CONTROL, the voltage of the generator should 
preferably be about its A4pproximate normal rated load value when the 
full testing voltage is attained, which requires that the ratio of the raising 
transformer be such that the full testing voltage is reached when the gen- 
erator voltage is normal. This avoids the instability in the generator 
which may occur if a considerable leading current is taken from it when 
it has low voltage and low field current. 

In MAGNETIC COMMUTATION, the control is effected by shunting the mag- 
metic flux through a secondary coil so as to vary the induction through 
the coil and the voltage induced in it. The shunting should be effected 
smoothly, thus avoiding sudden changes in the induced voltage. 

In TRANSFORMER VOLTAGE CONTROL, by change of ratio, it is neces- 

sary that the transition from one step to another be made without inter- 
ruption of the test voltage, and by steps sufficiently small to prevent 
surges in the testing circuit. The necessity of this precaution is greater 
as the inductance or the static capacity of the apparatus in the testing 
circuit under test is greater. 
_ When REsISTANCE COoILs oR REAcTORs are used for voltage control, it 
is desirable that the testing voltage should be secured when the controlling 
resistance or reactance is very nearly or entirely out of circuit in order 
that the disturbing effect upon the wave form which results may be negli- 
gible at the highest voltage. 


F. CONDUCTIVITY. 


Copper. The conductivity of copper in annealed wires and in electric 
cables should not be less than 98 per cent of the Annealed Copper Stand- 
ard, and the conductivity of hard-drawn copper wires should not be less 
than 95 per cent of the Annealed Copper Standard. The Annealed 
Copper Standard represents a mass-resistivity of 0.153022 ohm per meter- 
gram at 20 deg. cent. or 873.75 ohms per mile-pound at 20 deg. cent.; or 
using a density of 8.89, a volume-resistivity of 1.72128 microhm-cm., or 


microhms in a cm. cube, at 20 deg. cent. or 0.67767microhm-inch at 20 
deg. cent. j 


261 


262 
263 


264 


. 265 


266 


267 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2559 


G. RISE OF TEMPERATURE. 


(I) MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE. 
(A) MeEtTHODs. 


There are two methods in common use for determining the rise in tem- 
perature, viz.: (1) by thermometer, and (2) by increase in resistance of 
an electric circuit. 

_ 1. By THERMOMETER. The following precautions should be observed 
in the use of thermometers: 

a. PROTECTION. The thermometers indicating the room temperature 
should be protected from thermal radiation emitted by heated bodies, or 
from draughts of air or from temporary fluctuations of temperature. 
Several room thermometers should be used. In using the thermometer 
by applying it to a heated part, care should be taken so to protect its bulb 
as to prevent radiation from it, and, at the same time, not to interfere 
seriously with the normal radiation from the part to which it is applied. 

b. BuLts. When a thermometer is applied to the free surface of a ma- 
chine, it is desirable that the bulb of the thermometer should be covered 
by a pad of definite area. A convenient pad may be formed of cotton 
waste in a shallow circular box about one and a half inches in diameter, 
through a slot in the side in which the thermometer bulb is inserted. An 
unduly large pad over the thermometer tends to interfere with the natural 
liberation of heat from the surface to which the thermometer is applied. 

2. By INCREASE IN RESISTANCE. The resistance may be measured 
either by the Wheatstone bridge, the Thomson or Kelvin double bridge, 
the potentiometer method, or the ammeter and voltmeter method. If a 
temperature coefficient must be assumed, its value for copper may be 
taken to be 0.00394 per deg. cent. from and at 20 deg. cent., or 0.00428 
per deg. cent. from and at 0 deg. cent. This value holds for average com- 
mercial annealed copper. If the copper wire is hard-drawn, or if the con- 
ductivity is known, a different value of temperature coefficient should 
be taken, according to the explanation and discussion of the temperature 
coefficient in Appendix E. ; 

The temperature rise may be determined either (1) by dividing the 
per cent increase of initial resistance by the temperature coefficient for the 
initial temperature expressed in per cent; or (2) by multiplying the in- 
crease in per cent of the initial resistance by T plus the initial temperature 
in degrees cent., and then dividing the product by 100. (—T is the “in- 
ferred absolute zero temperature of resistance ’’ and is given in the last 
column of the table in Appendix E. For average commercial annealed 
copper it is 233.8). 

3. COMPARISON OF Metuops. In electrical conductors, the rise of tem- 
perature should be determined by their increase of resistance where prac- 
ticable. Temperature elevations measured in this way are usually in ex- 
cess of temperature elevations measured by thermometers. In very low 
resistance circuits, thermometer measurements are frequently more reli- 
able than measurements by the resistance method. Where a thermometer 
applied to a coil or winding, indicates a higher temperature elevation 
than that shown by resistance measurement, the thermometer indication 
should be accepted. 


(B) NorMat ConpiTIons FoR TESTS. 


1. DuRATION oF TEsTS. The temperature should be measured after a, 
run of sufficient duration for the apparatus to reach a practically constant 
temperature. This is usually from 6 to 18 hours, according to the size and 
construction of the apparatus. It is permissible, however, to shorten the 
time of the test by running a lesser time on an overload in current and 
voltage, then reducing the load to normal, and maintaining 1t thus until 
the temperature has become constant. 

2. Room TEMPERATURE. The rise of temperature should be referred to 
the standard condition of a room temperature of 25 deg. cent. 

TEMPERATURE CORRECTION. If the room temperature during the test 


2560 


‘cent, and with a room temperature of 15 deg. cent., the observed rise of 


270 


271 


272 


273 


274 


275 
276 
277 
278 


279 


280 
281 
282 


283 


284 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


differs from 25 deg. cent., correction on account of difference in resistance 
should be made by changing the observed rise of temperature by one-half 
per cent for each degree centigrade. Thus with a room temperature of 35 
deg. cent., the observed rise of temperature has to be decreased by 5 per 


temperature has to be increased by 5 per cent. In certain cases, such 
as shunt-field circuits without rheostat, the current strength will be 
changed by a change of room temperature. The heat-production and 
dissipation may be thereby affected. Correction for this should be made 
by changing the observed rise in temperature in proportion as the J? R 
loss in the resistance of the apparatus is altered owing to the difference in 
room temperature. 

3. BAROMETRIC PRESSURE. VENTILATION. A barometric pressure of 
760 mm. and normal conditions of ventilation should be considered as 
standard, and the apparatus under test should neither be exposed to draught 
nor enclosed, except where expressly specified. The barometric pressure 
needs to be considered only when differing greatly from 760 mm. 

BAROMETRIC PRESSURE CORRECTION. When the barometric pressure 
differs greatly from the standard pressure of 760 mm. of mercury, as at 
high altitudes, a correction should be applied. _In the absence of more nearly 
accurate data, a correction of one per cent of the observed rise in tempera- 
ture for each 10 mm. deviation from the 760-mm. standard is recommended. 
For example at a barometric pressure of 680 mm. the observed rise of tem- 

760—680 


perature is to be reduced by ei a Sper cent. 


(II) LIMITING TEMPERATURE RISE. 


GENERAL. The temperature of electrical machinery under regular ser- 
vice conditions, should never be allowed to remain at a point at which 
permanent deterioration of its insulating material takes place. 

Limits RECOMMENDED. It is recommended that the following maximum 
values of temperature elevation, referred to a standard room temperature 
of 25 degrees centigrade, at rated load under normal conditions of ven- 
tilation or cooling, should not be exceeded. 


(A) MAcHINES IN GENERAL. 


In commutating machines, rectifying machines, pulsating-current gen- 
erators, synchronous machines, synchronous commutating machines and 
unipolar machines, the temperature rise in the parts specified should not 
exceed the following: 

Field and armature, 50 deg. cent. 

Commutator and brushes, by thermometer, 55 deg. cent. 

Collector rings, 65 deg. cent. 

Bearings and other parts of machine, by thermometer, 40 deg. cent. 
(B) Rotary INpuction Apparatus. The temperature rise should not 
exceed the following: 

Electric circuits, 50 deg. cent., by resistance. 

Bearings and other parts of the machine 40 deg. cent., by thermometer. 

In squirrel-cage or short-circuited armatures, 55 deg. cent., by thermo- 
meter, may be allowed. 


(C) SvaTIONARY INDUCTION APPARATUS. 


a..TRANSFORMERS FOR CONTINUOUS SERVICE. The temperature rise 
should not exceed 50 deg. cent. in electric circuits, by resistance; and in 
other parts, by thermometer. 

b. TRANSFORMERS FOR INTERMITTENT SERVICE. In the case of trans- 
formers intended for intermittent service, or not operating continuously 
at rated load, but continuously in circuit, as in the ordinary case of lighting 
transformers, the temperature elevation above the surrounding air-tem- 
perature should not exceed 50 deg. cent., by resistance in electric circuits 
and by thermometer in other parts, after the period corresponding to the 
term of rated load. In this instance, the test load should not be applied 


285 


286 


287 


288 


289 


290 


291 


292 


293 


294 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2561 


until the transformer has been in circuit for a sufficient time to attain 
the temperature elevation due to core loss. With transformers for com- 
mercial lighting, the duration of the rated-load test may be taken as three 
hours, unless otherwise specified. 


c. REaAcToRs, INDUCTION- AND MAGNETO-REGuLATORS. Electric circuits 
by resistance and other parts by thermometer, 50 deg. cent. 


d. LARGE APPARATUS. Large generators, motors, transformers, or other 
apparatus in which reliability and reserve overload capacity are important, 
are frequently specified not to rise in temperature more than 40 deg. 
cent. under rated load and 55 deg. cent. at rated overload. It is, how- 
ever, ordinarily undesirable to specify lower temperature elevations than 
40 deg. cent. at rated load, measured as above. 


(D) RHEOSTATs. 


In RueEostats, HEATERS and other electrothermal apparatus, no com- 
bustible or inflammable part or material, or portion liable to come in 
contact with such material, should rise more than 50 deg. cent. above the 
surrounding air under the service conditions for which it is designed. 


a. Parts oF RHEOosTATS. Parts of rheostats and similar apparatus rising 
in temperature, under the specified service conditions, more than 50 deg. 
cent., should not contain any combustible material, and should be arranged 
or installed in such a manner that neither they, nor the hot air issuing from 
them, can come in contact with combustible material. 


(EZ) Limits RECOMMENDED IN SPECIAL CASES. 

a. HEAT REsIstING INSULATION. With apparatus in which the insu- 
lating materials have special heat-resisting qualities, a higher temperature 
elevation is permissible. 

b. Hicoh AIR TEMPERATURE. In apparatus intended for service in 
places of abnormally high temperature, a lower temperature elevation 
should be specified. 

c. APPARATUS SUBJECT TO OVERLOAD. In apparatus which by the 
nature of its service may be exposed to overload, or is to be used in very 
high voltage circuits, a smaller rise of temperature is desirable than in 
apparatus not liable to overloads or in low-voltage apparatus. In ap- 
paratus built for conditions of limited space, as railway motors, a higher 
rise of temperature must be allowed. 

d. APPARATUS FOR INTERMITTENT SERVICE. In the case of apparatus 
intended for intermittent service, except railway motors, the temperature 
elevation which is attained at the end of the period corresponding to the 
term of rated load, should not exceed the values specified for machines 
in general. In such apparatus, including railway motors, the temperature 
elevation should be measured after operation, under as nearly as pos- 
sible the conditions of service for which the apparatus is intended, and 
the conditions of the test should be specified. 


H. OVERLOAD CAPACITIES. 


PERFORMANCE WITH OvERLOAD. All apparatus should be able to carry 
the overload hereinafter specified without serious injury by heating, spark- 
ing, mechanical weakness, etc., and with an additional temperature rise not 
exceeding 15 deg. cent., above those specified for rated loads, the overload 
being applied~after the apparatus has acquired the temperature corre- 
sponding to rated load continuous operation. Rheostats to which no 
temperature rise limits are attached are naturally exempt from this addi- 
tional temperature rise of 15 deg. cent. under overload specified in these 
rules. 

NorMAL ConpiTIons. Overload guarantees should refer to normal con- 
ditions of operation regarding speed, frequency, voltage, etc., and to non- 
inductive conditions in alternating apparatus, except where a phase dis- 
placement is inherent in the apparatus. 


2562 


295 
296 


297 


298 


299 


300 


301 


302 


303 


304 


305 


306 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


OvEeRLOAD CAPACITIES RECOMMENDED. The following overload capaci- 
ties are recommended: 


a. GENERATORS. Direct-current generators and alternating-current 
generators, 25 per cent for two hours. 


b. Motors. Direct-current motors, induction motors and synchronous 
motors, not including railway and other motors intended for intermittent 
service, 25 per cent for two hours, and 50 per cent for one minute. 


c. CONVERTERS. Synchronous converters, 25 per cent for two hours, 
50 per cent for one-half hour. 


d. TRANSFORMERS AND RECTIFIERS. Constant-potential transformers 
and rectifiers, 25 per cent for two hours; except in transformers connected 
to apparatus for which a different overload is guaranteed in which case the 
same guarantees shall apply for the transformers as for the apparatus 
connected thereto. 


e. Exciters. Exciters of alternators and other synchronous machines, 
10 per cent more overload than is required for the excitation of the syn- 
chronous machine at its guaranteed overload, and for the same period of 
time. All exciters of alternating-current, single-phase or polyphase gen- 
erators, should be able to give at their rated speed, sufficient voltage and 
current to excite their alternators, at the rated speed, to the full-load ter- 
minal voltage, at the rated output in kilovolt-amperes and with 50 per 
cent power factor. ; 

A ConTINUOUS-SERVICE RHEOSTAT, such as an armature- or field- 
regulating rheostat, should be capable of carrying without injury for two 
hours, a current 25 per cent greater than that at which it 1s rated. It 
should also be capable of carrying for one minute a current 50 per cent 
greater than its rated load current, without injury. This excess of ca- 
pacity is intended for testing purposes only, and this margin of capacity 
should not be relied upon in the selection of the rheostat. 

g. An INTERMITTENT SERVICE OR MOTOR-STARTING RHEOSTAT is used for 
starting a motor from rest and accelerating it to rated speed. Under 
ordinary conditions of service, and unless expressly stated otherwise, a 
motor is assumed to start in fifteen seconds and with 150 per cent of rated 
current strength. A motor-starter should be capable of starting the 
motor under these conditions once every four minutes for one hour. 

(a) This Test may be carried out either by starting the motor 
at four-minute intervals, or by placing the starter at normal tem- 
perature across the maximum voltage for which it is marked, and 
moving the lever uniformly and gradually from the first to the 
last position during a period of fifteen seconds, the current being 
maintained substantially constant at said 50 per cent excess, by 
introducing resistance in series or by other suitable means. 

(b) OTHER RHEOSTATS FOR INTERMITTENT-SERVICE are employed 
under such special and varied conditions, that no general rules are 
applicable to them. : 


Ill. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES. 
A. VOLTAGES. 


DirRECT-CURRENT GENERATORS. In direct-current, low-voltage gener- 
ators, the following average terminal voltages are in general use and are 
recommended: 

125 volts. 250 volts. 600 volts. 

Low-VoLtaGEe Circuits. In direct-current low-voltage circuits, the 

following terminal voltages are in general use and are recommended: 
115 volts. ; 230 volts. 550 volts. - 

In alternating-current low-voltage circuits, the following terminal volt- 
ages are in general use and are recommended. 

110 volts. 220 volts. 440 volts. 550 volts. 


wh, “is 


307 


308 


309 


310 


311 


312 


313 


314 


315 


316 


317 


318 
319 


320 
321 


322 
323 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2563 


PRIMARY DIsTRIBUTION Circuits. In alternating-current, constant- 
potential, primary-distribution circuits, an average voltage of 2,200 volts, 
with step-down transformer ratios 1/10 and 1/20, is in general use, and is 
recommended. 

TRANSMISSION Circuits. In alternating-current constant-potential 
transmission circuits, the following impressed voltages are recommended. 

6,600 11,000 22,000 33,000 44,000 66,000 88,000 110,000 

TRANSFORMER RATIO. It is recommended that the standard transformer 
ratios should be such as to transform between the standard voltages above 
named. The ratio will, therefore, usually be an exact multiple of 5 or 
10, e.g., 2,200 to 11,000; 2,200 to 44,000. 

RANGE IN VOLTAGE. In alternating-current generators, or generating 
systems, a range of terminal voltage should be provided from rated voltage 
at no load to 10 per cent in excess thereof, to cover drop in transmission. 
If a greater range than ten per cent is specified, the generator should be 
considered as special. 


B. FREQUENCIES. 


In ALTERNATING-CURRENT CrRcuiTs, the following frequencies are, 
standard: 
25 cycles 60 cycles 
_ These frequencies are already in extensive use and it is deemed ad- 
visable to adhere to them as closely as possible. 


IV. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS. 


NaME Puates. All electrical apparatus should be provided with a name 
plate giving the manufacturers’ name, the voltage and the current in 
amperes for which it is designed. Where practicable, the kilowatt capacity, 
character of current, speed, frequency, type, designation and serial num- 
ber should be added. 

DIAGRAMS OF Connections. All electrical apparatus when leaving the 
factory should be accompanied by a diagram showing the electrical con- 
nections and the relation of the different parts in sufficient detail to give 
the necessary information for proper installation. 

RueEostaT Data. Every rheostat should be clearly and permanently 
marked with the voltage and amperes, or range of amperes, for which 
it is designed. 

CoLorep INDICATING Licnts. When using colored indicating lights 
on switch-boards, red should denote danger such as ‘‘ switch closed,”’ 
or “circuit alive’; green should denote safety, such as * switch open,”’ 
or “circuit dead.” 

When white lights are used a light turned on should denote danger, 
such as ‘‘ switch closed’ or ‘‘ circuit alive’; while the light out should 
denote safety, such as ‘‘ switch open,” or ‘circuit dead.”’ Low-effi- 
ciency lamps should be used on account of their lesser liability to acci- 
dental burn-out. pe 

The use of colored lights is recommended, as safer than white lights. 

Grounpinc MxetaL Work. It is desirable that all metal work near 
high potential circuits be grounded. . 

Circuit OPENING Devices. The following definitions are recommended. 

a. A Circuit-BREAKER is an apparatus for breaking a circuit at the 
highest current which it may be called upon to carry. ee 

}. A DISCONNECTING SWITCH is an apparatus designed to open a circuit 
only when carrying little or no current. : . 

c. An AUTOMATIC CiRCUIT-BREAKER is an apparatus for breaking a cir- 
cuit automatically under an excessive strength of current. It should be 
capable of breaking the circuit repeatedly at rated voltage and at the 
maximum current which it may be called upon to carry. 


2564 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


Vv. APPENDICES AND TABULAR DATA. 
APPENDIX A. NOTATION. 


The following notation is recommended: 


Name of Quantity Symbol Unit 

324 Voltage, e.m.f., potential difference 1 te e, volt 
Current Tues ampere 
Resistance Rey %s ohm 
Reactance X, x, b 
Impedance Z, 2, - 
Admittance SESE mho 
Conductance Sir Te = 
Susceptance BD, 7 
Power Perp s watt 
Capacity C,¢, farad 
Inductance Seow oe henry 
Magnetic flux ® maxwell 
Magnetic density 8, gauss 
Magnetic force ids gilbert per cm. 
Length eM cm. or inch 
Mass M, m, gm. or lb. 
Time fA ta second or hour 


Em, Im and Bm should preferably be used for maximum cyclic values, 
e,i and p for instantaneous values, E and J for r.m.s. values (see 
Sec. 5g.) and P for the average value or effective power. These distinc- 
tions are not necessary in dealing with continuous-current circuits. 
Vector quantities are preferably represented by bold face capitals. 


APPENDIX B.—RAILWAY MOTORS. 
(I) RATING. 


825 InTRopUcToRY NOTE ON RaTING. Railway motors usually operate in 
a service in which both the speed and the torque developed by the motor 
are varying almost continually. The average requirements, however, 
during successive hours in a given class of service are fairly uniform. On 
account of the wide variation of the instantaneous loads, it is impracticable 
to assign any simple and definite rating to a motor which will indicate 
accurately the absolute capacity of a given motor or the relative capacity 
of different motors under service conditions. It is also impracticable to 
select a motor for a particular service without much fuller data with regard 
both to the motor and to the service than is required, for example, in the 
case of stationary motors which run at constant speeds. 


. 
. 
326 Scope or NomMinaL RatinG. It is common usage to give railway motors 

a nominal] rating in horse power on the basis of a one-hour test. As above j 
explained, a simple rating of this kind is not a proper measure of service 


capacity. This nominal rating, however, indicates approximately the 
maximum output which the motor should ordinarily be called upon to 
develop during acceleration. Methods of determining the continuous 
capacity of a railway motor for service requirements are given under a 
subsequent heading. 


327 The Nominat RaTING of a railway motor is the horse-power output at 
the car-axle, that is, including gear and other transmission losses, which 
gives a rise of temperature above the surrounding air (referred to a room 
temperature of 25 deg. cent.) not exceeding 90 deg. cent. at the 
commutator and 75 deg. cent. at any other part after one hour’s con- 
tinuous run at its rated voltage (and frequency, in the case of an alter- : 
nating-current motor) on a stand, with the motor-covers removed, and 
with natural ventilation. The rise in temperature is to be determined 
by thermometer, but the resistance of no electrical circuit in the motor 
shall increase more than 40 per cent during the test. | 


328 
329 


330 
331 


332 


333 


334 


335 


336 


337 


338 


339 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2565 


(II) SELECTION OF MOTOR FOR SPECIFIED SERVICE. 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. The suitability of a railway motor for a 
specified service depends upon the following considerations: 


_a. Mechanical ability to develop the requisite torque and speeds as 
given by its speed-torque curve. 


b. Ability to commutate successfully the current demanded. 


c. Ability to operate in service without occasioning a temperature rise 
in any part which will endanger the life of the insulation. 

OPERATING CONDITIONS, TYPICAL RUN. The operating conditions which 
are important in the selection of a motor include the weight of load, the 
schedule speed, the distance between stops, the duration of stops, the rate 
of acceleration and of braking retardation, the grades and the curves, 
with these data at hand, the outputs which are required of the motor may 
be determined, provided the service requirements are within the limits of 
the speed-torque curve of the motor. These outputs may be expressed 
in the form of curves giving the instantaneous values of current and of 
voltage which must be applied to the motor. Such curves may be laid 
out for the entire line, but they are usually constructed only for a certain 
average or typical run, which is fairly representative of the conditions of 
service. To determine whether the motor has sufficient capacity to per- 
form the service safely, further tests or investigations must be made. 


Capacity TEST OF RatLway Moror IN SERVICE. The capacity of a 
railway motor. to deliver the necessary output may be determined by 
measurement of its temperature after it has reached a maximum in ser- 
vice. If a running test cannot be made under the actual conditions of 
service, an equivalent test may be made in a typical run back and forth, 
under such conditions of schedule speed, length of run, rate of acceleration, 
etc., that the test cycle of motor losses and conditions of ventilation are 
essentially the same as would be obtained in the specified service. 

METHODS OF COMPARING Moror CAPACITY WITH SERVICE REQUIRE- 
MENTS. Where it is not convenient to test motors under actual service 
conditions or in an equivalent typical run, recourse may be had to one of the 
two following methods of determining temperature rise now in general 
use: 

1. METHOD By LossES AND THERMAL Capacity CurvVES. The heat de- 
veloped in a railway motor is carried partly by conduction through the 
several parts and partly by convection through the air to the motor-frame 
whence it is distributed to the outside air. As the temperature of the 
several parts is thus dependent not only upon their own internal losses 
but also upon the temperature of neighboring parts, it becomes necessary 
to determine accurately the actual value and distribution of losses in a 
railway motor for a given service and reproduce them in an equivalent 
test-run. The results of a series of typical runs expressed in the form of 
thermal capacity curves will give the relation between degrees rise per watt 
loss in the armature and in the field for all ratios of losses between them 
met with in the commercial application of a given motor. 

This method consists, therefore, in calculating the several internal 
motor losses in a specified service and determining the temperature rise 
with these losses from thermal capacity curves giving the degrees rise 
per watt loss as obtained in experimental track tests made under the same 
conditions of ventilation. 

The following motor losses cause its heating and should be carefully 
determined for a given service: J? R in the field; J’ R in the armature; 
TI? R in the brush contacts, core loss and brush friction. 

The loss in the bearings (in the case of geared motors) also adds some- 
what to the motor-heating, but owing to the variable nature of such 
losses they are generally neglected in making calculations. 

2. MetHop By Continuous Capacity oF Motor. The essential losses 
in the motor, as found in the typical run, are in most cases those in the 


2566 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


motor windings and in the core. The mean service conditions may be 
expressed in terms of the current which would produce the same losses 
in the motor windings and the voltage which, with that current, would 
produce the same core losses as the average in service. The continuous 
capacity of the motor is given in terms of the amperes which it will carry 
when run on a testing stand—with covers on or off, as specified—at dif- 
ferent voltages, say, 40, 60, 80 and 100 per cent of the rated voltage— 
with a temperature rise not exceeding 90 deg. cent at the commutator and 
75 deg. cent at any other part, provided the resistance of no electric circuit 
in the motor increases more than 40 per cent. A comparison of the equiva- 
lent service conditions with the continuous capacity of the motor will de- 
termine whether the service requirements are within the safe capacity of 
the motor. 


340 This method affords a ready means of determining whether a specified 
service is within the capacity of a given motor and it is also a convenient 
approximate method for comparing the service capacities of different 
motors. 


APPENDIX C. PHOTOMETRY AND LAMPS. 


341 CaANpDLE-PowER. The luminous intensity of sources of light is expressed 
in candle-power. The unit of candle-power is the international candle 
maintained by the Bureau of Standards at Washington, D. C. The 
Hefner unit is 0.90 of the international candle. 


342 Lumen. The total flux of light froma source is equal to its mean spherical 
intensity multiplied by 477. The unit of flux is called the lumen. A 


lumen is the tah part of the total flux of light emitted by a source 


having a mean spherical intensity of one candle-power. 


844 ILLUMINATION. The fundamental physical unit of illumination is the 
centimeter-candle, or lumen per square centimeter of incident surface. 
This is a very intense illumination. It is, therefore, convenient to express 
illumination practically in thousandths of the fundamental unit; 7.e., in 
millilumens per sq. cm. In English-speaking countries, the unit of il- 
lumination commonly employed is the foot-candle or lumen per square 
foot. A foot-candle is nearly the same illumination as a millilumen per 
sq. cm. and is actually the more intense in the ratio 1.0764; so that u foot- 
candles = 1.0764 millilumens per sq. cm. A meter candle or lumen per 
square meter, is called a ‘“‘lux’’. _A foot-candle is 10.764 lux, anda milli- 
lumen per sq. cm. is exactly 10 lux. 


346 The Errictency or ELEcrric LAmps is properly stated in terms of 

- lumens per watt at lamp terminals. This use of the term efficiency is to 
be considered as special, and not to be confused with the generally ac- 
cepted definition of efficiency in Sec. 84. 

347 9a. ErricreNcy, AUXILIARY Devices. In illuminants requiring auxiliary 
power-consuming devices outside of the luminous body, such as steadying 
resistances in constant potential arc lamps, a distinction should be made 
between the net efficiency and the gross efficiency of the lamp. This 
distinction should always be stated. The gross efficiency should include 
the power consumed in the auxiliary resistance, etc. The net efficiency 
should, however, include the power consumed in the controlling mech- 
anism of the lamp itself. Comparison between such sources of light 
should be made on the basis of gross efficiency, since the power con- : 
sumed in the auxiliary device is essential to the operation. | 

348 =A Stanparp Circuit VOLTAGE of 110 volts, or a multiple thereof may 
be assumed, except where expressly stated otherwise. 


349 Warts PER CANDLE. The specific consumption of an electric lamp is 
its watt consumption per mean spherical candle-power. ‘‘ Watts per 
candle” is the term used commercially in connection with incandescent 


lamps, and denotes, watts per mean horizontal candle-power, 


350 


351 


352 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.I.E.E. 2567 


PHOTOMETRIC TESTS in which the results are stated in candle-power 
should be made at such a distance from the source of light that the latter 
may be regarded as practically a point. Where tests are made at shorter 
distances, as for example in the measurement of lamps with reflectors, the 
results should always be given as ‘‘ apparent candle-power ”’ at the distance 
employed, which distance should always be specifically stated. 


BAsIs FOR Comparison. Either the total flux of light in lumens, or the 
mean spherical candle-power, should always be used as the basis for com- 
paring various luminous sources with each other, unless there is a clear 
understanding or statement to the contrary. 


INCANDESCENT LAMPS, RatinG. It is customary to rate incandescent 
lamps on the basis of their mean horizontal candle-power; but in com- 
paring incandescent lamps in which the relative distribution of luminous 
intensity differs, the comparison should be based on their total flux of 
light measured in lumens, or on their mean spherical candle-power. 


352a Lire Tests. Similar filaments may be assumed to operate at the same 


353 


' 354 


355 


356 


357 


temperature only when their lumens per watt consumed are the same. 
Life tests are comparable only when conducted under similar conditions 
as to filament temperatures. 
The SPHERICAL REDUCTION-FAcTOR of a lamp 
_ mean spherical candle-power 
mean horizontal candle-power 


The ToraL Fiux of light in lumens emitted by a lamp=4 7X mean 
horizontal candle-power Xspherical reduction-factor. 

The SPHERICAL REDUCTION-FacToR should only be used when properly 
determined for the particular type and characteristics of each lamp. 
The spherical reduction-factor permits of substantially accurate com- 
parisons being made between the total lumens, or mean spherical candle- 
powers of different types of incandescent lamps, and may be used in 
the absence of proper facilities for direct measurement of the total lu- 
mens, ot mean spherical candle-power. 

“READING DIsTANCE.’’ Where standard photometric measurements 
are impracticable, approximate measurements of illuminants such as 
street lamps may be made by comparing their ‘reading distances;’’ 1.¢., 
by determining alternately the distances at which an ordinary size of 
reading print can just be read, by the same person or persons, when all 
other light is screened. The angle below the horizontal at which the meas- 
urement is made should be specified when it exceeds 15 degrees. Reading- 
distance methods usually involve the comparison of very faint illuminations 


and hence the results may be seriously affected by the Purkinje effect. 

In CoMPARING DIFFERENT LUMINOUS SOURCES not only should their 
candle-power be compared, but also their relative form, brightness, dis- 
tribution of illumination and character of light. 


357a The following symbols are recommended in connection with photometry: 


358 


Photometric magnitude Symbol Unit 

Intensity of light. IE International candle. 
Luminous flux. F Lumen. 

Illumination. E Lumen/cm.?, foot-candle. 
Specifie radiation. R Foot-candle. 

Brightness. b Candle/cm.? 

Quantity. Q Candle. 

Lighting. L Lumen-second, lumen-hour. 


APPENDIX D. SPARKING DISTANCES. 


Table of Sparking Distances in Air between Opposed Sharp Needle- 
Points, for Various Root-Mean-Square Sinusoidal Voltages, in inches 
and in centimeters. The table applies to the conditions specified in Secs. 


240-246. 


2568 STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 


360 


' 369 


Distance. ee 7 Distance. 
Kilovolts ilovolts 
R.M.S. Inches Cm R.M.S. Inches Cm. 
Mea 0.225 0.57 1: 0 eget rte ee ities ee Re 13.9 5.4 
I) ORT 1.19 VEO Ae oa ee tican tel agele 15.0 38.1 
Thay - . 0.725 1.84 BAGO ain Bae 5 Be Oe ey as 3 16.05 40.7 
7A brie riciseee TG 2.54 UW 61 ee a Phe ade as 17.10 48.4 
25. Aled 3.3 180: crsratie oer esate 18.15 46.1 
30.. al O25 ee at LOO tae igcsentetaere 19.20 48.8 
BiB Aone Oe 2.0 5.1 20025. Ske eee 20.25 51.4 
40.. . 2.45 6.2 QAO cer Re eles SRO 21.30 54.1 
45.. . 2.95 7.5 220 he es eee ae 22.35 56.8 
DO seecte soe: 3.55 9.0 230. Sees Ris. Eerie weet ais 23.40 59.4 
602 eatiacrccues 4.65 11.8 240s rrfo 4d tien neta ca he 24.45 62.1 
Oe. . 5.85 14.9 250.2 deka wauectiere aeons ters 25.50 64.7 
805-5) aes tfal 18.0 2602. Se pee cok Beweees 26.50 67.3 
OO A ner dae acts rote 1 ee NY 744 || Oe Se, ee enna 27.50 69.8 
TOO eras 9.6 24.4 DBO. cues whore hale esterase 28.50 72.4 
TO pace ae ee 10.75 27.3 290 .29.50 74.9 
120 ti a eee 11.85 ~ 30.1 S00 enh eee hee 30.50 77.4 
VS Oe Ziseet wees 12.90 . 32.8 


APPENDIX E. TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT OF COPPER. 


The fundamental relation between the rise of temperature and the 
increase of resistance of copper may be expressed thus: 


R,=R, qd mae F [¢ — t1]) 


where R, is the resistance at any temperature ¢ deg. cent.; Ry, is the re- 
sistance at any “initial temperature ’’ (or ‘‘ temperature of reference ’’) 
t, deg. cent.; and @, is the temperature coefficient from and at the initial 


1 

temperature f; deg. cent. Obviously the temperature coefficient is dif- 
ferent for different initial temperatures, and this variation is shown in 
the horizontal rows of the table below. Furthermore, it has been shown 
that the temperature coefficient is different for different conductivities, 
and that the temperature coefficient is substantially proportional to the 
conductivity. The results of this simple law are shown by the vertical 
columns of the table below. 


TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENTS OF COPPER FOR DIFFERENT INITIAL 
TEMPERATURES AND DIFFERENT CONDUCTIVITIES 


Ohms per Per | 

meter- cent =. 
em | aa esse pines ei 
deg. cent | tivity QO, (arr Aso Qs As Aso zero '"’ 
0.16108 | 95 0.00405 | 0.00381 | 0.00374 | 0.00367 . 0.00361 | 0.00336 —247 .2 
0.15940 | 96 0.00499 | 0.00386 | 0.00378 | 0.00371 | 0.00364 | 0.00340 | -244.4 
0.15776 | 97 0.00414 | 0.00390 | 0.00382 | 0.00375 | 0.00368 | 0.00343 -241.7 
0.15727 97.3 | 0.00415 | 0.00391 | 0.00383 | 0.00376 | 0.00369 0.00344 | -240.9 
0.15614 | 98 0.00418 | 0.00394 | 0.00386 | 0.00379 | 0.00372 | 0.00346 —239.0 
0.15457 | 99 0.00423 | 0.00398 | 0.00390 | 0.00383 | 0.00375 | 0.00349 —236.4 
Pea . 153022) 100 0.00428 | 0.00402 | 0.00394 | 0.00386 | 0.00379 | 0.00352 | -233.8 
0.15151 | 101 0.00432 | 0.00406 | 0.00398 | 0.00390 0.00383 | 0.00355 -231.3 


: 


361 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE A.1.E.E. 2569 


The quantity (- 7) given in the last column of the above table is the 
calculated temperature on the centigrade scale at which copper of the par- 
ticular conductivity concerned would have zero electrical resistance 
provided the temperature coefficient between 0 deg. cent and 100 deg. cent. 
applied continuously down to the absolute zero. The usefulness of this 
“inferred absolute zero temperature of resistance’’ in calculating tem- 
perature rise is evident from the following formula: 


i i Bes (T +t) 
MEN BAe 1 


1 


The presentation of the above table is intended to emphasize the de- 
sirability of determining the temperature coefficient rather than assuming 
it. Actual experimental determination is facilitated by the proportional 
relation between the temperature coefficient and the conductivity; a mea- 
surement of either quantity gives both. However, if a temperature coeff- 
cient must be assumed, the best value to take for average commercial 
annenled copper wire is that given in the table for 100 per cent conductivity, 
v1Z., 


Q) =0.00428, 2 =0.00394, A; =0,00386 


This is the value recommended for wire wound on instruments and ma- 
chines, since they are generally wound with annealed wire and experi- 
ments have shown that the distortions due to the winding of the wire do 
not appreciably affect the temperature coefficient. 

If a value must be assumed for hard-drawn copper wire, the value re- 
commended is that given in the table for 97.3 per cent conductivity, vzz., 


Qo =0.00415, G29 =0.00383, A; =0.00376 


The temperature coefficients in fahrenheit degrees are given by dividing 
any @ above by 1.8. Thus, the 20 deg. cent. or 68 deg. fahr. temperature 
coefficient for copper of 100 per cent conductivity is 0.00394 per deg. 
cent., or 0.00219 per deg. fahr. 


APPENDIX F. HORSEPOWER. 


In view of the fact that a horsepower defined as 550 foot-pounds per 
second represents a power which varies slightly with the latitude and 
altitude (from 743.3 to 747.6 watts) and also in view of the fact that dif- 
ferent authorities differ as to the precise value of the horsepower in watts, 
the Standards Committee has adopted 746 watts as the value of the horsepower. 
The number of foot-pounds per second to be taken as one horsepower ts 
therefore such a value at any given place as is equivalent to 746 watts; the 
number varies from 552 to 549 foot-pounds per second, being 550 at 50 deg. 
latitude (London), and 550.5 at Washington. The Standards Committee, 
however, recommends that the kilowatt instead of the horsepower be used 
generally as the unit of power. 


ADDENDA 


TO THE 


A. 1. E.E. STANDARDIZATION RULES 


G. Official ctons of the Turn Congress 


AND 


H. Rating of Electrical Machinery in 
Different Countries 


Printed by order of the Board of Directors in Accordance with the 
Following Resolution Adopted October 13, 1911: 


Resolved, that the Secretary be authorized to publish with the Standard- 
ization Rules of the Institute the decisions of the International Electrotechnical 
Commission at Turin in regard to standard symbology and the direction for 
indicating advancement of phase in graphic diagrams of alternating current 
quantities, and a resume of the principal features of the rating of electrical 
machinery of the leading foreign countries. 


aa 


iE: C OFFICIAL ACTIONS 2571 


The following appendix, G, covers the principal official actions of the 
Turin Congress in 1911. 


APPENDIX G.—INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS OF THELE.C. 


_ The following is a brief résumé of the official actions of the Interna- 
tional Electrotechnical Commission at Turin in 1911. 


(a) INTERNATIONAL SYMBOLS 


_1. Instantaneous values of electrical quantities which vary with the 
time are to be represented by small letters. 

2. Virtual or constant values of electrical quantities to be represented 
by capital letters. 

3. Maximum values of periodic electrical quantities to be represented 
by capital letters followed by the subscript “‘ m”’ 

4. Magnetic quantities, whether constant or variable, to be represented 
by capital letters of either script, gothic, heavy-faced, or of any special 

ype. 

5. Maximum values of magnetic quantities to be represented by 
capital letters of either script, gothic, heavy-faced, or of any special type, 
followed by the subscript “ m”’. 

6. The following quantities to be represented by the following letters: 


Electromotive force Eye 
Electric quantity Gh @ 
Self-inductance* Grwls 
Magnetic force 5, H | i 
Magnetic flux density @, B J 
Length Ll 
Mass M,m 
Time Tait 


7. The letters J, E, and R were definitely adopted to represent, respec- 
tively, the current, the electromotive force, and the resistance, in the 
simple algebraical expression of Ohm's law. 

8. In all questions relative to alternating currents, the expression 
“ Reactive Power ’ is adopted to designate the quantity UJ sin ¢. 


(b) DIAGRAMS FOR ALTERNATING CURRENTS 

“In the graphical representation of alternating electric and magnetic 
quantities, advance in phase shall be represented in the counter-clockwise 
direction. 

Note. The impedance of a reactive coil, of resistance R, and induct- 
ance L, is R+4/-11 o, and that of a condenser of capacity C, is 

1 E 

————— where w is equal to 2 z X frequency. 
ey, Cw w q T q yy I 


It follows also that the diagram herewith represents the 


_phase relations in a simple alternating-current circuit 


containing an impressed electromotive force OF anda 
lagging current O J. 


(c) RATINGS OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY AND APPARATUS 


The propositions of the Brussels conference in regard to rating were 
adopted without modification as follows: r 

1. The output of electric generators is defined as the electric power 
available at the terminals. : 

2. The output of electric motors is defined as the mechanical power 
available at the shaft. — 

3. Both the electric and mechanical powers to be expressed in inter- 
national watts. 


~ *Coefficient of self-induction. 
+As examples only. 


fe) 


‘2572 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


Appendices H and I give compaiisons of methods of rating electrical 
machinery, and particularly of D-C. machinery, in different countries, 
as compiled by the Secretary of the International Electrotechnical Com- 
mission. See Publication No. 9, ‘‘ Rating of Electrical Machinery,” of 
the I. E. C. August, 1911. 


APPENDIX H.—RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


The following are the comparative rules on the rating of direct current 
generators and motors as compiled by the General Secretary of the 
International Electrotechnical Commission from the National Rules of 
six countries as in force in 1911. These comparative rules have been 
appended to the Standardization Rules by order of the Board of Directors 
of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, in order to present the 
extent of agreement or diversity existing on these rules, in 1911, among 
the leading electrical engineering societies of the world. 


List of documents from which extracts have been made: 

BELGIuM. “Prescriptions normales"’ for the reception of electrical 
machines and transformers issued by the ‘‘ Chambre syndicale des 
Electriciens Belges ’’ in 1908. 

France. General instructions for the delivery and reception of elec- 
trical machines and transformers issued by the ‘‘ Union des Syndicats 
de l’Electricité ’’ in 1910. 

Regulations for tenders, supply and testing of electrical machines and 
transformers issued by the ‘‘ Association Alsacienne des Propriétaires 
d’Appareils a Vapeur,’’ 1906. 

GERMANY. Standard rules for the utilization and testing of electrical 
machines and transformers issued by the ‘‘ Verband Deutscher Elektro- 
techniker ’’ in 1910. 

GreEAT Britain. Report of the British Engineering Standards 
Committee on ‘‘ Electrical Machinery ’’ issued in 1907. 

SWEDEN. Rules for the testing and reception of electrical machines 
and transformers issued by the ‘‘ Association of Swedish Engineers " 
in 1909. 

UNITED STATES. Standardization Rules of the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers as contained in its PROCEEDINGs, Augtst, 1911. 


ANALYSIS OF THE RULES 
POWER 
Method of Expressing the Power of Electrical Machines 


BELGIUM. 
Generators. Kw. at the machine terminals. 


Motors. Mechanical horse power at the shaft (75 kg-m. per sec.) 
FRANCE. 

Generators. Kw. at the machine terminals. 

Motors. Kw. or horse power at the shaft (75 kg-m. per sec.). 
GERMANY. 

Generators. Kw. 

Motors. Horse power (75 kg-m. per sec. =736 W.). 


GREAT BRITAIN. 
Generators. Kw. 


Motors. B.h.p. (1 Brake horse power =746 W.). 
SWEDEN. 

Generators. Kw. ‘ 

Motors. Horse power (75 kg-m. per sec.). 


UNITED STATES. 
Generators. Kw. at the machine terminals. 
_ Motors. __ Bhp. (746 W.) Preferably in kilowatts. 
Notes.—BEtGiuM. Motors usually have their power inaicated as ‘‘H.P.," with 
consequent confusion as to which is intended; the English b.h.p. being 746 watts, the 
cheval-vapeur ”’ being equivalent to 736 watts. ; ‘ 
FRANCE. The Association Alsacienne still allows the Poncelet of 100 kg-m. per sec. 


. 


. 
aT 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2573 


RATING 
BELGIUM. 


Ch), Intermittent service. In which the periods of work and rest alter- 
nate in minutes. 

(2) Momentary service. In which periods of work of sufficiently short 
duration for a stationary temperature not to be reached are followed by 
periods of rest long enough for the temperature to fall to approximately 
that of the surrounding air. 

(3) Continuous service. In which the periods of work are sufficiently 
prolonged to lead to the establishment of stationary conditions of tem- 
perature. 


FRANCE, 


(1) Continuous service. 
(2) Variable service. 
(3) Intermittent service. (Overhead traveler, crane, lift.) 


GERMANY. 


(1) Intermittent service. In which the periods of work and rest alter- 
nate in minutes. (Motors for cranes, lifts, tramways, and similar ap- 
paratus. ) 

(2) Short period service. In which the periods of work are not suffi- 
ciently long for the final (rated) temperature to be reached, whilst the 
periods of rest are long enough for the temperature to fall to approxi- 
mately that of the surrounding air. 

(3) Continuous service. In which the periods of work are sufficiently 
long for the final temperature (rated) to be attained. 


GREAT BRITAIN. 

(1) Continuous working. The output of generators and motors for 
continuous working shall be the output at which they can work con- 
tinuously for six hours and conform to the prescribed tests, and this out- 
put shall be defined as the Rated Load. 

(2) Intermittent working. The output of motors for intermittent 
working shall be the output at which they can work for one hour and 
conform to the prescribed tests, and this output shall be defined as the 
Rated Intermittent Load. 


SWEDEN. 

(1) Continuous service. In which the temperature reaches stationary 
conditions: 

(2) Intermittent service. In which the working periods do not exceed 
one hour or alternate with intervals of rest of a similar length. 


UNITED STATES. 

(1) Continuous rating. In which, under load, there is the attainment 
of approximately stationary temperature. 

(2) Intermittent rating. In which one minute periods of load and rest 
alternate until the attainment of approximately stationary conditions 


of temperature. 
(3) Minute rating. In which, under load for one minute, no limit of 

capacity is exceeded, and no permanent change is wrought in the apparatus 
(4) Variable service rating. Not yet defined. 


NotES.—FRANCE. The Association Alsacienne does not recognize ‘variable service.”’ 

GREAT BRITAIN. The reason for the ‘six hours” in the explanation of ‘‘ continuous 
working ’’ is due to the fact that the Committee considered standardization shoula not go 
beyond 1,000 kw., above that capacity being considered as special. One of the aims of 
standardization being to assist the manufacturer to carry stock, it would scarcely pay to 
do so above 1,000 kw. . 4 

“ Continuous working '’ does not include machines running from week-end to week-end 
without a stop. The one-hour test under “ Intermittent ” is likely to be revised. ; 

SwEDEN. The rated output under continuous service is defined as that output which 
can be obtained continuously for an unlimited period without the temperature limits 
specified being exceeded. The rated output under intermittent service is that output which 
can be obtained continuously for an hour without the temperature limits specified being 


exceeded. 


2574 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


NA ME-PLATES 
Information to be Stated on the Name-plates 


BELGium. Service recognized (intermittent, momentary, fora; «oes 
hours, or continuous). The rated values of the power, the pressure, the 
current and the angular speed. 

FRANCE. The power for which the machine has been sold. : 

It is expressed thus: For generators, in kilowatts at the terminals; 
for motors, in kilowatts, or horse power of 75 kg-m. per second, available 
at the shaft. ’ 

Additional information to be stated: For continuous working, the 
rated values of the speed in revolutions per minute, the pressure, and 
the current; for variable working, the limits of pressure and current; 
for intermittent working (traveller, crane, lift, etc.) the power for a period 
of one hour, mentioning ‘‘ intermittent working.”’ 


GERMANY. The power for generators to be stated in kilowatts (kw.). 
Mechanical power to be stated in kilowatts or in horse power (p-s.). 

In addition, the name-plate on which the power is stamped, ora special 
name-plate, must indicate the rated value of the number of revolutions, 
the pressure and the current. 

The name-plate must also indicate the rating: ‘‘ Intermittent,” or 
sab Ot eeivates 4 hours,” or ‘“‘ Continuous.” 


GREAT BRITAIN. Unless otherwise stated, the output is to be con- 
sidered to apply to continuous working. In the case of intermittent 
rating the word “‘ Intermittent ”’ is to be added. 

The name-plate shall also indicate: For generators: Kw., volts, 
amperes, rev. per min. For motors: B.h.p., volts, amperes, rev. per 
min.; B.h.p (Intermittent), volts, amperes, rev. per min. 


SWEDEN. Unless otherwise stated, the output shall be considered as 
applying to continuous working. 

The values stated on the name-plate shall be in conformity with the 
rules, except it bear the indication ‘‘ For special purposes.”’ 

The following information to be stated: For generators: the kilowatts, 
volts, amperes, and revs.per minute. For motors: the mechanical power, 
the volts, amperes, and revs. per minute. 

N. B.—The speed shall be the speed with the machine hot, and a tolerance of + 7% shall 
be allowed. 

The service, adding the words: ‘‘ For continuous service.’’ ‘ For 
intermittent service.” : 

For variable service, the respective limits shall be given. 


UnitED STATES. Name of the maker, volts, amperes. 
When practicable, the kilowatts, the revs. per minute, the type, the 
character of current, designation and serial number. 


COMMUTATION 


BeLtcium. Under all conditions not exceeding the rated load, the 
commutator of a machine shall not require to be cleaned or given other 
attention more than once a day, with the brushes remaining in the most 
favorable position. 


FRANCE. 

Union des Syndicats de L’Electricité. Under all loads included in 
running free up to the rated load, the brushes being ground and fixed 
in the most favorable position by means of a previous run, machines with 
a commutator must be capable of working for the period of the test 
(specified under Heating: Duration of Test,) without it being necessary 
to glass-paper the commutator or resort to any other method of cleaning. 

Association Alsacienne. Unless otherwise specified, when once the 
brushes have been adjusted in the most favorable position, machines 
with commutators shall be capable of working, without appreciable 
sparking or adjustment of brushes, at all loads from no load to rated 
load, even with sudden changes of current. 


: 
: 
7 
a 
a 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2575 


_ Under continuous working, and at any load within the prescribed 
limits, the working of the commutator shall be such as to require atten- 
tion (cleaning or lubricating) only at intervals of twelve hours. This 
condition also applies to collector rings. 


GERMANY. Under all conditions of load from one quarter up to the 
rated load, and without alteration of the position of the brushes, the 
sparking produced must be so negligible as to permit the machine to work 
for at least 24 hours without the commutator requiring attention. The 
brushes to be ground in in the most favorable position. 


GREAT BRITAIN. 


SWEDEN. Unless otherwise specified, the commutation is to be with- 
out appreciable sparking from no load to 10 per cent overload, and with- 
out the position of the brushes being altered. 

In the case of machines for variable working, the position of the brushes 
may be altered. The working position of the brushes is to be indicated. 


Unitep States. The machine must carry the specified overload 
without injurious sparking or mechanical weakness. 


OVERLOAD 


The percentages given below imply an overload in excess of the rated 
load marked on the name-plate. 


_ Bevtcium. For continuous service. 20 per cent of the rated load for 

a period equal to one-fifth of the duration of the heating test, with a 
maximum of one hour. 

For intermittent service. 20 per cent of the rated load for one-fifth 
of an hour. 

For momentary service. 20 per cent of the rated load for a period 
equal to one-fifth of the time marked on the name-plate. 40 per cent of 
the rated load for 3 minutes. 


FRANCE. The test to be applied at the close of the rated load test. 

All machines must be capable of withstanding, without deterioration 
or appreciable sparking: 20 per cent of the rated load for one-tenth of 
the duration of the test for continuous working; 30 per cent of the rated 
load for 5 minutes. 

Motors for intermittent service: 25 per cent of the rated load for 15 
minutes; 30 per cent of the rated load for 5 minutes. 

Germany. For generators and motors: 25 per cent of the rated 
load for half an hour. 

For motors (constant potential): 40 per cent of the rated load for 3 
minutes. 

GREAT BRITAIN. (see Heating at Conclusion of Overload Test) 

SwEDEN. 25 per cent in excess of the rated current without injurious 
sparking. Adjustment of brushes permitted. 

Unitep States. For generators: 25 per cent of the rated load for 2 
hours. 

For motors (continuous working): 25 per cent of the rated load for 
2 hours; 50 per cent of the rated load for 1 minute. 


Notres.—Betcium. The machine must be capable of sustaining the overload during 
the specified period without adjustment of the brushes. The overload test can be carried 
out at the close of the rated load test, in which case the rise in temperature must not exceed 
the limits prescribed for the rated load by more than 10 deg. cent. 

FRANCE. The Association Alsacienne also specifies: 

For motors intended to work for prolonged periods, an overload test of 40 per cent for 
three minutes. F 

‘All motors must be capable of withstanaing an increase of 30 per cent in the rated speed 
for a period of five minutes. 

GERMANY. The overload test is to be applied without reference to the temperature 
rise, and it must be commenced with the machine at such a temperature as to prevent the 
prescribed limits being exceeded. onc enttee 

At constant angular speed, generators must be capable of maintaining constant pressure 
with an overload of 15 per cent. 


2576 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


VARIATION OF PRESSURE AND SPEED 


BELGIUM. J 
Generators. The pressure variation of a generator is measured by 
the greatest difference observed, at constant speed, between any two 
values of the pressure corresponding with loads, the current of which 
does not exceed that defined by the rated load, the pressure being regu- 
lated, at this current, to -the rated load value. The brushes to remain 
‘adjusted in the working position. 

Note.—The excitation of a generator, intenaed to work at constant pressure, 
must be capable of maintaining the rated value of the pressure under normal conditions 
of angular speed, at all loads from no load up to and including 1.15 times the rated load 
current. 

Motors. The speed variation is defined as the difference in angular 
“speed at rated load and at no load at normal working pressure, and with- 
out alteration of field rheostats adjusted for the rated load. 


FRANCE. P 
Generators. The pressure variation shall be measured in passing 
from the rated load to no load, at constant speed, in the case of self- 
exciting machines, whilst maintaining constant the resistance in the field 
circuit; in the case of separately excited machines, whilst maintaining 
constant the exciting current. During this test, and unless otherwise 
-specified, the brushes shall remain fixed in the rated load sparkless position. 
Motors. The speed variation shall be measured in passing from the 
rated load to no load, with constant pressure at the terminals. : 


GERMANY. At constant rated load speed and excitation, the pressure 
to be observed at, at least, four points practically equidistant on the 
load curve. The greatest difference between the observed pressures is 
a measure of the variation. In regard to the adjustment of brushes, the 
conditions are to be governed according to the rating. 

GREAT BRITAIN. 


SWEDEN. At constant rated load speed and excitation, the ratio of 

pe cue ase in pressure at rated load and the pressure at no load, shall 
e taken: 

(1) By observing the values of the pressure at no load and at rated load. 

(2) By observing the values of the pressure with increasing values of 
the field current, both with no load on the armature and with the rated 
load current in the armature. Tolerance allowed +2 per cent. 

UNITED STATES. . 

Generators,. Ratio of maximum variation of terminal pressure from 
the normal (occurring between rated load and no load) to the rated 
load pressure. 

Motors. Ratio of maximum variations in speed from the normal 
(occurring between rated load and no load) to the rated load speed. 


HEATING 
General Notes 


BELGiuM. The test is to be carried out as nearly as possible under 
ordinary working conditions. -An overload may be applied at the com- 
mencement of the test in order to attain more rapidly the final conditions 
of temperature. 

The maximum temperature is to be compatible with the insulation 
employed. Special precautions are to be taken when employing ther- 
mometers. Unless otherwise specified, apparatus for variable speed and 
pressure shall be tested under the most severe conditions. 


_ France. The maximum temperature is to be compatible with the 
insulation employed. \ 


GERMANY. The tests are to be carried out under. the conditions of 
service specified. Any ventilation which would naturally be produced 
. under ordinary working conditions and which was provided for in the 
design may be imitated during the test. If a thermometer is employed, 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2577 


it is recommended that the bulb be covered with tinfoil and every pre- 
caution taken to prevent loss of heat. 


GREAT BRITAIN. The temperature allowed depends on the character 
of the insulation. 

The temperature limits specified do not cover cases in which cotton, 
paper, and its preparations, linen, or similar materials are used solely 
as vehicles for insulation varnishes, or enamels, capable 6f continuously 
resisting temperatures above 125 deg. cent. Machines in which such 
materials are employed are dealt with separately. 

A much higher temperature rise than that specified on page 44, 
may be permitted in machines in which the insulation is secured by means ~ 
of special materials designed to resist high temperatures, but the amount 
of permissible temperature rise must depend on the properties of the 
insulating materials and the method of construction and must be settled 
specially for each class of machine. 


SWEDEN. The test is to be carried out as nearly as possible under 
ordinary working conditions. 


UNITED STATES. The temperature allowed must not be such as to 
be detrimental to the insulation under ordinary working conditions. 


An overload may be applied to shorten the duration of the test. 


_ Methods 


BELGIUM. By increase in resistance, if this method is practicable. 
Otherwise by means of thermometers. 

France. Temperatures ascertained by means of thermometers, 
placed in the hottest part accessible; nevertheless, in the case of exciting | 
circuits and all stationary windings, the temperature may be determined 
by increase in resistance. 

GERMANY. Exciting coils and stationary windings by increase in 
resistance, other parts by thermometer. 

GREAT BRITAIN. Stationary windings by increase in resistance. 
Moving coils by increase in resistance, if possible, otherwise by ther- 
mometer or thermo-couple. Commutators, brushes, bearings by ther- 
mometer. 

SWEDEN. Windings by increase in resistance, if possible, otherwise 
by thermometer. Other parts by thermometer. 

UNITED STATES. By thermometer. Conductors by rise in resistance, 
when possible. 


Duration of Test 


« 


BELGIUM. Z ; , 
Continuous service. A period of sufficient duration to attain a prac- 


tically constant temperature: ordinarily 5 hours up to 20 kilowatts, 8 
hours above 20 kilowatts. 
Intermittent service. One hour. ee 
Momentary service. The number of hours indicated on the name-plate. 


FRANCE. 
Continuous working. A period sufficiently long to attain a practically 
constant temperature. (See Note.) 
Intermittent service. One hour. 


NotTeE.—FRANCE. The periods me given, in a general manner, by the following table: 


_ Volts XAmperes 
K ~ Rev.per.min. 
OEM OURS scatoretoledsvel vie 'sareue = oi0"s 2 hours SOO 50D ete pt heas ee oO sn 7 hours 
RO TS SO aes a c.aits ticcitee ohare BOO= LOOM, sweets tel ac £ 
BOSLOO athe sre ete tonkaiieiacie Ai ron Oat OOO pera tare itera wei ee one ta 9 ¥ 
OMA star ths oitlit sie turaste ay syeesl abe WOOO SI BOO WEY te Gy tains ae sas eus ys 10 


2578 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


GERMANY. 
Intermittent service. One hour. ces 
Momentary service. The number of hours indicated on the name-plate. 
Continuous service. Ten hours. 
In the case of small machines the duration of test may be reduced. 


GREAT BRITAIN. 
Continuous working. Six hours (up to 1,000 kw.). 
Intermittent working. One hour (under revision). 
SWEDEN. ; ; 
Continuous service. A period sufficiently long to attain a practically 
constant temperature. 
UNITED STATES. , . 
Continuous service. A period sufficiently long to attain a practically 
constant temperature. 
Intermittent service. According to the conditions of service specified. 


Limits of Temperature Rise in Deg. Cent. 


BELGIUM. 
(i) Permissible limits. (it) Recommended limits. (4) (at) 
Insulated: withicottonmi.ccccn es oe ies oe tare aaa 50 45 
He WA “DADCL ngs ane ee a ee Be ee a 60 45 
2 «“ mica, asbestos or similar preparations... 80 65 
Committators: brushes ..23.5 cis sia: <r tne wh ones eealate ets 60 50 
Bearings, terminals and connections.. .........--+-++4 35 30 


For permanently short-circuited windings, 5 degrees rise in excess 
of the above limits is permitted. 
FRANCE. 

Continuous service. For stationary windings, 10 deg. cent. in excess, 
of the limits for moving coils. 

Moving coils: 


Insulated with cotton. ..c../-csacuiencir ke hs er eae Seeten eee 50 
% Oe DADE. Saha ine wa huteed Stipe hs ae Roe eae 60 
‘ “ ‘mica, asbestos or equivalent preparations...... 80 
Tron and bare: CONAUCTOFS Sis, 65% unchecked oa clevokes sui test aire aii 90 
Comrmititators’ s/s axis aay ce, cost eleie-phene. © beiaty laser lente evel nae oleate 60 
BG ari ta oS sauce core vi saves artes casas ty salle ade eri wile a etbale sate gia ae Se eee 45 


Intermittent service. In conformity with the regulations of the Milan 
Congress (see Appendix I). 

Uninterrupted service. For commutating machines destined for an 
uninterrupted day and night service, the permissible temperature rise 
shall be in accordance with those for continuous service, reduced by 5 deg. 
cent. 


Association Alsacienne. 
(a) For field windings traversed by a continuous current: 


Bay resibtanices’. sits ara iy vs hua pheekta te tate ee Pele eho seas ec eae rte OD 

By-thermometeryn oh Why 34 ean ao A ae oe eee eee irae 45 
(6) For all other windings and the iron in which the windings are 

embedded 225 7. erie hoe hero eee Le a eee po RAD, 
(c) For permanently short-circuited windings................. 65, 
(2) Por commutators, -brushesi.n iy eee eee ete vis wihatie a On 
(e) For bearings, terminals and connections.................. 30 


N. B.—For enclosed machines, an extra rise of 5 degrees may be permitted. 
_ For commutating machines destined to work day and night continuously the above 
limits of temperature shall be reduced by 5 degrees. 
GERMANY. For stationary windings 10 deg. cent. above the limits for 
moving coils is permitted. 
For moving coils as well as the iron in which the windings are embedded: 
Insulated with: cottominn: cis acai tocopherol tote ene er cane 50 
: . “~ underioil and papenicncn ce ae nets €0 
i enamel, mica, asbestos or equivalent prepara- 
RODLSSGNTCRTIRIOIR, 5. ois. cb ms focegeredety ie mice 


“ “ 


Pe 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY ~— 2579 


Comannebato ts eeewen ae ay etwas ore A sices he cei recone eas Gh Ww aiid oxancis 60 
Ee uN cee MP OME R IRAE ey Pe Caae Sutin eit or ieaal =, Ae te poh eer ca nboie uote 50 


Great Britain. For cotton, paper and its preparations, linen, 
micanite or similar materials: 


Stationary coils (by increase in resistance)..............0.-+++ 60 
Moving coils (by inerease.in resistance)... iin. ven anee eens 60 
IMovinexcollci(bysbaetino-CcOUple)). sits sos oc ee cn sre - sisin ee DO) 


SWEDEN. For stationary windings, 10 per cent above the limits for 
moving coils. 
Moving coils: 


Pica abecteWvit MeCOLtOiM ans emcees ema occ. cevie aie exescgnue vn ets 50 

Si SME PA Cie ae a Soe SEA eee etc Sooo eae 60 

s SRETIICH was DESLOS Wenennin we one My ka cool Gls hoe est rae 80 
COPS EN RS fw ahe Gt Secs Ue Cee One Bice ce Ee ae On ee oe a 60 
Copana tera tOns eerste ae ec ot ee hin Och acceiod acm, head eae 60 
TSXSPSEIG GFR oka amc ncacgeaet ee wea te ca SRO MER oe Ia ae i 40 

UNITED STATES. 

Picidvanudsarinattre: windingser...c-c.teeteast. beth enge ws o 00 
ComitniutatorsyanG spruces. secre atc sree cea eee OO 
Bearings and other parts......... eas Petcare ew) 


N. B.—For large machines, a temperature limit of 40 deg. cent. under rated load 
conditions and 55 deg. cent. under overload is frequently specified. 


Surrounding Air Temperature 


(At the commencement of each paragraph the figure in deg. cent. indicates the 
standard adopted as the room temperature.) 


BELGIUM. 

35 deg.cent. The temperature to be adopted is the mean of the ther- 
mometer readings, taken at regular intervals during the last quarter of the 
test, in the currents of air passing to the apparatus, or, in default, at the 
middle height round the apparatus; in any case, as near as possible at 
a minimum distance to ensure safety from the effects of direct radiation. 


FRANCE. 
35 deg. cent. The thermometer indicating the surrounding air shall be 


placed in the line of air currents at about one metre from the machine and 


sheltered from all external influence. The mean value of the figures 
during the last quarter of the test shall be adopted. 
GERMANY. ; 
35 deg. cent. The temperature of the surrounding air shall be taken in 
the currents of air arriving, or, if there is no well-defined current of air, the 
mean value shall be taken of the air surrounding the machine at the 
middle height and at about one metre distant from the machine. The 
mean value of the figures during the last quarter of the test shall be 
adopted. 
GREAT BRITAIN. 
25 deg. cent. 
SWEDEN. 
“35 deg. cent. 
UNITED STATES. ; , : 
25 deg. cent. The surrounding air of the test room is to’ be ascer- 
tained by means of several thermometers protected from direct radiation 


and air currents. 


Heating at Conclusion of Overload Test 


BeLcium. After the application of an overload of 20 per cent for one- 
fifth of the specified test period and of 40 per cent for three minutes, the 
prescribed limits of temperature must not be exceeded by more than 
10 deg. cent. 

FrANcE. No conditions as to heating. 


2580 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


GERMANY. The temperature limits specified for the rated load must 
not be exceeded, therefore the overload must be applied for a sufficiently 
short period and at a time when the temperature of the machine is 
sufficiently low in order to insure that the permissible limits of temperature 
cannot be exceeded. 

Great BrITAIN. Under no conditions must the temperature exceed 
85 deg. cent. 


SWEDEN. 


Unitep STATES. When the overload test is applied directly after thes 


rated load test under continuous service conditions, an allowance is per- 
mitted of 15 deg. cent. above the limits specified for the rated load. 


Surrounding Air Temperature Corrections 


BeLcium. If the surrounding air is likely to exceed 35 deg. cent., the 
temperature limits must be reduced by an amount equivalent to the excess. 
FRANcE. If the test is carried out with a surrounding temperature 
below 35 deg. cent., the temperature limits shall be reduced in the fol- 
lowing ratio: 
1 
1 + 0.005 (35-6) 


@ being the temperature of the surrounding air during the test. 

If the machine is intended for a locality in which the surrounding air 
exceeds 35 deg. cent., the temperature limits shall be reduced in the 
following ratio: 


1 
1+ 0.005 (@’— 35) 


’ being the presumed temperature of the surrounding air. : 
Association Alsacienne. If the temperature of the surrounding air 
ordinarily exceeds 35 deg. cent., the temperature limits must be reduced 
by an equivalent amount. 
GERMANY. 


Great BriTAIN. If the surrounding air in actual service is likely to 
exceed 25 deg. cent., the observed temperature rise shall be reduced 
by one degree for each degree of difference between the surrounding air and 
25 deg. cent. 

SWEDEN. 


_ Unirep States. The observed temperature shall be reduced or 
increased one-half per cent for every degree cent. difference between the 
surrounding air and 25 deg. cent. 


RESISTIVITY OF COPPER 
Variation with Temperature 


Unless otherwise specified, the following values have been adopted: 
BeLGium. 0.004 per degree cent. 

FRANCE. 0.004 per degree cent. 

GERMANY. 0.0040 per degree cent. 

GREAT BRITAIN. 0.42 per cent per degree cent. from and at 0 deg. cent. 
SWEDEN. 0.004 per degree cent. 

UNITED STATES. 0.428 per cent per degree cent. from and at 0 deg. 


cent. for annealed copper of 100 per cent standard conductivity (see 
Appendix E). 


ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE 


UnitED STATES. 760 mm. of mercury. 
The observed temperature rise shall be reduced by 1 per cent for every 
10 mm, deviation below 760. This correction is only to be applied when 


the atmospheric pressure differs greatly from the standard pressure of 
760 mm. of mercury. , ; 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2581 


MECHANICAL TESTS 


BELGIUM. _ Machines must be capable of withstanding for five minutes, 

at no load with and without excitation, a speed of 25 per cent in excess 
of the maximum speed specified for the particular service, unless the 
nature or method of using the machine in itself necessitates speeds ex- 
ceeding this figure, in which case the excess must be 100 per cent. 
_ France. Generators must be capable of withstanding a momentary 
increase in speed to be fixed, in each case, according to the particular 
method of driving. Continuous current motors must be capable of with- 
an ene, during five minutes, a speed of 20 per cent in excess of the rated 
speed. 

Association Alsacienne. Motors must be capable of withstanding, 
during five minutes, a speed of 30 per cent in excess of the rated speed. 

GERMANY. Machines intended to work at a practically constant speed 
must be capable of withstanding during five minutes, a speed of 15 per 
cent in excess of the rated speed, first without excitation and then with 
full excitation. 

GREAT BRITAIN. 

SWEDEN. Machines must be capable of withstanding a speed of 20° 
per cent in excess of the rated speed. Generators driven by hydraulic 
turbines, unless otherwise specified, must be capable of withstanding a 
speed of 90 per cent in excess of the rated speed. 


UNITED STATES. 


IDM AKCI GD INYE NE 
General Conditions 


BELGIUM. The method of determination is to be specified. Unless 
otherwise stated, the efficiency is to be ascertained at rated load and under 
the corresponding conditions as to temperature. 

The power absorbed in the field rheostats of a machine is to be included 
as part of the power required to excite the machine. In the case of a 
separately excited machine, the efficiency of the machine and that of its 
exciter, shall be separately stated. 

FRANCE. The efficiency tests should be made at, or reduced to, the 
temperature attained at the close of the working test. The efficiency 
shall be stated for the rated load, three-quarters and half load, and is to 
include the losses due to the auxiliary apparatus such as exciter, ventila- 
tion, circulating pumps, forming an integral portion of the plant. j 

GERMANY. The statement as to the efficiency applies to the rated 
load and the conditions of service to which it refers is to be mentioned. 
The power absorbed in excitation and in the rheostats must be considered 
as losses for the purpose of the calculations; unless otherwise stated the 
power absorbed in cooling the machine must also be considered as a loss. 

For machines which are specially excited, the efficiency of the two 
machines must be stated separately. 


CREAE wD RETA DN ee 

SwEDEN. The losses in excitation and in the rheostats are to be in- 
cluded. 

Friction losses are only to be included in the case of machines with 
automatic lubrication. 

Losses due to an independent flywheel are to be excluded. 

The efficiency measurements are to be made at the temperature 
attained by the machine at the close of the rated load test and referred 


_ to a surrounding air temperature of 20 deg. cent. 


UNITED STATES. The test is to be carried out under ordinary work- 
ing conditions and with the surrounding air at standard temperature. 
In the case of belt-driven machines, the loss of power in belts and the 
increase of bearing friction, due to the increase of belt tension, is to be 


excluded. 


2582 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 


In the case of a generator inseparable from its prime mover, bearing 
friction is to be excluded. , 

The losses in exciters or in auxiliary apparatus are to be considered 
separately, and charged to the plant consisting of the machine together 
with its auxiliary apparatus. : ‘ 

The plant efficiency is to be distinguished from the efficiency of the 
machine alone. The efficiency of a machine is to be measured at, or 
reduced to, the temperature which the machine assumes under rated 
load conditions, referred to a surrounding air temperature of 25 deg. cent. 


Method 


ALL Countriss. Directly by input output, where possible. 
Indirectly by losses, if the direct method is not possible. 


Enumeration of Losses 


BELGIUM. 


FRANCE. ; em! 
Mechanical. (a) Bearing friction and ventilation. ; 
(b) Friction of brushes on commutators and collecting 
rings. 
Electrical. (c) Hysteresis and Foucault currents. 
(d) Joule effects in the circuits. 


GERMANY. The losses are not enumerated in tabular form. 
GREAT BRITAIN. 


SWEDEN. 
(a) Bearing, brush and air friction. 
(b) Hysteresis and Foucault currents. 
(c) Ohmic losses in armature. 
(d) Ohmic losses in brushes. 
(e) Ohmic losses in exciting coils. 


UNITED STATES. 
(a) Bearing friction and windage losses. 
(b) Molecular magnetic friction and Foucault current losses. 
(c) Armature resistance losses. 
(d) Commutator-brush friction loss. 
(e) Brush and brush-contact resistance losses. 
(f) Field excitation loss. 
(g) Load losses. 


Nores.—FRANCE. Association Alsacienne includes under electrical losses brush con- 
tact resistance. 

UNITED STATES. (e) Losses may be considerable with carbon brushes in low voltage 
Pate gg. (g) Difference between total losses under load and sum of losses as here 
specified. 


DIELECTRIC TESTS 


General Conditions of Test 


BeLGium. Dielectric tests take the place of insulation tests unless the 
machine is intended for localities in which special conditions are imposed. 

The test is to be carried out before the machine is put into actual 
service. The repetition of the test is to be avoided. 

The test is to be carried out hot. 

The windings of machines and transformers must be capable of with- 
standing, for a period of half an hour, a working pressure of 30 per cent 
in excess of the highest pressure of the service. 

FRANCE. The test of the insulation is to be carried out. hot, when 
possible, and shall only be made in the works of the manufacturer. 

The test pressure is to be applied gradually. The circuits of ma- 
chines and transformers shall be capable of withstanding, without undue 
strain, for a period of three minutes, a pressure 30 per cent in excess of 
the ordinary working pressure, provided no mechanical or electrical 
considerations are against it. 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2583 


GERMANY. The tests, when possible, are to be carried out at the works 
of the manufacturer. They are not to be repeated except in very ex- 
ceptional cases. For large machines the test is to be repeated, in silu, 
but previous to the machine being put into actual service. 

The test is to be carried out hot. Machines and transformers must be 
capable of withstanding, during five minutes, a pressure 30 per cent in 
excess of the rated pressure. 


GREAT BRITAIN. 
SWEDEN. The test to be carried out hot. 


UNITED States. In general, the test is to be carried out at the 
temperature corresponding to the rated load and when the machine is 
completely assembled, but before it is put into regular service. ; 

The machine must be dry and free from dust. 


Points of Application of the Pressure 


ALL CountTrRIES. The various rules specify that the test pressure is 
to be applied between windings and the frame and between all electric 
circuits. 


Nature of the Test Pressure 


BELGIUM, FRANCE, GERMANY, SWEDEN. The values of the test pres- 
sure herein indicated are applicable to cases in which the testing current 
is similar to the ordinary working current. 

If windings intended for continuous current work be tested with alter- 
nating current, the test pressure shall be seven-tenths of that specified. 

Conversely, if windings intended for alternating current work be 
tested with continuous current, the test pressure shall be 1.4 times that 
specified. 

The voltage curve of the alternator employed for the test shall be as 
nearly as possible a sine wave. 


GREAT BRITAIN. 


UNITED STATES. The test is to be carried out with alternating current 
at the normal frequency of the apparatus. 

The values herein given are the root mean square values of the test 
pressure referred to a sine wave form. ‘ 

The ‘wave shape of the test pressure should be as nearly as possible 
sinusoidal, and should not be materially distorted by the testing circuit. 


Test Pressure 


BELGIUM. 
‘Working Pressure. Test Pressure. 
Less than 300 v. 4 times the working pressure + 300 v. 
: 300— 600 v. Sy ae . :: z + 600 v. 
600— 1,200 v. 2,400 v. 
1,200— 5,000 v. Twice the working pressure. 
5,000—10,000 v. The working pressure + 5,000 v. 
Above 10,000 v. 1.5 times the working pressure. 
FRANCE. 


Rated Pressure. 
Up to. 


From 5,000-10,000 v. 
10,000 v. 


5,000 v. 


Above 
Up to 


From 5,000-10,000 v. 
10,000 v. 


Above 


5,000 v. 


Test Pressure. 
Twice the rated pressure 
Tested minimum of 110 v. 
Hot. Rated pressure + 5,000 v. 
1.5 times rated pressure. 


with 


Three times the rated pressure with 


Tested minimum of 500 v. 
Cold. Rated pressure + 10,000 v. 
Twice the rated pressure, 


2584 RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 
GERMANY. 
Rated Pressure. Test Pressure. 
Above 40 v. At least 110 v. 
From 5,000— 7,500 v. The working pressure + 7,500 v. 
Above 7,500 v. Twice the working pressure. 
GREAT (BRED AUN «ies 
SWEDEN. 
Working Pressure Test Pressure. J ut 
Up to 3,300 v. 3 times the working pressure with a mini- 
mum of 700 v. 
Above 3,300 v. 1.5 times the working pressure. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
Working Pressure. Power, ° Test Pressure. 
Not exceeding 400 v. Below 10 kw. 1,000 v. 
10 kw. and above. 1,500 v. 
400 v. and above, but less than 800 v. Under 10 kw. 1,500 v. 
10 kw. and over. 2,000 v. 
800 v. and above, but less than 1,200 v. Any power. 3,500 v. 
1,200 v. and above, but less than 2,500 v. ie 5,000 v. 
2,500 v. and over. re Double the normal 


rated voltage. 


Length of Test 


BELGIuM. 30 minutes. 


FRANCE. 30 minutes (hot) wae es P< Aue ye 
5 “« (cold) (Association Alsacienne, 5 minutes). 


GERMANY. 1 minute. 
GREAT BRITAIN. 

SwEDEN. At least 1 minute. 
UNITED STATEs. 1 minute. 


APPENDIX I. 


HEATING (see p. 48). 


STIPULATION OF THE MiLAN CoNGRESS (September, 1906).. 

The heating of a motor is to be considered as excessive when, starting 
froma surrounding air temperature equivalent to 25 deg. cent., the motor, 
after 10 hours’ working at its permanent power or after one hour working 
at its normal power, attains a final temperature exceeding that of the 
surrounding air by the following values: 


(a) For windings insulated with cotton............... 70 deg. cent. 
For windings insulated with paper................ SOns 
For windings insulated with mica, asbestos or other 
substances presenting the same qualities of in- 
silation andincombustibility. ese eae LOU He 
(b)) Bor commutators vcs: Saute weer eevee re eee ere 80 ‘ a 
(c) For metallic portions in which the windings are em- 
bedded, the value corresponding to that indicated 
for the windings, according to the insulation em- 
ployed for the latter. 


When the windings are insulated with a combination of insulating 
_materials, the lower limit will be taken. . . . By permanent power and 
normal power of a motor is to be understood that power which, the current 
being furnished at the normal pressure of supply, can be developed by 
the said motor during 10 consecutive hours, in the first case, and during 
an uninterrupted period of one hour, in the second case, without the 
heating being excessive in the sense indicated under the paragraph as 
to ‘‘ Heating.” 


2» ee: — 


u 


RATING OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 2585 


TOLERANCE AS REGARDS GUARANTEES 


UNION DES SyYNDICATS DE L’ELECTRICITE 


The following table fixes: 
(1) Tolerance allowed for errors in measurement, and beyond 
which the question as to reduction in price may arise. 
(2) The limit beyond which the question as to the material not 
complying with the specification may arise. 


| Guarantees Saat 
Sat Tolerance. Limits. 
Heating. 3 deg. cent, 10 deg. cent. above the limits fixed. 


| Auto-regulation.| 20% of the guaranteed percentage) 50% of the guaranteed percentage. 


20% of the sum of the total or 50% of the losses, total or 
Efficiency. measurable losses, as the case measurable. 
may be. 


ASSOCIATION ALSACIENNE 


As acceptance of the various guarantees given, it is usual to fix two 
limits, the first representing the permissible tolerance to allow for inex- 
actitudes and errors of measurement, the second giving to the buyer the 
right to reject the material. Between these two limits it is usuallya 
question of penalties in proportion to the deviation from the guarantee. 
The penalties for the different guarantees are cumulative. 

The following values are to be recommended: 


| : ‘ Tolerance Penalties to be applied by 
Guarantee re Limits of Rejection. | the Buyer, between the 
as to Measurements. Tolerance and Limits. 


4 deg. cent. above limits 
_ Heating. fixed (for resistance | 10 deg. cent. above 4% per degree. 
measurements only). limits fixed. 


15% of the percentage 40% of the guar- 1% for each 10% of the 


| Auto- guaranteed by the man- | anteed percentage. | percentage guaranteed, 
regulation. ufacturer. applicable between 15% 
i and 40%, 


15% of the sum of the | 40% of the losses, 2% for each 10% of the 
| Efficiency. | losses, total or measur- | total or measurable. | sum of the losses, total or 
able, as the case may be. measurable, applicable 

between 15% and 40%. 


a Sa a EE a a ae 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FISCAL 
YEAR ENDING APRIL 30, 1911. 


The Board of Directors of the American Institute of Electrical Engi- 
neers presents herewith for the information of the membership its annual 
report for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1911. 

The report includes a brief summary of the more important work 
accomplished by the various standing and special committees, also de- 
tailed statements showing the condition of the various funds and finances 
of the Institute. It is highly gratifying to the Board of Directors to be 
able to report for this year, a surplus of nearly $17,000, and a net 
increase in the membership of 436 members. The Board also 
wishes to call attention to the investment last November, of $15,000, 
par value, in General Mortgage, four per cent, Chicago, Burlington and 
Quincy Railroad Company bonds. 

The Board has held 10 regular monthly meetings during the year, and 
the Executive Committee two meetings. 

The Annual Convention was held at Jefferson, N. H., June 26 to 30, 
1910. The total registered attendance numbered 178. Twenty pro- 
fessional papers were presented and discussed. 

Following the policy inaugurated last year of holding other Institute 
meetings in various portions of the country, partaking of the nature of 
conventions, there was held at Schenectady, N. Y., and Pittsfield, Mass., 
on February 14, 15 and 16, 1911, the Pittsfield-Schenectady Mid-Year 
Convention, at which 16 technical papers were presented and discussed. 
The attendance at this convention numbered 350 at Schenectady, and 
150 at Pittsfield. The meeting was a most successful one in every way. 
An equally enthusiastic and successful meeting, known as the Pacific 
Coast Meeting, was held in Los Angeles, Cal., on April 25 to 29, 1911. 
All of the larger cities on the coast were represented at this meeting, and 
the total attendance numbered 189 members and 134 visitors. These 
meetings cannot fail to emphasize the national character of the Institute. 

In addition to the work summarized and embodied in this report, a 
greal deal has been accomplished by temporary committees appointed 
by the Board from time to time throughout the year. Among these 
may be mentioned the special committee recently appointed to act in 
conjunction with the committees of other interested engineering organiza- 
tions in opposing the legislation to license engineers. The report of this 
committee may be found in the April issue of the PROCEEDINGS. Much 
creditable work has also been performed by the representatives of the 


2586 


Rey NS, aed J 
d' (a8 , 
" ‘ 


1911} REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2587 


Institute on various commissions and congresses, both in this country 
and abroad. Among the more important of these are: the Second 
National Conservation Congress at St. Paul, Minn., September 5 to 9, 
1910, the American Mining Congress at Los Angeles, Cal., September 
26—October 1, 1910, Annual Meeting, American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, Philadelphia, Pa., April 7 and 8, 1911, the International 
American Scientific Congress at Buenos Aires, Argentina, S. A., July 10 
to 25, 1910, and the Reunion Amicale at Brussels, August 8 to 10, 1910. 

The year has not only been one of the most prosperous in the history 
of the Institute, but an extremely busy and useful one. 

Sections Committee.—The Sections Committee is able to report con- 
tinued progress in Section and Branch affairs during the -past year. 
One Section has been added to the roster—Detroit-Ann Arbor—and one 
discontinued—Norfolk, Va. Although the total attendance at the Section 
meetings does not add up to quite so large a figure as during the 
previous year, an analysis of the various Sections indicates that the 
small Sections have generally increased their attendance, while. the 
decreases have taken place in one or two of the larger Sections. 

The reports from the University Branches have been most encouraging. 
It is gratifying to note that a large percentage of the additions to 
the membership of the Institute comes from the ranks of the enrolled 
Students, and further to note that most of the enrolled Students have 
come into the Institute through the agency of the University Branches. 

Considerable work has been done during the past year towards placing 
the matter of Sections expenditures on a uniform and logical basis. It is 
hoped that by-laws which incorporate this uniform basis of appropriation 
for this purpose will be in such shape that the proposed plan may be put 
into operation during the next administrative year, beginning August 
1, 1911. 


For Year Ending 


May 1 May 1 May 1 May 1 
1908 1909 1910 1911 
; SECTIONS — —— | c— l)cc 
Number of Sections..........-220s00ee. 21 24 25 25 
Section Meetings held...............0-- 141 169 187 208 
Original papers and talks.............++ 120 167 178 181 
PACDOMURIICC Sea iatria sie siereie.«) vicielelsisielele”™ aac 6 7,476 16,427 16,694 15,243 
BRANCHES 

Number of Branches.........+--++s+e+e0+ 22 26 31 36 
Branch meetings held.........-.++0-+055 143 198 237 255 
Original papers and talks...........-+.- 84 158 147 147 
A HCTICAUICE Ns easwitl stsinls isisia ctype © = eee g.0r0 4,128 8,443 10,255 10,714 


eS SSeS 


Meetings and Papers Committee.—This committee has arranged for 
nine regular Institute meetings during the year, at each of which one or 
more technical papers were presented. Seven of these meetings were 
held in New York, one in Boston, and onein Toronto. The committee 
also approved and coéperated in the Pittsfield-Schenectady Mid-Year 
Convention, and the Pacific Coast Meeting held in Los Angeles. Active 


2588 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS : [May 16 


preparations: are now being made by the committee for the Annual 
Meeting and the Annual Convention, the latter to be held in Chicago 
from June 26 to 30 inclusive. The committee has received much assist- 
ance from: the chairmen of the various technical committees, who have 
been-active-in securing papers and carrying out the policy of the Meetings 
and Papers Committee in handling the meetings held in New York. 
Educational Committee—The work of this committee for the year 
has consisted principally of an investigation into the advisability of offering 
prizes to students of electrical engineering for competitions of various 
sorts, such as thesis work or original designs. The committee unani- 
mously decided against the establishment of such prizes. The remainder of 
the work of the committee has consisted in arranging a program for one of 
the sessions of the Annual Convention to be held in Chicago in June. 
Industrial Power Committee.—This committee has been active in its 
field) during the year, and as a result of its efforts a number of 
meetings have been held by the various Sections which were devoted to 
the presentation and discussion of industrial power subjects. A very 
successful meeting, at which the cost of industrial power was discussed, 
was held under the auspices of the committee in New York in March, 
. with the codperation of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
‘The committee has succeeded in obtaining from various sources a number 
of valuable papers on industrial power subjects which will be transmitted 
to the new committee at the close of the present administrative year. 

Railway Committee——A number of meetings have been held by this 
- committee during the year. The advancement of railway electrification 
has been held as the principal object of the committee’s existence, and it 
now appears that the committee is in a fair way to establish a precedent 
of unusual value to determine the practical results of electrification as 
carried out on a number of important lines. To this. end, in addition 
to a paper read by Mr. W. S. Murray at an Institute meeting in Toronto 
' giving considerable information concerning the New Haven installation, 
there will be a discussion of this paper at the Annual Convention in June. 
Among others, special details relating to the New York Central installa- 
tion are expected. A most important paper giving construction, main- 
tenance, and operating costs, is now being prepared for the Chicago 
Convention. Six or eight other valuable papers have been promised for 
‘the future. 

“Telegraphy and a aleohony Committee.—The Telegraphy and Tele- 
phony Committee has held two meetings during the year. It has ob- 
tained several valuable papers in its field, for both the Pacific Coast 
Meeting, held at Los Angeles in April, and the Annual Convention, to be 
held in Chicago in June. 

. Electric Lighting Committee.—The Electric Lighting Committee se- 
cured five papers during the year, one of which was presented at the 
Institute meeting held in New York on February 10, 1911. The remain- 
ing four papers will all be presented at the Annual Convention in June. 

Power Station Committee.—The Power Station Committee had assigned 
to it the May meeting, but this was changed in order to give an oppor- 
tunity. for, the presentation ceremonies of the Edison Medal. The com- 
. mittee expects to, secure papers for the Annual Convention. 


1911] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2589 - 


Electrochemical Committee.—The efforts of this committee have been 
directed towards arranging for two or three papers on electrochemical 
subjects for a meeting scheduled tentatively for April, 1911. Owing to 
other engagements of those who were best qualified to deal with the 
subjects selected, and to the fact that practically all of the available’ ma- 
terial had been promised elsewhere, it was deemed inadvisable to hold 
an electrochemical meeting this year. Arrangements have virtually been 
completed, however, for one or two good papers for next fall or winter. 

High Tension Transmission Committee.—The High Tension Trans- 
mission Committee has followed this year the custom of previous’ years. ° 
Up to the present time it has held five meetings, with an average at- 
tendance of six members, and presumably at least one more meeting will be 
held during the term of the present committee. At these meetings various 
questions coming before the committee were discussed and appropriately * 
determined. The committee prepared the program for. the regular 
Institute meeting held in New York on January 10, 1911. The com-:' 
mittee also assisted in the preparation of the program for the Pacific 
Coast Meeting at Los Angeles. The committee expects to hold an 
‘Extra High Tension Operation Meeting ’”’ at the Annual Convention © 
in Chicago, giving data and discussion on the construction and operation 
of power systems utilizing 80,000 volts or higher. The most notable 
action of the committee during the present year was its participation, 
with the authorization of your Board, in the specifications for overhead 
crossings of electric light and power lines. These specifications were 
prepared with the idea of securing a nationally recognized crossing 
specification which could be uniformly used throughout the country by 
railway, telephone, telegraph, or whatever lines are crossed by power 
circuits. This specification is a joint report of committees of various 
engineering organizations, but it is believed, as a result of the codperation 
of these various bodies through their representative committces, that: 
this specification will be. universally recognized and followed. 

Editing Committee.—Since May 1, 1910, there have been edited and 
published 12 numbers of the PROCEEDINGS. The total number of pages 
contained in these PROCEEDINGS is 2,856. Of these, 360 pages have ap- 
peared in Section I, and 2,226 pages in Section II Of the 2,226 pages in 


‘Section II, 1,624 pages were devoted to technical papers, and 530 pages 


to discussions. Volume XXIX of the TRANSACTIONS, consisting of the 
papers and discussions presented during the calender year 1910 and the 
report of the Board of Directors for the fiscal year ending April 30, 1910, 
contains approximately 1,770 pages. The volume will be issued in two 
parts and is expected to be ready for delivery about the middle of June. 

From May 1, 1910 to April 30, 1911 there have been published in full 
in the PROCEEDINGS seven papers read before various Sections and 
Branches, in addition to 11 abstracts of such papers, which appeared in 
Section I of the PROCEEDINGS. 

The Editing Committee has gone carefully over the discussions which 
have been submitted by the Sections and Branches, and has supervised 
the editing of the discussions presented at the regular Institute meetings. 
The committee, in codperation with the Meetings and Papers Com- 
mittee, has revised and_will have reprinted the pamphlet “ Suggestions to 


2590 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


Authors’, bringing this up to present requirements as to style, illustra- 
tions, arrangement of matter for papers and discussions, with the end of 
assuring greater uniformity of style in the PROCEEDINGS and TRANSAC- 
’ sions and facilitating the actual handling of the papers and discussions. 

Standards Committee.—The Standards Committee has held seven regu- 
lar monthly meetings in New York since its appointment last August, and 
will hold one more in May. The additions and amendments to the 
Standardization Rules presented at the last Annual Convention have been 
completely revised, supplemented and incorporated into the rules. The 
rules thus revised will be presented to the Board of Directors at this meet- 
ing, and it is hoped will be ready for distribution in the early summer. 

Last year, at the request of the Standards Committee, the U. S. Bureau 
of Standards undertook a thorough investigation of the resistivity and 
temperature coefficient of copper, to serve as a basis for a new Institute 
wire table. This work was completed during the summer, and the 
Bureau has now nearing completion the preparation of a very compre- 
hensive set of tables under the direction of the Standards Committee. 

In order to handle the various questions arising, 10 sub-committees 
were appointed during the year. The work of five of these sub-commit- 
tees is still unfinished and will continue over until next year. The sub- 
jects under consideration by these five committees are: 1. Definitions of 
electromotive force, potential difference, and voltage; 2. The standardiza- 
tion of the stranding of cables; 3. A definition of horse-power in terms of 
the watt; 4. The rating of electrical machinery, particularly intermittent 
rating; 5. Insulation testing and transformer regulation. 

International Electrotechnical Commission.—An unofficial conference 
was held by the International Electrotechnical Commission at Brussels 
August 8 to 10, 1910, at the invitation of the Belgian Electrotechnical 
Committee. The Conference was presided over by Professor Eric 
Gerard. Forty-seven delegates, representing 11 national committees, 
attended the conference. Messrs. A. E. Kennelly and Charles F. Scott 
represented the U. S. National Committee. 

The resolution of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
adopted at the Jefferson Convention on June 29, 1910, referring the ques- 
tion of standard direction of alternating current vector-rotation to the 
Commission, (TRANsaAcTIONS A. I. E. E., 1910, pp. 1821-1822) was laid 
before the Conference by the U. S. delegates. 

Substantial progress was made at the Conference in all of the four sub- 
jects taken up for discussion—nomenclature, symbols, vector-rotation, 
and rating. In the last three the United States National Communes 
had taken an especially active interest. 

The official resumé of the actions at the Conference, issued in September 
by the General Secretary, was printed in the PROCEEDINGS of the Ameri- 
can Institute of Electrical Engineers for December 1910, pages 10 and 11. 

Six meetings have been held by the U S. National Committee in New 
York City during the year, with an average attendance of four members. 
At the meeting in October 1910 the actions of the Brussels Conference 
as printed in the Official Resumé were endorsed. Various documents 
have been received from the General Secretary and considered by the 
committee. Communications have been exchanged with the French 


1911) REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2591 


Committee on an inquiry received from them as to the nomenclature of 
reactive power in an alternating current circuit. 

Local committees of the Commission have now been formed in the 
following countries: Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, 
Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Spain. Sweden, 
and the United States. A plenary meeting of the Commission is scheduled 
to be held in Turin from September 11 to 16, 1911, at the invitation of the 
Italian Committee, and in conjunction with the Turin International 
Electrical Congress. 

The President of the Commission is Dr. Elihu Thomson, who succeeded 
Lord. Kelvin in that office. The Honorary Secretary is Colonel R. E. 
Crompton, and the General Secretary is Mr. C. le Maistre, whose office 
is at 28 Victoria Street, London. 

It is to be hoped that international standardization may be adopted 
at the forthcoming Turin meeting in some or all of the four subjects on 
which tentative progress was made at the Brussels Conference. 

Code Committee.—The Code Committee, through its chairman, repre- 
sented the Institute at the annual meeting of the National Board of 
Fire Underwriters, held in New York on March 20 and 21, 1911. The 
only matter of interest to the Institute, taken up at this meeting, was the 
grounding of secondaries, and the work of the Institute’s representative 
resulted in the passing of a resolution by the Underwriters’ Conference 
endorsing the practice of the grounding of secondaries and recommending 
that municipalities and lighting companies make such a rule mandatory, 
with the further resolution that the Institute use its efforts to bring about 
an agreement with the National Electric Light Association in the matter 
of grounding of secondaries up to 250 volts, instead of at 150 volts, the 
present adopted standard of the association. 

Law Committee.—The Law Committee has considered several questions 
submitted to it by the Board of Directors, principally in reference to 
interpretation of the By-Laws and Constitution. Owing to the fact that 
this committee, under the Constitution, is merely an advisory committee, 
no constructive work has been done. 

Conservation of Natural Resources Committee.—During the year the 
Conservation of Natural Resources Committee has corresponded, through 
its chairman, with various officials of the federal government relative to 
the regulations covering the development: of water powers, dependent in 
whole or in part, upon the run-off from public lands. 

On December 28 the Secretary of Agriculture issued a ‘‘ Use Book”’ 
containing regulations and instructions for the use of the national forestry 
service, and a Manual of Procedure for forest officers, which, in respect 
of water powers, embodies substantially all of the suggestions presented 
in President Stillwell’s presidential address at the Jefferson Convention, 
and approved by that convention in a resolution requesting the Board of 
Directors to take action looking to their adoption. 

On February 10 the Board of Directors, by resolution, instructed the 
Conservation Committee to examine a bill introduced in the House of 
Representatives by Mr. Herbert Parsons, and to communicate to Mr. 
Parsons (and if deemed desirable, to other representatives, senators and 
officers of the administration) the views of the committee in respect 


2592 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


thereto. In accordance with this instruction, the committee examined the 
bill and notified Mr. Parsons and Chairman Lundell, of the Committee on 
Public Lands, ofits approval of the proposed legislation. No action upon 
the bill was taken by the Congress which adjqurned in March. 

Library Committee.—In accordance with Section 24 of the By-Laws 
of the Institute we beg leave to submit herewith our annual report for 
the year ending April 30, 1911, showing the state of the library and 
including the names of all donors to it. 

The efforts of the committee have been directed towards the ultimate 
extension of the usefulness of the library to the members of the founder 
and associate societies and to non-members, whether resident or non- 
resident in New York City, and towards the harmonious, equitable and 
efficient administration of the joint libraries housed in the upper stories of 
the Engineers’ Building. 

The successful attainment of either of these ends predicates the as- 
sistance of a competent chief librarian. The former chief librarian having 
resigned on August 31, 1910, the administration was placed temporarily 
in the hands of Miss Alice J. Gates. On December 30, 1910 Dr. We Ps 
Cutter was appointed librarian of the libraries of the three Founder 
Societies and United Engineering Society and he assumed office about 
the first of February, 1911. To accept the appointment, Dr. Cutter, 
who had previously been connected with the Library of Congress and with 
the Library of the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, resigned from the librarian- 
ship of the Forbes Library, Northampton, Mass. : 

The present status of joint occupancy and administration of the 
library is as follows: There are four separate libraries which are the 
respective properties of the three Founder Societies and the United 
Engineering Society. Many parts of the first three have been donated 
and are subject to limitations prescribed by the deeds of gift. At the 
suggestion of the United Engineering Society, the Founder Societies 
(minutes of Board of Directors A. I. E. E., June 12, 1908) agreed ‘‘ That 
the administration of the library be placed in the hands of a chief li- 
brarian, all employes of the library to be subject to the direction of said 
chief librarian.” As the result of another suggestion from the United 
Engineering Society, which was approved at the same time, by the 
Founder Societies, the salaries of all the library employes are now paid by 
the United Engineering Society and one third of the total amount is 
charged back to each of the Founder Societies. Any administrative act 
of the chief librarian, which involves an expenditure by any one of the 
four societies, must be subject to the constitutional or other limitations 
prescribed by that society. The Constitution of A. I. E. E. ($50) pre- 
scribes that the Library Committee ‘‘ shall direct expenditures for books 
or other articles ’ for the library. The United Engineering Society allows 
the House Committee, which consists of the secretaries of the three 
Founder Societies, to direct expenditures which do not exceed $100. 
To facilitate the work of the chief librarian, therefore, the Library Con- 
ference Committee, consisting of one member from each of the Founder 
Societies, is of service. This committee, representation upon which was 
authorized by the Institute Board of Directors on October 26, 1906 and 


1911] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2593 


March 29, 1907, for diplomatic reasons has assumed merely recommend 
atory functions and it has been agreed that all its actions must be unani- 
mous. It meets once a month, at the close of the meeting of the House 
Committee, the members of the latter attending. To this committee the 
chief librarian makes recommendations, which, if approved, are ultimately 
referred to the body having power to effectuate the execution. Thc 
Institutes representative on this committee must be a member of the 
Library Committee, and has thus far been its chairman. 

Statistical information concerning the library and its use during the 
year, including a list of donors, is given in the following tables: 


Donors 


ACADEMIE) ROYALE DES SCIENCES». . 0) .0. 0210 shod Side waa 
ACHES OIN MAE: oy Ghanem ne Mies reer oath stats cake cE rsiaioeikeanaeeie 
(ADDIS MSA Eo eetD) cr net srt te ope sais eau  sfistete ree MS os BR ose Aah Pallstied MAA sats 
AGENDA DE L’ELECTRO. 
AMERICAN ELECTROCHEMICAL SOCIETY. 5 aR 
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS......... 
IREESOV Es MRCS “Ile Bans Gay oe ticeokete cee decd me ak oer 6 pide anne ate 
ASSOCIATION OF RAILWAY TELEGRAPH SUPERINTENDENTS.. 
BOSDONADRANSTTECOMMISSION 5 tise seure cage) sina OR ne 20% 
CALDWELL, EDWARD. gery Pec 
CHICAGO BUREAU OF STATISTICS. ae shares ieee: aad 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. 
CONGRESO CIENTIFICO (1° PAN AMERICANO).............. 
GROCKE Ra ae BH SCARE ND TM tan eo, 5 cronn ae ce, tagtans ns Fomor ay 
GENE RALBELE GCERIG COMPA Neate) Water cies, : ina tao cre «ae 
EUEREN Ge Cer niga eles es ce tins oo = 
[NDIANAW RAILROAD COMMISSIONER... qa: -o1.. Suet t suena 
INSTITUTION OF OPERATING ENGINEERS...........5.-:.-- 
INTERNATIONAL ELECTROCHEMICAL COMMISSION........... 
INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNIQUE COMMISSION......... 
LOWAS ENGINEERING) GOCIB EV a oli nice ain cit Gaels ean ek Gs 
LES VEPOSTECQRUBLE GRAD: «mee cctv come ane persed oes n 
FAUT lls WNT ACK ab A Rea ce ek Saat are in gas AMGRE A hy cash h ln 2 
NOURNAT OH ELECTRICIUY, «POWER,  GASetae coc. 5 stews 
EM R/NTEN UNOS NICs Peeee Aig thc her aaa hs ach Oe REN Per On ERE Car ORO ee 
TiO MO Oho 6 eeu aloe. oW da Stet o COAnNs Oh Satan Sr mene 
AUER 5 WEs 7 pmo egaan o optaoegtte Oko che ae ne nao ace inee ogee team 
MASSACHUSETTS GAS AND ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY....... 
IC CUI et eaIoR dE OMB AGN Vittertoet aut acinus asi ognde alineke tac tantda 
INKET ASE) NONE, AS cata tee I EEE rota) es ee ee eee Cee eae 
MGGRAWACUBEISEHUNGECOMPAN YW), 21 he ctor sho) ogee taht O 
MICHIGANMERECTRIC ASSOCIATION. crest Gece a o¥- +i via eteneasla wets 
ACU S MT OLUN PARE Rec mcr chess ici esitcuciags oicstnigakew’ > Enea Snredltat ig" con 
RENCOD Dy elCl, dDOReay Selo os One RO ytoa ENC RRS SMe i mare 
NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION.............04- 
NEW JERSEY PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSIONER.............. 2 
1 


MP be RAG Big Are Datirat retest beta cays lessa ke, asea\ aicciget .s ikelile-'s 9 iv! «melt nye erage ae giles 


De Bee eS eee ae Ee 


bo 


LS lll ell cee oe SO OP A) 


— eS ROS Se 


2594 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE OF BROOKLYN........-+--+++++55 1 
SEMENZA, Giese one's toca bun nse Dice ale eteleiete geal keksteacr Rare are re eer 1 
SOCIETE INTERNATIONALE DES ELECTRICIENS......---+--> 1 
TELEFUNKEN WIRELESS TELEGRAPH COMPANY.....------- 14 
‘U. §. ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON.....--.---- 1 
VAN NOSTRAND, D. COMPANY... .....s eee ee eee seer ceee 6 
VERMONT PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONER......-.-++-+++>: 1 
VILLARSTGHe cA cio eee av ais a sick ie ended tel oes 3 
ga On Pal ear et GR AS Sie iA ari too) cuvetrecicect ta 2 1 
WESTERN UNION TELEGRAPH COMPANY........-+-++++02:5 ui 
WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC & MANUFACTURING COMPANY.... 1 
DONOR UNKNOWN pieces ore oantte oo ote stole tele © (to eheltotteel oe neaatiay 6 
OLD AMA TERDA Lieiirederscsitrean sl een Cai ee as eee ats ohne ema 79 


EXCHANGES Gk sgn deities darter owed aa ele kale eee age 199 
Purchases s M caee bes ee ee eee rae ene ies 91 
i 290 


Totals ac@eSSiOnSs vaieec cl seoiciarere & ara tee tos eee ene eo 488 


The following tabulation gives the state of the five accounts from 
which the Library committee is entitled to draw. : 


Donations (GENERAL LIBRARY FUND) 


Dr. Crs 
Balance (May Leal OlOn gcse tess cts $258 .04 
Interest May Us TOU i aieiais cusses 6.48 Unexpended).. «../1c sss, « Suan wore $264.52 
$264.52 $264.52 


MaILLoux ENDOWMENT FuNp ($1,000) 


(Proceeds for the maintenance of certain sets of periodical publications.) 
Balance Wha. ky MOO iis. ep crctns syateuets $60.35 Expended... case va aie aie $34.00 
ERtorentr netics sale etic e sities ert ete alee 15.00 Unexpended 


INTERNATIONAL ELECTRICAL CONGRESS OF ST. Louts, 1904 FuNp.) 


(Proceeds available for the purchase of non-American International electrical literature) 
Invested inwNew York’ City 44%. Bonds. cig. vain cs <ssleda.s air eie oie blcas ans aerate $2268 .00- 
Additions to the fund 


Pe eee PR et Oa ote ee ee oe en 49.65 
TT Otel SLUT oso a:4 5 a0 sae 00% van Wie heicle Sree wTrm af oaMe, alecav edema see al.olle isin Shatadelie cs teste Cateanate $2317.65 

Balance on hand May 1, 1910..... $129.12 : 
Interest to May 1, 1911............. 90.00 Unexpended. Spanien a ere $219.12 
$219.12 — $219.12 


1911] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2595 
WEAVER DONATION 
(Available for the purchase of early electrical literature.) 
Balance on hand May 1, 1910...... $65.44 Wire x PEMGE|M! ty. larepace- cerca chearesere $65.44 
$65.44 $65.44 
INSTITUTE APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT 
Dr. (Ore 
Appropriation for the year end- Librarian and assistants (to 
inguOctober Ty lOU. cc. $4,500.00 Pauuarye VOW) creates eletevcrsicl « $1,005.90 
Cataloguing (to Jan. 1, 1911).. 554.00 
Desk attendant (to Jan. 1, 1911) 106.68 
Salary (one-third) of librarian, 
assistants, cataloguer and 
desk attendant (Jan. 1 to 
Assorilydlisp LOU NOs care Ris seta evene ys 528 .34 
One-third running expenses of 
library for MUO LOl a. < wser. scckeas 106.78 
PSOROMG Se Mess, lara Seared ign e aah 176.95 
SUDBCTIDTIONS! sic. cisco ated ses ore 169.29 
nSyrance wert -kemiseterere uaa 72.93 
NSheaVal hates et cnserion Ste ECO e 322).85 
Mascellameoua’....% ic. aims os 5.x 39.58 
_ $3,083 .30 
Unexpendedyadedecaeatee a. 1,406.70 
$4,500 00 $4,500.00 
STATISTICS OF LIBRARY MAY 1, 1911 
eel ee | 7 
Source Volumes phlets Valuation 
Report ot, Muay” Lyk O10 i carats reste vie: +Tavs 7 sler 14,865 1,279 $25,959.12 
TRUCOS Bain Go Git Gene Ou acee nO NeONC meee er coer 91 315.84 
GiliswamepeXCHAn PES ore. o.stiir« eels ls Bue o7s-6 clviaiet nce 0 288 30 583.50 
Old material accessioned.............002-0-05 49 34 66.50 
15,293 1,343 $26,924.96 


In the following table are given the figures for the total valuation of the 
Library property: 


BOOS oes nha everest ETT statche tate tate Ragen atte er wler wy ogee $26,924.96 
Vea ISMN eh tga eee Me nas eae a soiette Sc faealonbe oeista erate araisiefes sanbce ei af 1,761.05 
Furniture, Catalogues; Cases, €tC....... ee ee nese eect eee r eee 376.00 


$29,062.01 


Baa 5 Rie 


SS = oe 
FAG ¥® 


2596 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


LIBRARY ATTENDANCE 


Day Night | Total 
May TOO se nts ele veers ccc aeorsteuaterseletie tras 454 279 733 
June Pre ee Te ore et ee 471 239 710 
July CoN oF Lee aobenaiphate lavage metas eeramelenete . 609 | Closed 609 
August Pa eS Ae POR ene Sein Bate Ae, oe 560 & 560 
September! oo Sinideedies.e aviercinciel: groatett aletemnnier® 596 | 261 857 
October ie Tate bese Sethe fenans pftety 9 eee RMR ene 665 | 328 993 
November Maoh aca Ranerane ahajekars eel oie Sole stat Meuntnaaas 678 334 1,012 
December Ho Stacaaraealetace Wace thios atone koh cote 699 306 1,005 
January RoE Nak ee A es ee, Ae Paks AM te 681 333 1,014 
February OORT oe ot ta a OLS 617 334.- | 951 
March DPT UAS A he aha, sfontotaga einen ere Pere es 687 334 1,021 
April ee tr er PEE ieee BICC ee 756 293 ) 1.049 
Total May 1910-April 1911..............0000: 7,473 | 3,041 | 10,514 


Mr. Edward D. Adams has continued his contributions to the library 
as in previous years by the donation of the PROCEEDINGS and TRANSAC- 
TIONS of the Royal Society of London, and new volumes of the Inter- 
national Catalogue of Scientific Literature. He has also as heretofore 
had these volumes bound at his expense. 

The income from the C. O. Mailloux Fund of $1000 has again been 
used to maintain the four important periodical sets which were originally 
presented to the library by Mr. Mailloux. 


Respectfully submitted, 


A. BEMENT. 

C. F. BuRGEss. 

Gano DUNN. 

[eee MiaL EET 

C. E. SCRIBNER. 

Puitte TORCHIO. 

SAMUEL SHELDON, Chairman. 


LIBRARY COMMITTEE, 


Edison Medal Committee.—At a meeting of the Edison Medal Commit* 
tee held on November 26, 1910, the names of candidates submitted in 
accordance with the committee’s by-laws were voted upon, and Mr. Frank 
J. Sprague was selected from the list to be voted on in December following. 
The voting in December was done in accordance with the provisions 
of the by-laws, and resulted in the award of the Edison Medal to Mr, 
Frank J. Sprague, for ‘‘ Meritorious Achievement in Electrical Science, 
Engineering and Arts’’, the result of the vote being transmitted to the 
Board of Directors under date of December 19, 1910. The presentation 
is to be made at the Annual Meeting of the Institute on May 16, 1911. 

John Fritz Medal Board of Award.—The John Fritz Medal for 1910 
was awarded to Alfred Noble, past-president, American Society of Civil 
Engineers, for ‘‘ notable achievements as a civil engineer."’ The presenta- 
tion was made on November 30, 1910, at the house of the American 
Society of Civil Engineers, New York City. 


1911] REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2597 


Board of Examiners.—The Board has held 11 meetings during the year. 
It has considered and reported to the Board of Directors a total of 1,748 
applications for election to membership in the Institute, Student enrol- 
ment, and transfer to the grade of Member. 

A summary of these applications is as follows: 


Recommended for election as Associates.............. 916 
Not recommended for election as Associates.......... 2 
Reconmmendedmrorn transier voted. <becicniietht a nw asta eeans 54 
Noterecommended wor transiena. o26 oq Seer nae ae <s 27 
Recommended for enrolment as Students............. 749 

Total number of applications considered.......... 1,748 


This is an increase of 351 applications over last year. 


Membership Committee-——On November 1, 1910 a letter was mailed 
by the committee to each member of the Institute requesting the names 
of desirable candidates for admission. The codperation of the officers 
-of the Institute Sections was also requested. In response to these com- 
munications over 1,200 names were suggested by the membership. All 
of these prospective candidates were communicated with promptly and 
supplied with printed matter relating to the Institute and its various 
activities. 

The number of applications received from November 1, 1911, on which 
date the present committee began its active work, to April 30, 1911, is 
661, and the total number received during the year ending April 30, 1911, 
is 937. The present total membership and the net increase during the 
past year are indicated in the following table: 


| Hon. | 
Mem. | Mem. Assoc Total 
Membership, April 30, 1910........-.ssesseeese aE 640 | 6,040 6,681 
| ——_——————_ — 
Additions: 
ING Win A SSOGLACES 2 ac/dc elersy= 2 stele eel © alse lewcisiel ws | | 899 
Piven tistenue meeemncsel eile etual sais suet oteue le (ells 1s te) enexsl ee 56 
PRES PACE CA dies ete rauch esclsre tienes sitneioserep Me tusie: oie aye Bail 43 
Deductions: | 
SDE tal oe fox saeco teneiio DIED DIO ID aoe Ore aCe 2 34 
Pasig met atae sie aici ele ¢ se-rniesne esetetess sVelleleve sieieeo) jx 3 122 
ID rreseyaelws s gs doe ad Nee ce amen ora 5 343 
CRASH OLEEO Norale steistal= © cists tie ienele) +) «lola eevee ois ° 56 
es poe 
Membership April 30, 1911.......+.seee seer eee) 1 689 6,427 TALe 
Net increase during the year in membership........--+.s0+e++e0e 436 


Student Enrollment.—Since the enrollment of Students was authorized 
in 1902, the total number enrolled up to May 1, 1911 is 4,418. Of this 
number 1,348 are still enrolled as Students and 745 have become Associates, 
or their applications are pending. The remaining 2,325 are off the list 


2598 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


by reason of expiration of the three year Student term, or through their 
failure to complete that term. 

Resignations.—The following Members and Associates have resigned 
during the year in good standing. 

Members.—T. L. Miller, D. W. Shea, William C. Woodward. 

Assoviates.—L. Andrews, G. F. Atwater, H. Binney, G. W. Bissell, 
E. M. Blake, C. E. Boman, J. A. Britton, J. S. Brosius, H. B. Burley, 
K. O. Burrer, R. L. Cadwell, J. R. Carl, M. B. Carroll, F. J. Chisholm, 
Wm. Christensen, M. D. Church, W. R. Collier, C. A. Cornwall, A. G. 
Coursol, R. Dahlander, N. B. Davis, G. R. Davison, F. B. De Gress, 
R. J. Dunlop, J. J. Ehrenreich, F. W. Field. W. G. Fox, C. E. Frailey, 
D. H. Fry, W. Gale, Jr., F: H. Geer, S. D. Gilbert, G. B. Glassco, S. H. 
Goddard, J. R. Gordon, C. J. Graham, J. H. Granbery, E. W. T. Gray, 
L. H. Haight, F. G. Haldy, B. S. Harrison, H. H. Heaton, W. L. Heden- 
berg, A. S. Hegeman, C. J. Heilman, W. E. Hodge, H. Hollinger, J. C. 
Hunter, E. W. Jodrey, W. P. Judson, Grover Keeth, R. B. Kellogg, A. S. 
Kelly, C. G. R. Kemp, J. S. Kerine, John Langan, A. W. Lee, L. H. Lee, 
J. A. Leonard, D. R. Lovejoy, E. S. Lytch, R. T. MacKeen, H. E. De M. 
Malan, G. W. Martin, J. A. McCoy, S. A. Mendenhall, C. P. Merrill, 
H. C. Meyer, P. E. Mitchell, E. F. Morrill, F. C. Nelson, L. H. Newbert, 
E. C. Newton, E. W. Niles, Ray Oliphant, A. F. Ormsbee, W. H. Palmer, 
Jr., P. D,, Parsons, J. E. Peavey, P: C: Petersen, W. P. Phillips, J. O. 
Plowden, J. H. Poole, F. H. Poor, G. L. Pratt, C. Rabello, L. C. Ralston, 
C. J. Ratterman, Arthur Rice, C. D. Richardson, G. B. Roberts, Raymond 
Roth, L. Searing, F. M. Shaw, F. B. Shuford, Mont Sleeth, C. H. Stark- 
weather, L. Stocker, F. C. Sutter, Phillip Sweetser, W. M. Talbott, E. A. 
Taylor, E. L. Tessier, R. McK. Thomas, W. H. Thorpe, J. B. Tingley, 
H. C. Trow, R. T. Turnbull, W. E. Ver Planck, E. S. Vinten, W. E. Ward- 
well, K. Watson, W. IF. Weber, W. C. Webster, S. F. Weston, H. B. P. 
Wicks, Car! Wiler, R. S. Willis, J. F. Wilson, H J. Wood, J. W. Wright, 
C. R. Wylie. 

Total resignations, 125. 

Deaths.—The following deaths have occurred during the year: 

Members.—S. S. Dickenson, Joseph Wetzler. 

Associates.—R. F. Adams, T. P. Bailey, S. M. Balls, C. K. Batchelder, 
EE, A. Bessey, W. H. Browne, H. W. Deeds, R. Dickerson, J. D. E. Duncan, 
G. N. Eastman, E. R. French, A. Henderson, J. Heywood, F. F. Gardner, 
C. W. Hunt, E. J. Jenness, J. D. Keiley, W. C. Kerr, C. J. Larson, F. H. 
Lincoln, K. McCaskill, J. McKenzie, R. J. Nunn, T. G.Odell, J. F. Palecek 
C. E. Robles, A. Spies, Charles Talbott, O. Stephensen, D. A. Wilkes, E. B. 
Wintrobe, J. T. Wolfe, A. V. Woodard, S. Yoshisaki. ‘ 

Total deaths, 36. 

Delinquent.—Dropped as delinquent during the year, 348. 

Intermediate Grade of Membership Committee——The work of this 
committee has consisted chiefly in the gathering of data relating to the 
establishment of a third grade of membership. The committee being so 
widely scattered, it has been deemed wise to call a meeting to be held 
sometime during the Annual Convention. It is also planned to have a 
discussion of the subject by the Section delegates at the convention. 


Indexing Transactions Committee.—The work of this committee has _ 


a 


1911] ~ REPORT-OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 2599 


been largely devoted to the perfection of a plan providing for a suitable 
index to the Institute TRANSACTIONS. The actual work of indexing the 
papers and discussions, however, is now well under way, although the 
work must necessarily be slow at the present time. 

It is the intention to make this index complete in every detail, and yet 
not encumber it with the minutz which fill ordinary indexes. It is 
planned to have the index so arranged that one in search of information on 
any given subject will first find all papers bearing directly on the subject, 
and then all references which may be parts of other papers or discussions. 

Building Fund.—The amount collected from subscribers during the 
year was $1,672.00. The interest on the bank balance amounted to 
$119.54, making a total of $1,791.54 to the credit of the Building Fund 
during the year. 


LAND, BUILDING AND ENDOWMENT FUND. 


RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. 
Before appointment of Com- Paid United Engineering So- 
EE ENGION Hs oO ROUTE OEE IDO cae $ 6,100.00 ciety, acct. of contract...... $ 8,000.00 
Collected by Committee....... 147,553.05 | Paid United Engineering So- 
Interest on balances.......... 6,086.55 ci.ty, acct. of mortgage..... 126,000.00 
Reimbursement by Institute... 9,221.95 | Paid United Engineering So- 
ciety, acct. of interest...... 19,529.45 
Expenses of Committee....... 10,440.73 
Balance in bank, May 1,1911.. 4,991.37 
eB uell eeverstoreae ovals 'etoueceureileei9y3 $168,961.55 Motally 2 xcs eis aee $168,961.55 


Finance Committee.—The following correspondence and financial 
statements form a complete summary of the work of the Finance Com- 
mittee for the year. 


* 


BOARD OF DIRECTORS, ‘ May 16, 1911. 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers. 

Dear Sirs: The Finance Committee respectfully submits herewith 
the following report for the year ending April 30, 1911. 

The committee has held regular monthly meetings throughout the 
year. It has examined and approved the expenditures of the Institute 
for various purposes, and has otherwise performed the duties prescribed 
for it in the Constitution and By-Laws. Messrs. Peirce, Struss and 
Company, chartered accountants, have audited the Institute books, 
and their certification of the Institute finances follows. 

Your Secretary, a representative of the firm of chartered accountants, 
and your committee have examined the securities owned by the Institute 
and find them to be in accordance with the accountants’ report. In this 
connection attention may be directed to the purchase by the Institute 
during the past year, of $15,000 par value of Chicago, Burlington & 
Quincy 4% Bonds, the selection being made from the list of securities 
available for legal investment by savings banks in New York and Massa- 
chusetts. 

_ In general it will be seen from the reports submitted that the finances 
of the Institute are in good condition and that the increase in expendi- 
tures resultant from increased activities is being successfully met by the 
increase in income. 
Respectfully submitted, 
' A, W. BERRESFORD, 
Chairman Finance Committee. 


2600 REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [May 16 


Mr. A. W. BERRESFORD, New York, May 8, 1911. 
Chairman Finance Committee. 

Dear Sir: In accordance with your instructions, we have audited the 
books and accounts of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
for the year ended April 30th,1911. 

The results of this examination are presented in four exhibits, attached 
hereto: as follows:— 

Exhibit ‘‘ A’”’ Balance Sheet, April 30, 1911. 

Exhibit ‘‘B”’ Receipts and disbursements for general purposes for 

year ended April 30, 1911. 
Exhibit ‘‘C"’ Receipts and Donations for designated purposes, also 
expenditures for year ended April 30, 1911. 

Exhibit ‘‘ D"’ Condensed Cash Statement. 

We beg to present attached hereto our certificate to the aforesaid 
exhibits. 

Yours very truly. 
(Signed) PEIRCE, Struss & Co., 
Certified Public Accountants. 


Mr. A. W. BERRESFORD, New York, May 8, 1911. 
Chairman Finance Committee: 

Dear Sir: Having audited the books and accounts of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers for the year ended April 30, 1911, we 
hereby certify that the accompanying Balance Sheet is a true exhibit of 
its financial condition as of April 30, 1911, and that the accompanying 
statements of Cash Receipts and Disbursements are correct. 

(Signed) PErrcE, Struss & Co., 
Certified Public Accuuntants. 


——— 


oie al " 


Total Assets......- 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


BALANCE SHEET, APRIL 30, 1911. 


ExnuisiT A. 


ASSETS. 
CASH: 
Land, Building and 


Endowment Funds 4,991.37 
General Library fund 264.52 
Compounded Mem- 

bership fund..... 4,742.99 


Farmers’ Loan and 
Trust ctf. of dep 
General cash in bank 18,866.49 
Mailloux fund, inter- 
St ee ae 
Weaver donation... 
International Elec. 
Congress of St. 
Louis Library fund 
PTUGELESE ate xus aus 


Total cash deposit... 
Secretary’s petty 
cash on hand...._ 


Land, Building and 
Endowment fund, 
accrued interest. . 

General Library fund 
accrued interest.. 

Mailloux Fund ac- 
crued interest.... 

International Elec- 
trical Congress of 
St. Louis, 1904, 
Library Fund ac- 
crued interest... 


Mailloux eee, prin- 
cipal Bond....... 
Eiteenational Elec- 
trical Congress of 
St. Louis 1904, 


__ 268.77 
19,242.05 
750.00 


43.02 
2.75 
22.50 


45.00 


2,268.00 


30,000.00 
1,952.50 


N.Y. City 44% Gold 
Bonds, due 1957.. 
Premium on bonds. 
Westinghouse Elec- 
age: & Mfg. Co’s. 
Cy ae “& 0. 4% Bonds 
(15M.), due 1958, 
COSiieaisleaarc iets © os 


Equity in Engineer- 

ing Societies Build- 

ing (25 to 33 West 

OUR Le) eve lent iste lars 353,346.61 
One-third cost me 


land (25 to 
West 39th St.)... > 180,000.00 


50.00 


14,606.25 


~ Library Volumes eae 


28,096.17 
8,123.50 


7,084.10 


2,543.60 
339.95 


BIXVUTCS. Se) .e. w.e note 
Pransactions. ...... 
Office Furniture and 

IB RGUTES = pease <eiuslo 
Works of Art, Paint- 

ings, €tC,.....0..- 
See Sprere ics = oto bo ee 
AccouNTS RECEIVABLE: 
Members for current 

UES fale tse 9 220 
Members for past 

dues, suspense ac- 


470.00 


7,216.50 
305.00 
367.93 

1,803.50 


675.00 


trance fees....... 
Miscellaneous...... 
For Advertising.... 
Accrued interest on 
Bonds 
Accrued interest on 
bank balance..... 


Pr 


“212.38 
$671,565.19 


9,998.88 
1,000.00 


19,992.05 


113.27 
1,000.00 


46,608.75 


533,346.61 


46,187.32 


11,050.31 


LIABILITIES AND SURPLUS, 


Funps: 
Land, Building and 
Endowment Fund 
General Library fund 
Compounded Mem- 
bership Fund..... 
Mailloux Fund..... 
International 
trical Congress of 
St. Louis 1904, 
Library Fund: 
Bonds .).sn ey entenre 
Cash, on deposit... 
Accrued interest.... 


Reserve, for Furni- 
ture and Fixtures. 
Accounts payable, 
Subject to ap- 
proval by the 
Finance Commit- 


United Engineering 
Society (for cost 
of land) 


Total Liabilities.... 


SURPLUS: 


Chicago, Burlington 
& Quincy Bonds. 
In property and ac- 
counts receivable. 


5,034.39 
267.27 


4,742.99 
1,063.85 


2,268.00 

268.77 

45.00 
3,690.27 


2,237.98 


3,973.40 


54,000.00 


73,901.65 


18,866.49 
31,952.50 
14,606.25 


532,238.30 
——— 597,663.5 


Total Liabilities and surplus.. 


671,565,419 


2602 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS FOR GENERAL PURPOSES FOR YEAR 
EnpED AprRIL 30, 1911. 


EXHIBIT B. 
RECEIPTS. 

Entrance Fees......... 4,430.00 
Current, Dues ...c rn 7=s 63,550.87 
Past sessions 5,410.00 
Advance Dues......... 262.00 
Students Dues........ 4,185.00 
Transfer Fees:..... <3. 530.00 
Ad PES -tevencta stein ote dieteal 1,845.00 


80,212.87 


Sales, Transactions, etc. 1,271.86 
Subscriptions, Proceed- 


ings.... : 1,596.77 
Advertising. . 9,350.66 
Binding. . ene 149.50 
Exchange. Favedhig ievabeisheustene 20.2 
——_—— 12,389.05 
INTEREST: 
ONS. ele oltre teres 1,650.00 
Bank Balance..... 795.30 
—§——_ 2,445.30 
Royaltviergsci-stes 100.00 
Total sites pce wale ee she $95,147.22 


REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


DISBURSEMENTS, 
Stationery and Printing. 2,987.01 
Postage cfongeaesan es 2,730.05 
General Expenses...... 3 see OL 
Meeting Expenses..... 4,613.03 
Section Meetings...... 6,831.85 
Badges purchased...... 1,541.14 
DALATICS: c/o «> cislabeial<s e's 11,380.00 
Interest on Mtge...... 2,160.00 
Office Furniture....... 613.74 


Advertising Expense... 3,491.41 
Year Book and Cata- 
1OGQUG: Joon aes aaiee 2,645.79 


Express, acmc vie eiae = 2 6 232.43 
—— $41,794.46 
PROCEEDINGS: 
Printing. oo ccs $7,777.88 
Paper and Envelopes 5,731.13 
Engraving scco-2 << 2, 224.77 
Binding and Mailing 3,860.32 
OALANIES Sek vaca siriate 3/3 372.00 
22,966.10 
TRANSACTIONS 
hs Les Sete te 5,474.50 
Vols 202.i.astemesie ore 1,084.82 
6,559.32 
Lisrary (including salaries).... 3,083.30 
UNITED ENGINEERING SOCIETY.. 
Assessments for office space.. 4,000.00 
Total bis crertdicie sfoahesossters sae cree ae $78,403.18 
Excess Receipts over Disburse- 
men tsi iii .s vl ape ates aac a ctem 16,744.04 
$95,147.22 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


RECEIPTS AND DONATIONS FOR DESIGNATED PURPOSES, ALSO EXPENDI- 
TURES FOR YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 1911. 


Exarerr C; 


RECEIPTS. 


a i i i ees 


OCC CMe diss. Oh UOT OOO CO OF bas ecg CEC ee Caw noms 


a ed 


$1, Ma rs 
23! 62 


113.85 
127.00 


2,270.49 


i od 


ee a? 


EXPENDITURES. 


MVP ANIC Xe, PUM apo aatsnrgstcre toms one 
Compounded Membership Fund 
oe ea mA Deposit F. L. & T. Co 
. Telephone Bond, Sue 1939 

CB, & Q. 


ee i cry 
eC ec a) 
ee a ee cr 


a rary 


17,333.40 


1911) REPORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS ~— 2608 


AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS. 


CONDENSED CASH STATEMENT, 
ExHisBiT D. 


Gash on deposit April’ S07 191... ee ccc cee cee ccs es 27,559.80 
Secretary's Petty Cash, April 30, 1910..........-e.esecees 750.00 
ee 28)300180 
Receipts for general purposes, Exhibit ““B"'............... 95,147.22 
Receipts for designated purposes, Exhibit ‘‘C'’............ 2,270.49 
97,417.71 
UY PA (an 
Disbursements for general purposes Exhibit ‘“‘B”........... 78,403.18 
Expenditures for designated purposes, Exhibit “ (OSs next 17,333.40 
95,736.58 
*) Balance.on hand April 30, U911-. 0... oe ek tee en re eens 29,990 93 
On deposit for designated purposes, Exxbi pig, yA aes mele 9,998.88 
*On deposit in General cash, Exhibit “ Pe avi cregdiea eae eek on 19,242.05 
Secretary's Petty Cash, Exhibit ““A'........sseee cece rere 750.00 
— 29,990.93 
Property acquired during the year, Office Furniture and Fix- 
Eta Seer metic rcteisie or ciatelc o) cisieiercietele/ersisielviv sisieis/nie'e sacle w/oa’ eve 613.74 
*This includes the following unexpended balances: 
ME ailloix erties cake cisicisiole ce sic w.slle le e.cicivielslsiniele/s) orniers.e cle ee oie 41.35 
Weaver Donation.....ccccccccercrc erence ee cecescrenees 65.44 
Int. Elec. Congress of St. Louis Library Fund............- 268.77 te 


RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS PER YEAR PER MEMBER. 
During eacifiiscal year for the past seven years. 


1909 1910 1911 
6400 6681 7117 


AT ee a ieieiin oe foustaness iel/e)ie7a sella ols: ojs''e 1905 1906 1907 1908 
Membership, April 30, each year. . 3460 3870 4521 5674 
Receipts per Member.........-- $12.32 $12.77 $12.21 $13.01 


Disbursements per Member: $10.72 $10.48 $11.62 $11.73 


$13.21 $13.35 $13.37 
$10.49 $12.03 $11.03 


Credit Balance per Member.... $1.60 $2.29 59 $1.28 


Respectfully submitted for the Board of Directors, 
RALPH W. 
New York, May 16, 1911. 


$2.72 $1.32 $2.34 


POPE, Secretary. 


PAPERS AND DISCUSSIONS 


Application of Current Transformers to Three-Phase Circuits, 
“Che: s(Uliustrated.). Sak Crarghedd,) oc... 0s ES ee ess 
Choice of Rotor Diameter and Performance of Polyphase Induc- 
tion Viotors, | llustrated.)\ (Ci keodore Eoock.). 2. 022... 0- 
Commercial Loading of Telephone Circuits in the Bell System, 
Mens (Uilstratedss “upavcrol, Gherardt.) pe tA) seed oor 
Cost of Transformer Losses. (Illustrated.) (EH. C. Stone and R. 
LGA TSO ee OO PEAS Gao OE a ROS OOS otis Oo eet 
Economical Design of Direct-Current Electromagnets, The. 
QUMisEraAteGs aiken CRGNGEr. erika dori kactcprtedton sities nmaeyay or 
Electiic Line Oscillations. (Illustrated.) (G. Facciolt.)........ 
AS aes of Air II, The. (IUustrated.) (John B. White- 
DUCE sock oy aE I he ea ae A ae Peto ee i a 


Electrolytic Corrosion in Reinforced Concrete. (Illustrated.)- 


(C. Edward Magnusson and G. A. Smith.).....-....-20.+ 20s 
High-Efficiency Suspension Insulator, The. (Illustrated.) (A. 
International Electrotechnical Congress of Turin, The........... 
Law of Corona and the Dielectric Strength of Air, The. (Illus- 

‘pina eCGms yy” HBG MG 21a ae lao) lee keedet A SUES Fh tee, POT ch ones 
Magnetic Properties of Iron at Frequencies up to 200,000 Cycles. 

(iilustrated.)) (H. Fe W. Alexanderson:)). 3.2220. 1. sues: = 
Mechanical and Electric Characteristics of Transmission Lines. 

(Illustrated.) (Harold Pender and H. F. Thomson.).......... 
Methods of Varying the Speed of Alternating-Current Motors. 

Klittiserateds)ei (Gus A laters) irre ecto eis eee rho nr a 
Problems in Telephone Traffic Engineering. (Illustrated.) (F. 

ay WEORET TO Od. ee a OTA. OO OLA Leer Mae 
Report of Board of Directors for the Fiscal Year Ending April 

310), TOI. 3 es Be Ge le Reb ote oke Mk ee ibe mrs Pecans Mapeerrace ye 
Sag Calculations for Suspended Wires. (Illustrated.) (P. H. 

TET OREO) a As, re Oe aol ook here A NOG Oh rca op areca ica Dao 
Solution to Problems in Sags and Spans. (Illustrated.) (Wm. Le 

ROG ORODELISON. Jism ociyle oe gee nto 5 nee nies igaeelle Bo ieee ele genes 

- Standardization Rules of the A. I. E. E..... 1... cee eee eee 
Tables of Hyperbolic Functions in Reference to Long Alternating- 

Current Transmission Lines. (Illustrated.) (A. £. Kennelly.) 

-Tentative Scheme of Organization and Administration, for a 

State University. (Illustrated.) (Ralph D. Mershon.)....... 
Theory of Commutation and its Application to Interpole Machines. 

A. (Illustrated.) (B. G. Lamme.)........ 0.00 eee eee tees 
Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company. 

(Illustrated.) (P. T. Hanscom.)..........0.0eeeeen renee 
Transmission System of the Great Western Power Company. 

(Iilustrated.) (J. P. Jollyman.).......0- esse errr et tee 

Transmission System of the Great Falls Power Company. (M. 


Wave Shape of Currents in an Individual Rotor Conductor of a 
Single-Phase Induction Motor. (Illustrated.) (H. Weichsel.) 


Vv 


INDEX OF AUTHORS 


Adams, Gi Ax, Discusston® (Dilastrated sys. 11 nee eee 
Alexanderson, E. F. W., ne 24337" Diseussion si sene ee eee 
Allen, A. P., Discussion. . : fi, SON TOE 
Atkinson, R. W., Paper, 2181; ‘Discussion’ 2 ton A ee 
Austin, A. O. Paper, 2303; Discussion, (Illustrated) 
Balcomb, Jean Bart, Discussion 
Bangs, E. He; Discussion. . 
Barker, Harry, Discussion (Illustrated).. 
Beebe, CH Discussions). <Ge aecee ecco eee 
pebrd: B. ‘he Discussipiscs sos oversee eee Aa ete ee 
Brackett, ie BA Discussion! .. ce eae ies see ae eee 
Brown, RiS,+ DisetiSstonist i, ach hn. cleredies he ori ace enone eee ea 
Bick, BS W.; DisSCussioie 75.1: =, srcee e/ocnelsteteeeie see eee 
Burke; James* Discussion ‘(illustrated) Pe-c<. < Or an ele niet eas 
Gampbell, Wi Lee Discussion? 6:22 %.c nus eats eee ete eee 1799 
Carpenter, Hi Vi}! DiIstassiofil.. 25 tedck mittee ts oes ee aoe eter 
Collbohm:-Max' Hs. Discussion: ...\.. ee an ae ears 1853 
Colpitts, E. H., Discussion 
Craft, E. B., Discussion 
Craighead.) Re Paper aus oh. a oes cael: micro ieee ee ee 
Creighton, E. E. F., Discussion (Illustrated) 
Darrow, R. C., Discussion Coane ¢ 
Davis, Cassius M., Discussion. . 
Dickinson, Ri Nes ‘Discussion Pe Tn ke WP ors RR nace 
Erpen, HH. Fe IT; Discussion cots Ax ook. oe ee ee 
Racctoli;GiyPaper ac nalicism nix o0,o% Cais Meee ran he eons abe ae re rem 
Fechheimer, C. J., Discussion 2159 (Illustrated) 
Fessenden, Reginald A... DiSCussion' s/s seth je eee ee 
Ford, A. H., Discussion Cillustra ted) 25 ook ee oe Oe ee 
Fowle, Frank F., Discussion 1771, 2052 (Illustrated) 
Géar, tH BS Discusston shins. oe oes Sr eed ie 
Gherardi, Bancroft, Paper, 1748; Discussion...............1772 
Haat, 15: ,Discussioncs: sofe s&s ee eee ee 
Hanscom, Pc, Paperat cs. < cad force une accete oar een ene 
Harding, C. F., Discussion. . 
Hebgen, M., ., Paper. 

Hendricks, Bi sits Discussion. . 
Hewlett, E. ML Discussion. . ie TER CATER pict ne eee 
Hoadley, George A., Discussion... al ov. eee 
Hobart, H. M., Discussion.......... WS AOR, Eel ied SR Oe 
ioock, Dheodore; Discussion)... i). oe wee eee Lowe ee a 
Hoxie; (George La Discussion... cad Soe Ra eee eee 
Wewett oF. Bs,, Discussion 3.:.,. csc duc Cie eer nee eee eee ee 
Jollymamn, gf." Poy Papers it feces od Pine ise  eetee ncalCen nnn eee 
Kennelly, A. Bs Paper iiss asac! tie he eas Mea ee 
Lamme, B. G., Paper, 2359; Discussion, 2426 pee S Rat 
Langsdorf, A. 5s Discussion....... . .2086, 
Lee, W.S., Paper Bee a Sue Shelly, ce hte heres Lae es eth ca OG ae 
Lincoln, Paul iM... Discussion. ..0¢..ccuin Ace OL On eee) 
MacLaren, Malcolm, Discussion 
Magnusson,.C. Edward; Paper... ¢ a. oe ee eee 
Maier, Gus A., Paper, 2455; ‘Disctissiontiea... seme eee 2485, 
Mailloux, C. O., Discussion 


o oe le] & € Oo, <8 


MieGoliarnms intone Disc uSsiOia ween 2S. c akd ines Palate. os 
Miexshon kal ph. weaper, 2307, Discussion.) 20.02.2203 ams. . 


INNO ONC Cat Comm lO ISCUSSIOME mine ciens a cickaroenchsns ig share ieee thle areets sel eee 
Neall, N. ‘les Discussion. . ETO ee ein ee COLO mee 261, 
Nicholson, Oe Ce Discussion. . Soe Se tere eR ater oie aA UE 
Nies, J. D. SESE GRRL e , Ba aaa ge 08 Rane an ae 
Pastoriza, Hugh, Discussion 5 a MAU AR SI eee doe oy Ne ae ee ee 2018, 
Peek, F. W., Jr., Paper, 1889; Discussion. . eee 
Pender, Harold, Paper 2241, Discussion (Illustrated). ih See 2301; 
Pikler, A. H., Discussion. . dite © Posner eater 
Robertson, Wm. Le Roy, ae 2209; ‘Discussion.......... 2283, 


Rushmore, D. B., Discussion. . ASS Sogo ee ces acus 
Ryan, Harris J., BCE SEE 01 RSM VEL Pe Re tee OR 
Scott, Charles F., NDIGCIISSIGIUACH eee Atel eee co era a7 1975, 
Super Gxiay thy ESCUSSION yee even Wiee sin eiasacst tered) letes « a eave ans 


Seward sone Gael mo iSCUSSIONe ator ry crr cre oe cue kidos 2085, : 


Sle pce mt w bone DSc Scloiie nanscatin ys code rel sine aki apace onsdcare trail ches 
Smith, Allard, pac ee PEEL Ma ph ee ee de Nidiet wieted nacre veces 
Seealeine SONS (is lea: WORWEelR, DSi & SRC EE Ron Rice o Gagan ance eG otr Ey act eos 
Smith, W. C., pee. (Illustrated). . ET ee CRE ie toc Se 
Sia enV EN ee TSCUSSIO Ta aie ey hsecc ise ei cise te beer eo apes syesdcess Ser she 
Steinmetz, Ci 7p . DISCUSSION. uae 1851, 1856, 1966, 2450, 
“Shere DANG. DISS halon cag aie coeee Dies pro Cedi o baer Cirecuoiearec 
re, 1 NCS PRY ai cage cue Bac etic ie See a nic anne cic Cibe tee pierces mente 
Thomas, P. ca Paper, 2229; Discussion 1856 (Illustrated)....... 
1989, 2298, 2300, 
Thomson, H. F., Paper, 2241; Discussion 2284 (lllustrated) .. Eeioned 
Toch, Maxmilian, Discussion. . : nee 
Treat, 1X, 123, ID NGETERTICHO NS ew oleic ny oat oo Olea ceo Gate amar tly ecko 
Upson, W. jt Discussion (Illustrated). . Pe Oe ork) 
Valentine, F. P., Raper, L773; Discusses dc ok uk tn ior, 
Vaughan, J. F., ein MRE ee. ke Ong eget eens 
Wagner E. A., Discussion. . Sa Sate bed a oats esron he 
Weichsel, H., Paper, 2103; Discussion. . pel eleven eeoote ume Caalahs 
Whitehead, J. Bi, Paper, 1857; Discussion. . ent IER roel atta oreo rers 
Wikander, R., Paper. . : CE OEE Lae Rh Re 
Wilson, C. E., As eae 
Wray, ip Gx Discussion. . 


SYNOPTICAL AND TOPICAL 


INDEX 


OF 


A. I. E. E. TRANSACTIONS 


Vol. XXX, Parts I, II and III 


Prepared under the supervision of the Committee on Indexing the 


Transactions 


The main headings under which these synopses are classified were arrived 
at by a careful study of all the papers contributed since the organization 
of the Institute. 

The method of making this classification may be called the automatic 
method, since it is created by sorting the papers themselves into groups 
and then naming the groups. 

Many papers fall naturally into several different groups and in such 
cases they are inserted under as many different heads as it is thought 
they rightfully belong. 

The classified synopses are designed for those searching for compre- 
hensive information on any given topic, while the subject index is intended 
for those looking up specific and definite data or information. 


4. Dielectric Phenomena 


. Electric Conductors. . 


. Batteries 


MAIN SECTIONS OF SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


ud Dla hele uakoy «enapmins Alara ras ceetatsr eo nigak PN PA A eer ny, 
i, General THe Or yin... s/:c.5 vce 6 ei eNO 9 oe eee ie ee 


. Measurements and Instraments >. cc aes ee eee 


. Magnetic Properties ae 1 Testing ofr Irony, fa. cen gs co she See 
SE TANSLOTMETS & 1a.~ is 5) Siphes 8's sous betcha chante sal ok apna ORES OT nt ae aeae enr 
. Electrical Machinery and Apparatus 
. Prime Movers and Steam Boilers 


. Power Plants 


. Parallel Operation 


 Lransmission Lines. 7.00% 2 cones ee ee en ee 
* 


. Electric Service Disturbances and Protection 
. Distribution Systems 


). Control;;Regulation and Switching, os «ca cuca. testa perenne eee 
Ragl e kel cle rn ML err OR wos RMR dA ope t is 
. Lighting and Lamps.. attadeeals y 
. Electricity in the rok s and pe slat alas Wty en Se ape ae aap or 
. Miscellaneous Applications of Electricity...................-5- 
wbelephony and. T elepraphiysa.ci vse ieee Geren iter ee 


. Miscellaneous Topics and Institute Affairs.......2...0:.. 0.0. oe 


1. EDUCATION 


TENTATIVE SCHEME OF ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION, FOR A 
STATE UNIVERSITY 
Ralph D. Mershon Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2337-2344 
Endeavor to improve the efficiency of university organization system. 
Discussion, pp, 2346-2358 by Messrs. A. H. Ford, C. F. Harding, 
B. B. Brackett, A. S. Langsdorf, George D. Shepardson, M. C. Beebe, 
W. L. Upson and Ralph D. Mershon, 
Criticisms of author’s plan. Other plans of organization. 


2. GENERAL THEORY 


MECHANICAL FORCES IN MAGNETIC FIELDS 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 367-385 


Elementary theory of the energy transformation in plunger magnets, 
giving equations for the mechanical work and the efficiency. Brief 
mathematical consideration of the mechanical forces exerted by short- 
circuit currents in transformers, cables and general circuits. 

Discussion, pp. 386-413, by Messrs. A. S. McAllister, G. Faccioli, 
Cassius M. Davis, Mr. Harper, F. C. Green, C. J. Barrow, Henry Pikler, 
John J. Frank, Charles F. Scott, H. C. Cox, V. Karapetoff, K. Faye-Han- 
sen, J. Murray Weed, H. B. Dwight, A. C. Zelewsky, E. Jasse and C. P. 
Steinmetz. 

General discussion of the mechanical forces exerted on short circuits 
in transformers,—equations, tests and experience. Energy transforma- 
tions in plunger magnets. 3 


THE TEMPERATURE GRADIENT IN OIL-IMMERSED TRANSFORMERS 
James Murray Weed Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 427-446 


General discussion of the complex temperature gradient from the hottest 
part of the transformer coil to the external air. Thermal properties of 
various substances. Laws of heat dissipation. 

Discussion incorporated with that of paper by F. C. Green on “ Prob- 
lems in the Operation of Transformers.” 


THE DIRECTION OF ROTATION IN ALTERNATING-CURRENT VECTOR 
DIAGRAMS 
Ernst J. Berg Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 575-579 
Advantages of rectangular and polar coordinate systems of representing 
alternating quantities. 
Discussion incorporated with that of paper by W. S. Franklin on 
““ Conventions in Clock-Diagram Representation.”’ 


3 


4 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


CONVENTIONS IN CLOCK-DIAGRAM REPRESENTATION 
W. S. Franklin Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 581-585 


Presentation of clock-diagram with both methods of representing time- 
phase displacement. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by Ernst J. Berg on “ The Direction 
of Rotation in Alternating-Current Vector Diagrams ""), pp. 586-596, 
by Messrs. G. L. Hoxie, Charles P. Steinmetz, Louis F. Blume, O. J. 
Ferguson, and C. A. Adams. 

General discussion of the relative advantages of the polar coordinate 
system and the crank diagram in representing alternating quantities. 


CISOIDAL OSCILLATIONS 
George A. Campbell Vol. xxx—1911 pp. 873-909 
Development cf system of equations for general electric circuit. Ap- 
plication in the calculation of quantities in networks of conductors; 
free oscillations of eddy currents and skin effect. 
Discussion, pp- 910-913, by Mr. C. L. Cory. 
Physical meaning of author’s equations. 


THE ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR—II 
John B. Whitehead Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1857-1887 


Account of experimental investigation of various factors which affect 
corona or critical e.m.f. and critical surface intensity at which corona 
forms. Discussion of results with reference to their bearing upon ioni- 
zation theory. 

No discussion. 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1889-1965 


Account of extensive investigations of corona and dielectric phenomena 
on a 230,000-volt transmission line. Study of the effects of various at- 
mospheric conditions; of wire diameter, spacing and nature of surface; 
and of frequency, etc., on dielectric phenomena. Methods of measuring 
corona losses. Development of formulas for expressing the relations be- 
tween the various factors. Results tabulated and plotted as curves. 

Discussion, pp. 1966-1988, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Cassius M. 
Davis, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., Charles F. Scott, Harris J. Ryan, John 
B. Whitehead and F. W. Peek, Jr. 


Results of other corona tests. Relation between critical e.m.f..and - 


diameter giving critical diameter. Comparison of results of Dr. White- 


head and Mr. Peek with earlier experimental work. Terminology of 


dielectric phenomena. Dielectric strength of oil under pressure. 


A THEORY OF COMMUTATION AND ITS APPLICATIONTO INTERPOLE 
MACHINES 

B. G. Lamme Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2359-2404 

Development of theory of commutation with method of calculation 

based on fundamental law of electromagnetic induction. Analysis of 

various fluxes and their effect on commutation. Design of interpoles. 


‘ 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 5 


Discussion, pp. 2405-2431, by Messrs. H. F. T. Erben,.Geo. L. Hoxie, 
H. M. Hobart, Malcolm MacLaren, C. A. Adams, C. F. Scott, James 
Burke, R. B Treat, C. E. Wilson, and B. G. Lamme. 

Theoretical and experimental methods of studying commutation, 


TABLES OF HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS IN REFERENCE TO LONG ALTERNATING- 
CURRENT TRANSMISSION LINES 


A. E. Kennelly Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2495-2506 


Formula for use with hyperbolic functions in calculation of long trans- 
mission lines. Tables calculated for this purpose. Examples of the use 
of the formulas and tables in calculation of different types of lines. Buibli- 
ography of tables of complex hyperbolic functions. 

No discussion. 


3. MEASUREMENTS AND INSTRUMENTS 


HIGH-TENSION TESTING OF INSULATING MATERIALS 
- A. B. Hendricks, Jr. Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 167-213 


Outline of methods of testing the dielectric properties of materials, 
covering briefly general conditions, choice of apparatus, factors which 
affect the results and properties of commercial insulating materials. 
Description of the method used by the author for standard tests and re- 
sults of numerous tests on commercial materials given in the form of 
curves. Design of new type of spark gap for oil testing. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by H. R. Wilson on ‘““ Com- 
mercial Problems of Transformer Design.”’ 


COMMERCIAL PROBLEMS OF TRANSFORMER DESIGN 
H. R. Wilson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 219-223 


Brief mention of some of the commercial factors which enter into the 
design of transformers. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by A. B. Hendricks, Jr., on “High- 
Tension Testing of Insulating Materials,’ and W. J. Wooldridge on 
“ Hysteresis and Eddy Current Exponents for Silicon Steel), pp. 224-248, 
by Messrs. Charles P. Steinmetz, Henry Pikler, Ralph D. Mershon, 
William L. Puffer, A. S. McAllister, L. T. Robinson, George F. Seaver, 
J. R. Craighead, J. L. R. Hayden, F. M. Farmer, H. L. Schermerhorn, 
E. M. Hewlett, W. J. Foster, Charles F. Scott, Cc. A. Adams, and William 
A. Del Mar. 

Relative merits of various methods measuring high e.m.f. Outline 
of proper method of insulating electrical machinery. Analytical study 
of stress distribution in cable insulation with proposed explanation of early 
breakdown in inner layers of insulation. 


TEST OF LOSSES ON HIGH-TENSION LINES 


G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 337-355 


Description of corona loss tests on lines of Central Colorado Power 
Company. Methods of measurement. Results in form of curves and 


6 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


in tables. Experimental law of corona loss. Equation of actual corona 
e.m.f. as function of spacing and diameter. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. H. Cunningham on “ Design, 
Construction and Test of an Artificial Transmission Line;” paper by 
E. E. F. Creighton on ‘‘ Protection of Electrical Transmission Lines’’ 
and paper by C. I. Burkholder and R. H. Marvin on “ Tests of Arcing- 
Ground Suppressor on the 40,000-Volt System of the Southern Power 
Company "), pp. 356-365, by Messrs. Ralph D. Mershon, Charles 8. 
Ruffner, L. C. Nicholson, Taylor Reed, J. L. R. Hayden, F. W. Peek, Jr., 
L. T. Robinson, Charles F. Scott, G. Faccioli and E. E. F. Creighton. 

Discussion of corona loss and critical e.m.f. laws. Experimental 
determinations. Actual distribution of insulator flash-overs among the 
three conductors of a three-phase line. Protection of lines from insulator 
spill-overs. 


COMMERCIAL TESTING OF SHEET IRON FOR HYSTERESIS LOSS 
L. T. Robinson os Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 741-760 


Outline of the requirements of a shop method of testing.iron. Des- 
cription of testing outfits developed by the author, with results of tests 


of commercial iron. Relative accuracy and cost of testing compared with 


Epstein method. ; 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Malcolm MacLaren 
on ‘‘ The Effect of Temperature upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Steel.”’ 


THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE HYSTERESIS LOSS IN SHEET STEEL 
Malcolm MacLaren Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 761-775 


Description of iron-loss tests on samples of iron at temperatures up 
to non-magnetic point. Eddy-current and hysteresis coefficients and 
value of hysteresis loss plotted with temperature for different densities. 
Also a description of method of measuring hysteresis loss directly. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by L. T. Robinson on ‘‘ Commercial 
Testing of Sheet Iron for Hysteresis Loss '’), pp. 776-802, by Messrs. 
C. H. Sharp, Edwin F. Northrup, J. A. Capp, L. W. Chubb, R. B. Treat, 
W. J. Wooldridge, W. R. Whitney, C. J. Fechheimer, C. A. Adams, 
W. S. Franklin, Malcolm MacLaren, L. T. Robinson, Henry Pikler, 
M. G. Lloyd and J. D. Ball. 

General remarks on commercial methods of testing magnetic 
properties of iron. Relation between flux density and hysteresis expo- 
nent. Method of calculating the hysteresis exponent from observed iron 
losses. 


A POWER DIAGRAM INDICATOR FOR HIGH-TENSION CIRCUITS 
Harris J. Ryan Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1089-1113 


Cathode ray power indicator—its theory of operation and its mode 
of construction. Account of tests made with power indicator, demon- 
strating its accuracy and usefulness. Measurement of very low power 
at high e.m.f. Photographs of apparatus and connection diagrams. 

Discussion, pp. 1114-1119 by Messrs. E. F. Scattergood, C. L. Cory, 
J. J. Frank, Ralph D. Mershon, H. J. Ryan and R. W. Sorensen. 

General remarks on the uses and advantages of the cathode-ray power 
indicator, : 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX a, 


ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS 
G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1803-1850 


Account of switching tests on 100,000-volt transinission system of the 
Great Western Power Company. Detailed discussion of large number of 
oscillograms. Recommendation for switching on high-tension systems: ~ 
Appendix by W. W. Lewis on construction and operation of the photo- 
graphic attachment to the oscillograph. 

Discussion, pp. 1851-1856, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Max H. Coll- 
bohm, D. B. Rushmore and Percy H. Thomas. 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1889-1965 


Accounts of extensive investigations of corona and dielectric phenomena 
on a 230,000-volt transmission line. Study of the effects of various 
atmospheric conditions of wire diameter, spacing and nature of surface, 
and of frequency, etc., on dielectric phenomena. Methods of measuring 
corona losses. Development of formulas for expressing the relations 
between the various factors. Results tabulated and plotted as curves. 

_ Discussion, pp. 1966-1988, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Cassius M! 
Davis, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., Charles F. Scott, Harris J. Ryan, John B. 
Whitehead and F. W. Peek, Jr. 

Results of other corona tests. Relation between critical e.m.f. and 
diameter giving critical diameter. Comparison of results of Dr. White- 
head and Mr. Peek with earlier experimental work. Terminology of 
dielectric phenomena. Dielectric strength of oil under pressure. 


THE APPLICATION OF CURRENT TRANSFORMERS TO THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS 
J. R. Craighead Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2167-2179 


Analysis of the performance of series transformers with secondaries 
interconnected in various ways, the primaries being included in polyphase 


circuits. 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Messrs. E. C.. Stone 


and R. W. Atkinson on ‘“‘ Cost of Transformer Losses.”’ 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES UP TO 200,000 CYCLES 
E, F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2433-2448 


Measurements of magnetizing core loss and skin effect at high frequen- 
cies. Method of measuring power at high frequency. Relation between 


the various factors and frequency plotted as curves. 
Discussion, pp. 2449-2454, by Messrs. Harold Pender, B. A. Behrend, 


Charles P. Steinmetz, Reginald A. Fessenden and F. B. Silsbee. 
Behavior of iron at high frequency. 


4. DIELECTRIC PHENOMENA 


OPEN ATMOSPHERE AND DRY TRANSFORMER OIL AS HIGH VOLTAGE 


INSULATORS 
_Harris J. Ryan Vol. xxx— i911, pp. 1-76 


Analytical study of corona formation and the factors which influence 
it, covering practically all the work that has thus far been done by the 


8 ~~ SYNOPTICAL INDEX, 


author and other investigators. Complete references to all original work. 
Brief explanation of the ionization theory, which is applied to explain the 
phenomena that take place on high-tension lines. Laws formulated for~- 
calculation of critical e.m.f. under all conditions. ‘ 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by E. L. West on “‘ High 
Voltage Line Loss Tests made on the 100-Kilovolt, 60-Cycle, 180-Mile 
Transmission Line of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


HIGH-VOLTAGE LINE LOSS TESTS MADE ON THE 100-KILOVOLT, 60-CYCLE, 
180-MILE TRANSMISSION LINE OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER 
COMPANY 


E. L. West . Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 77-85 

Communication to Professor Ryan by the author, giving detailed 
results of tests on extensive transmission system with and without load. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by Harris J. Ryan on “| Open 
Atmosphere and Dry Transformer Oil as High-Voltage Insulators "’) 
pp. 86-130, by Messrs. M. I. Pupin, G. Faccioli, C. P. Steinmetz, William 
S. Stanley, J. B. Whitehead, Erich Hausmann, Samuel Sheldon, H. W. 
Fisher, J. E. Noeggerath, A. E. Kennelly, F. W. Peek, Jr., George 3 
Hoxie, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., J. A. Koontz, C. E. Bennett, and Harris J. 
Ryan. General discussion of Professor Ryan's conclusions. Criticism 
and defense of electron theory. Formula for practical corona calculations 
on long-distance lines. Method of constructing minute needle points. 
Relation between conductivity of gases and vapors and corona phenomena. 
Results of tests on high-tension lines and also with short-spark discharge 
apparatus. 


HIGH-TENSION TESTING OF INSULATING MATERIALS 
A. B. Hendricks, Jr. Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 167-213 


Outline of methods of testing the dielectric properties of materials, 
covering briefly general conditions, choice of apparatus, factors which 
affect the results and properties of commercial insulating materials. 
Description of the method used by the author for standard tests and 
results of numerous tests on commercial materials given in the form of 
curves. Design of new type of spark gap fog oil testing. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by H. R. Wilson on “ Com- 
mercial Problems of Transformer Design."’ 


COMMERCIAL PROBLEMS OF TRANSFORMER DESIGN 
H. R. Wilson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 219-223 

Brief mention of some of the commercial factors which enter into the 
design of transformers. ; 

Discussion, (including that of paper by W. J. Wooldridge on “Hysteresis 
and Eddy Current Exponents for Silicon Steel), pp. 224-243, by Messrs. 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Henry Pikler, Ralph D. Mershon, William L. Puffer, 
A. S. McAllister, L. T. Robinson, Geo. F, Seaver, J. R. Craighead, J. L. 
R. Hayden, F. M. Farmer, H. L. Schermerhorn, E. M. Hewlett, W. ie 
Foster, Charles F. Scott, C. A. Adams, and William A. Del Mar. 


Relative merits -of various methods of measuring high e.m.f. Out- 


line of proper method of insulating electrical machinery. Analytical study 


of stress distribution in cable insulation with proposed explanation of early ; 


breakdown in inner layers of insulation. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 9 


TESTS OF LOSSES ON HIGH-TENSION LINES 
G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 337-355 


Description of corona loss tests on’ lines of Central Colorado Power 
Company. Methods of measurement. Results in form of curves and in 
tables. Experimental law of corona loss. Equation of actual corona e.m.f. 
as function of spacing and diameter. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. H. Cunningham on “ Design, 
Construction and Test of an Artificial Transmission Line;’’ paper by 
E. E. F. Creighton on “ Protection of Electrical Transmission Lines”’ 
and paper by C. I. Burkholder and R. H. Marvin on “ Tests of Arcing 
Ground Suppressor on the 40,000-Volt System of the Southern Power 
Company,’’) pp. 356-365, by Messrs. Ralph D. Mershon, Charles S. 
Ruffner, L..C. Nicholson, Taylor Reed, J. L. R. Hayden, F. W. Peek, Jr., 
L. T. Robinson, Charles F. Scott, G. Faccioli and E. E. F. Creighton. 

Discussion of corona loss and critical e.m.f. laws. Experimental deter- 
minations. Actual distribution of insulator flash-overs among the three 
conductors of a three-phase line. Protection of lines from insulator, spill- 


overs. 
THE ELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR—II 


John B. Whitehead Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1857-1887 


Account of experimental investigation of various factors which affect 
corona or critical e.m.f. and critical surface intensity at which corona 
forms. Discussion of results with reference to their bearing upon ioniza- 
tion theory. 

No discussion. 


THE LAW OF CORONA AND THE DIELECTRIC STRENGTH OF AIR 
F. W. Peek, Jr. : Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1889-1965 


Account of extensive investigations of corona and dielectric phenomena 
on a 230,000-volt transmission line. Study of the effects of various 
atmospheric conditions of wire diameter, spacing and nature of surface, 
and of frequency, etc., on dielectric phenomena. Methods of measuring 
corona losses. Development of formulas for expressing the relations 
between the various factors. Results tabulated and plotted as curves. 

Discussion, pp. 1966-1988, by Messrs C. P. Steinmetz, Cassius M. 
- Davis, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., Charles F. Scott, Harris J. Ryan, John B. 
Whitehead and F. W. Peek, Jr. 

Results of other corona tests. Relations between critical e.m.f. and 
diameter giving critical diameter. Comparison of results of Dr. Whitehead 
and Mr. Peek with earlier experimental work. Terminology of dielectric 
phenomena. Dielectric strength of oil under pressure. 


THE HIGH-EFFICIENCY SUSPENSION INSULATOR 


A. O. Austin Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2303-2328 


Mathematical study of the efficiency of different shapes and types of 
suspension insulator. Judging an insulator by flash-over tests. Design of 
insulators for high tension. 

Discussion, pp. 2329-2335, by Messrs. E. E. F. Creighton, Paul M. 
Lincoln, P. H. Thomas, E. M. Hewlett, N. J. Neall and A. O. Austin. 

Behavior of insulators under high-tension stresses, Distribution of 
stresses between several parts of link insulators. 


10 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


5. ELECTRIC CONDUCTORS 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION IN REINFORCED CONCRETE 
C. Edward{Magnusson and C. H. Smith Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2055-2079 


Account of experimental investigation of damage done by stray currents 
in reinforced concrete. Study of various methods of protecting reinforces 
ment from corrosion. 

Discussion, pp. 2080-2101, by Messrs. Burton McCollum, E. W. Steven- 
son, G. G. Shepardson, George A. Hoadley, A. S. Langsdorf, Max- 
milian Toch, Guy F. Shaffer, Harry Barker and W. L. Upson. 

Description of similar investigations by the Bureau of Standards and 
others. Criticism of the authors’ methods, especially of the high e.m.fs. 
used. Account of actual example of corrosion in a building. 


6. MAGNETIC PROPERTIES AND TESTING OF IRON 


HYSTERESIS AND EDDY-CURRENT EXPONENTS FOR SILICON STEEL 
W. J. Wooldridge Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 215-217 


Results of tests plotted in the form of curves. 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by H. R. Wilson on ‘‘ Com- 
mercial Problems of Transformer Design.” 


COMMERCIAL TESTING OF SHEET IRON FOR HYSTERESIS LOSS 
L. T. Robinson Vol. xxx 1911 pp. 741-760 


Outline of the requirements of a shop method of testing iron. Descrip- 
tion of testing outfits developed by the author, with results of tests of 
commercial iron. Relative accuracy and cost of testing compared with 
Epstein method. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Malcolm MacLaren on 
“ The Effect of Temmperature upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Steel.” 


THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE HYSTERESIS LOSS IN SHEET STEEL 
Malcolm MacLaren Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 761-775 


Description of iron loss tests on samples of iron at temperatures up 
to non-magnetic point. Eddy current and hysteresis coefficients and 
value of hysteresis loss plotted with temperature for different densities. 
Also a description of method of measuring hysteresis loss directly. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by L. T. Robinson on ‘‘ Commercial 
Testing of Sheet Iron for Hysteresis Loss '’) pp. 776-802, by Messrs. C. H. 
Sharp, Edwin F. Northrup, J. A. Capp, L. W. Chubb, R. B. Treat, W. J. 
Wooldridge, W. R. Whitney, C. J. Fechheimer, C. A. Adams, W. S. 
Franklin, Malcolm MacLaren, L. T. Robinson, Henry Pikler, M. G. 
Lloyd and J. D. Ball. 

General remarks on commercial methods of testing magnetic properties 
of iron. Relation between flux density and hysteresis exponent. Method 
of calculating the hysteresis exponent from observed iron losses. 


—— 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 11 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES UP TO 200,000 CYCLES 
E. F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp 2433-2448 


Measurements of magnetizing core loss and skin effect at high fre- 
quenciés. Methods of measuring power at high frequency. Relation 
between the various factors and frequency plotted as curves. 

Discussion, pp. 2449-2454, by Messrs. Harold Pender, A. B. Behrend 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Reginald A. Fessenden, F. B. Silsbee. 

Behavior of iron at high frequency. 


8. TRANSFORMERS 


OPEN ATMOSPHERE AND DRY TRANSFORMER OIL AS HIGH-VOLTAGE 
INSULATORS 


Harris J. Ryan Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1-76 

Analytical study of corona formation and the factors which influence it, 
covering practically all the work that has thus far been done by the 
author and other investigators. Complete references to all original work. 
- Brief explanation of the ionization theory, which is applied to explain the 
phenomena that take place on high tension lines. Laws formulated for 
calculation of critical e.m.f. under all conditions. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by E. L. West on “‘ High 
Voltage Line Loss Tests made on the 100-Kilovolt, 60-Cycle, 180-Mile 
Transmission Line of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


COMMERCIAL PROBLEMS OF TRANSFORMER DESIGN 
H. R. Wilson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 219-223 


Brief mention of some of the commercial factors which enter into the 
design of transformers. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by A. B. Hendricks, Jr., on “‘ High 
Tension Testing of Insulating Materials '’ and W. J. Wooldridge on “‘ Hys- 
teresis and Eddy Current Exponents for Silicon Steel ’’), pp. 224-243, by 
Messrs. Charles P. Steinmetz, Henry Pikler, Ralph D. Mershon, William L. 
Puffer, A. S. McAllister, L. T. Robinson, George F. Seaver, J. R. Craig- 
head, J. L. R. Hayden, F. M. Farmer, H. L. Schermerhorn, E. M. Hewlett, 
W. J. Foster, Charles F. Scott, C. A. Adams, and William A. Del Mar. 

Relative merits of various methods of measuring of high e.m.f. Outline 
of proper method of insulating electrical machinery. Analytical study of 
stress distribution in cable insulation with proposed explanation of early 
breakdown in inner layers of insulation. 


: MECHANICAL FORCES IN MAGNETIC FIELDS 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 367-385 


Elementary theory of the energy transformation in plunger magnets, 
giving equations for the mechanical work and the efficiency. Brief 
mathematical consideration of the mechanical forces exerted by short- 
circuit currents in transformers, cables and general circuits. 

Discussion, pp. 386-413, by Messrs. A. S. McAllister, G. Faccioli, 
Cassius M. Davis, Mr. Harper, F. C. Green, C. J. Barrow, Henry Pikler, 


12 . SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


John J. Frank, Charles F. Scott, H. C. Cox, V. Karapetoff, K. Faye- 
Hansen, J. Murray Weed, H. B. Dwight, A. C. Zelewsky, E. Jasse and 
C. P. Steinmetz. 

General discussion of the mechanical forces exerted on short circuits 
in transformers, equations, tests and experience. Energy transformations 
in plunger magnets. 


THE REGULATION OF DISTRIBUTING TRANSFORMERS 
C. E. Allen Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 415-426 


Comparison of a number of the most important regulation formulas. 
Effect of different electric and magnetic constants upon regulation 
characteristics with varying power-factor. Modern winding construction 
for good regulation. : 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. C. Green on “ Prob- 
lems in the Operation of Transformers.”’ 


THE TEMPERATURE GRADIENT IN OIL IMMERSED TRANSFORMERS 


James Murray Weed Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 427-446 


General discussion of the complex temperature gradient from the 
hottest part of the transformer coil to the external air. Thermal proper- 
ties of various substances. Laws of heat dissipation. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. C. Green on “ Prob- 
lems in the Operation of Transformers.” 


DISSIPATION OF HEAT FROM SELF-COOLED, OIL-FILLED TRANSFORMER 
: TANKS 
J. J. Frank and H. O. Stephens Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 447-456 
Description of various modern types of transformer tanks, followed by 
results of tests bearing on the relative merits of each type in the dissipa- 
tion of heat. 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. C. Green on “ Prob- 
lems in the Operation of Transformers.” 


PROBLEMS IN THE OPERATION OF TRANSFORMERS 
F. C. Green Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 457-475 


Directions for installing and caring for transformers. Sources of 
trouble in operation. Single-phase and polyphase connections, also 
connections that breed trouble. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by James Murray Weed on “ The 
Temperature Gradient in Oil-Immersed Transformers ’’ and paper by 


J. J. Frank and H. O. Stephens on ‘‘ Dissipation of Heat from Self-_ 


Cooled, Oil-Filled Transformer Tanks ’’), pp. 476-494, by Messrs. W. S. 
Moody, Henry Pikler, E. G, Reed, Louis F. Blume, E. A. Wagner, C. 
A. Adams, A. E. Walden, Ralph D. Mershon, C. W. Stone, E. F. Alex- 
anderson, C. P. Steinmetz, J. M. Weed, R. W. Atkinson and C. E. Allen. 

General discussion of the regulation, cooling and protection of trans- 
formers from short-circuits. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 13 


COMMERCIAL TESTING OF SHEET IRON FOR HYSTERESIS LOSS 
L. T. Robinson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 741-760 


Outline of the requirements of a shop method of testing iron. Descrip- 
tion of testing outfits developed by the author, with results of tests of 
commercial iron. Relative accuracy and cost of testing compared with 
Epstein method. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Malcolm MacLaren 
on “‘ The Effect of Temperature upon the Hysteresis Loss in Sheet Stecl.”’ 


THE APPLICATION OF CURRENT TRANSFORMERS TO THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS 
J. R. Craighead — Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2167-2179 


Analysis of the performance of series transformers with secondaries 
interconnected in various ways, the primaries being included in polyphase 
circuits. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Messrs. E. C. Stone and 
R. W. Atkinson on ‘‘ Cost of Transformer Losses.” 


COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 
E. C. Stone and R. W. Atkinson Vol. xxx—1911 pp. 2181-2199 


Classification of transformer losses and complete analytical discussion 
of the cost of various losses under various operating conditions. 
Discussion, (including that of paper by J. R. Craighead on “ The 
Application of Current Transformers to Three-Phase Circuits ’’), pp. 
2200-2207, by Messrs. A. H. Pikler, W. C. Smith, E. A. Wagner, H. B. 
Gear, and R, W. Atkinson. * 
Progress in transformer design in a period of 12 years. Importance 
of long life as compared with energy efficiency. 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES UP TO 200,000 CYCLES 
E, F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2433-2448 


Measurements of magnetizing core loss and skin effect at high fre- 
quencies. Method of measuring power at high frequency. Relation 
between the various factors and frequency plotted as curves. 

Discussion, pp. 2449-2454, by Messrs. Harold Pender, B. A. Behrend, 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Reginald A. Fessenden and F. B. Silsbee. 

Behavior of iron at high frequency. 


9. ELECTRICAL MACHINERY AND APPARATUS 


; MECHANICAL FORCES IN MAGNETIC FIELDS 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 367-385 


Eletnentary theory of the energy transformation in plunger magnets, 
giving equations for the mechanical work and the efficiency. Brief 
mathematical consideration of the mechanical forces exerted by short- 
circuit currents in transformers, cables and general circuits. 

Discussion, pp. 386-413, by Messrs. A. S. McAllister, G. Faccioli, 
Cassius M. Davis, Harper, F. C. Green, C. J. Barrow, Henry 


14 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Pikler, John J. Frank, Charles F. Scott, H. C. Cox, V. Karapetoff, K. 
Faye-Hansen, J. Murray Weed, H. B. Dwight, A. C. Zelewsky, E. Jasse 
and C. P. Steinmetz. 

General discussion of the mechanical forces exerted on short circuits 
in transformers, equations, tests and experience. Energy transformations 
in plunger magnets. 


VOLTAGE REGULATION OF GENERATORS 
H. A. Laycock 3 Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 555-571 


Outline of requirements of generator and exciters essential to successful 
application of automatic regulation. Description of Tirrill regulator . 
applied to alternating-current and direct-current systems. Examples of 
very large installations. 

Discussion, pp. 572-573, by Messrs. H. G. Reist, Carl J. Fechheimer, 
and E. F. Alexanderson. 

Desirability of poor inherent regulation of large generators. 


FLYWHEEL LOAD EQUALIZER 
W.N. Motter and L. L. Tatum Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 729-739 


Description of a fly-wheel-generator installation designed to take the 
sudden peak loads encountered in the operation of ore bridges. Results 
of tests of power consumption and actual saving in the cost of handling 
the ore. 

No discussion. 


THE USE OF POWER-LIMITING REACTANCES WITH LARGE TURBO- 
ALTERNATORS 


R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. Schweitzer Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1143-1194 


Detailed account. of exhaustive tests made to determine the action of 
reactors in the leads of turbo-generators under various conditions, with 
respect to the effect on the generators, on the secondary apparatus and on 
the stability of the system. Oscillograms of currents and e.m.fs. are given 
for each test. Bibliography. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Charles P. Steinmetz 
on “* Development of the Modern Central Station.” 


INDUCTION MACHINES FOR HEAVY SINGLE-PHASE MOTOR SERVICE 
E. F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1357-1369. 


Description, theory and performance characteristics of phase converter 
for changing single-phase to polyphase energy. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by William S. Murray on 
‘ Electrification Analyzed, and Its Practical Application to Trunk Line 
Roads, Inclusive of Freight and Passenger Operation.”’ 


AUTOMATIC MOTOR CONTROL FOR DIRECT-CURRENT MOTORS 
Arthur C. Eastwood Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1519-1537 
Advantages of automatic control over manual and description of 


various types of series current-limit controllers, with curves and data 
on their actual performance in operation. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 15 


Discusston, pp. 1538-1545, by Messrs. E. J. Murphy, Arthur C. East- 
wood, Ragner Wikander and Theodore Varney. 
Experience in the design of series current-control contactors. 


THE ECONOMICAL DESIGN OF DIRECT-CURRENT ELECTROMAGNETS 
R. Wikander Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2019-2051 


General formulas for pull of plunger,type electromagnets. Analysis of 
the design for minimum cost and minimum energy loss in plunger magnets 
for different classes of continuous and intermittent service. Formulas 
and diagrams developed for direct solution of the problem of selecting 
flux, density and dimensions. 

Discussion, pp. 2052-2054, by Messrs. Frank F. Fowle and Charles R. 
Moore. ~ 

Design of electromagnets for light duty. Use of polar enlargements for 
increasing the pull. 


WAVE SHAPE OF CURRENTS IN AN INDIVIDUAL ROTOR CONDUCTOR OF A 
SINGLE-PHASE INDUCTION MOTOR 


H. Weichsel Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2103-2124 


Analysis of wave shapes of rotor currents by resolving rotor field into 
two components at right angles to each other. 

Discussion, pp. 2125-2126, by Messrs. Theodore Hoock and H. Weichsel. 

Relation between no-load and magnetizing currents of single-phase 
induction motor. 


CHOICE OF ROTOR DIAMETER AND PERFORMANCE OF POLYPHASE 
INDUCTION MOTORS 

Theodore Hoock Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2127-2158 

Development of a rational method for determining the relations 
between the mechanical dimensions and the performance characteristics 
of polyphase induction motors. Method for laying out a line of induction 
motors. 

Discussion, pp. 2159-2166, by Messrs. E. F. W. Alexanderson, C. J. 
Fechheimer, 5S. Haar, J. D. Nies and Theodore Hoock. 


A THEORY OF COMMUTATION AND ITS APPLICATION TO INTERPOLE 
MACHINES. 

B. G. Lamme Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2359-2404 
Development of theory of commutation with method of calculation 

based on fundamental law of electromagnetic induction. Analysis of 

various fluxes and their effect on commutation. Design of interpoles. 
Discussion, pp. 2405-2431, by Messrs. H. F. T. Erben, George L. 

Hoxie, H. M. Hobart, Malcom MacLaren, C. A. Adams, C. F. Scott, 

_James Burke, R. B. Treat, C. E. Wilson, and B. ‘G. Lamme. 
Theoretical and experimental methods of studying commutation. 


MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF IRON AT FREQUENCIES UP TO 200,090 CYCLES 
E. F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2433-2448 

Measurements of magnetizing core loss and skin effect at high fre- 
quencies. Method of measuring power at high frequency. 


16 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Relation between the various factors and frequency plotted as curves. 

Discussion, pp. 2449-2454, by Messrs. Harold Pender, B. A. Behrend, 
Charles P. Steinmetz, Reginald A. Fessenden, and F. B. Silsbee. 

Behavior of iron at high frequency. 


METHODS OF VARYING THE SPEED OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS 
Gus A. Maier Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2455-2484 


Classification of types of varying and adjustable speed alternating- 
current motors. Comprehensive description of various types of speed 
control for induction and commutator motors, including rheostatic 
compensator, brush shifting, pole changing, concatenation, frequency 
changer and regulating motors. j : 

Discussion, pp. 2485-2494, by Messrs, H. W. Buck, R. N. Dickinson, 
W.N. Smith, G. A. Maier, C. J. Fechheimer, B. G. Lamme, C. P. Stein- 
metz and C. O. Mailloux. 

Description of additional methods of speed variation. 


11. POWER PLANTS 


COMMENTS ON FIXED COSTS IN INDUSTRIAL POWER PLANTS 
John C. Parker Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 637-652 


Analysis of fixed charges in isolated plants, covering investment, 
insurance, interest, depreciation, obsolescence, supervision, profit, real 
estate and space. Definition of marginal principle of figuring fixed cost.s 
Development of equation for amortization, Estimated and actual cost of 
energy production in isolated plants compared with central station 
service. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Aldis E. Hibner on 
“The Cost of Industrial Power.”’ 


THE COST OF INDUSTRIAL POWER 


Aldis E. Hibner Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 653-664 


Brief consideration of the various factors that enter into the cost of 
energy production in isolated steam and gas producer plants. Effect of 
factory heating on cost of energy production. Investment, fixed charges 
and operating charges for heating plant, steam power plant and gas 
producer plant for a given industrial installation. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by John C. Parker on ‘‘ Comments 
on Fixed Costs in Industrial Power Plants ’’) pp., 665-727, by Messrs. A. 
M. Dudley, E. Richards, Ivar Lundgaard, A. S. L. Barnes, A. E. Hibner, 
A. L. Mudge, Percival Robert Moses, David B. Rushmore, R. P. Bolton, 
Arthur Williams, Parker H. Kemble, H: H. Edgerton, C. M. Ripley, 
H. W. Peck, John H. Norris, Richard H. Tillman, W. S. Timmis, Stone- 
wall Tompkins, F. G. Gasche, William B. Jackson, R. Tschentscher, 
C. A. Graves, Frank F. Fowle, H. G. Gille, Thomas M. Gibbes, R. Norsa, 
Henry D. Jackson, Mr. Kelly, John West, C. A. Adams, J. F. Vaughan, 
Mr. Cook, Thomas M. Roberts, F. M. Gunby, J. C. Parker and Aldis E. 
Hibner. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 17 


General remarks on the cost of energy production in isolated plants. 
Estimates and actual figures on the investment cost and operation expense 
of steam and gas-engine plants. 


TRANSMISSION APPLIED TO IRRIGATION 
O. H. Ensign and James M. Gaylord Vol, xxx—1911, pp. 803-834 


Detailed description of the Minidoka and Salt River Projects of the 
Reclamation Service covering power houses, transmission lines and 
pumping stations. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by R. J. C. Wood on 
“Transmission Systems from the Operating Standpoint.”’ 


THE USE OF POWER-LIMITING REACTANCES WITH LARGE TURBO- 
ALTERNATORS 


R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. Schweitzer Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1143-1194 


Detailed account of exhaustive tests. made to determine the action 
of reactors in the leads of turbo-generators under various conditions, with 
respect to the effect on the generators, on the secondary apparatus and 
on the stability of the system. Oscillograms of currents and e.m.fs. are 
given for each test. Bibliography. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Charles P. Steinmetz 
on ‘“ Development of the Modern Central Station.’’ 


° 


DEVELOPMENT OF THE MODERN CENTRAL STATION 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1213-1225 


nebo sketch of the development of modern alternating-current station. 
Uses to which reactors can be put in localizing disturbance in different 
parts of the system and improving parallel operation of units. Electro- 
mechanical synchronizing of distant stations. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. 
Schweitzer, ‘‘ The Use of Power-Limiting Reactances with Large Turbo- 
Alternators’? and paper by E. B. Merriam on ‘“‘Some Recent 
Tests of Oil Circuit Breakers ’’), pp. 1226-1249, by Messrs. John W. Lieb, 
Jr., M. H. Collbohm, D. B. Rushmore, C. W. Stone, B. G. Lamme, W. L. 
Waters, J. J. Frank, Louis A. Ferguson, R. B. Williamson, Clarence P. 
Fowler, P. Junkersfeld and C. P. Steinmetz. 

General remarks on problems in operation of very large central stations, 
with special reference to the use of reactance in the circuits. 


12. PARALLEL OPERATION 


DEVELOPMENT OF THE MODERN CENTRAL STATION 


Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1213-1225 


Short sketch of the development of modern alternating-current station. 
Uses to which reactors can be put in localizing disturbance in different 
; parts of the system and improving parallel operation of units. Electro- 
mechanical synchronizing of distant stations. 
Discussion, (including that of paper by R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. 


18 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Schweitzer, ‘‘ The Use of Power-Limiting Reactances with Large Turbo- 
Alternators’ and paper by E. B. Merriam on ‘‘ Some Recent Tests of 
Oil Circuit Breakers’), pp. 1226-1249, by Messrs. John W. Lieb, Jr., M. 
H. Collbohm, D. B. Rushmore, C. W. Stone, B. G. Lamme, W. L. Waters, 
J. J. Frank, Louis A. Ferguson, R. B. Williamson, Clarence P. Fowler, 
P. Junkersfeld and C. P. Steinmetz. 

General remarks on problems in operation of very large central stations, 
with special reference to the use of reactance in the circuits. 


13. TRANSMISSION LINES 


OPEN ATMOSPHERE AND DRY TRANSFORMER OIL AS HIGH-VOLTAGE 
INSULATORS 


Harris J. Ryan Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1-76 


Analytical study of corona formation and the factors which influence 
it, covering practically all the work that has thus far been done by the 
author and other investigators. Complete references to all original work. 
Brief explanation of the ionization theory, which is applied to explain the 
phenomena that take place on high-tension lines. Laws‘ formulated for 
calculation of critical e.m.f. under all conditions. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by E. L. West on “ High- 
Voltage Line Loss Tests made on the 100-Kilovolt, 60-Cycle, 180-Mile 
Transmission Line of the Central Colorado Power Company.”’ 

© 
HIGH-VOLTAGE LINE LOSS TESTS MADE ON THE 100-KILOVOLT, 60-CYCLE, 
180-MILE TRANSMISSION LINE OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER 
COMPANY : 
E. L. West Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 77-85 

Communication to Professor Ryan by the author, giving detailed 
results of tests on extensive transmission system with and without load. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by Harris J. Ryan on ‘‘ Open 
Atmosphere and Dry Transformer Oil as High-Voltage Insulators ”’), 
pp. 86-130, by Messrs. M.I. Pupin, G. Faccioli, C. P. Steinmetz, William 
S. Stanley, J. B. Whitehead, Erich Hausmann, Samuel Sheldon, H. W. 
Fisher, J. E. Noeggerath, A. E. Kennelly, F. W. Peek, Jr., George L. 


Hoxie, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., J. A. Koontz, C. E. Bennett, and Harris J. 


Ryan. General discussion of Professor Ryan’s conclusion. Criticism 
and defense of electron theory. Formula for practical corona calculations 
on long distance lines. Method of constructing minute needle points. Re- 
lation between conductivity of gases and vapors and corona phenomena. 


Results of tests on high-tension lines and also with short spark discharge 
apparatus. 


DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND TEST OF AN ARTIFICIAL TRANSMISSION LINE 


J. H. Cunningham Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 245-256 


Detailed account of the mode of construction. 
and e.m.f. when the line was opened and closed. 


Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by G. Faccioli on ‘‘ Tests 
of Losses on High-Tension Lines.”’ 


Oscillograms of current 


Pres 


“SYNOPTICAL INDEX 19 


PROTECTION OF ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION LINES 
E. E. F. Creighton Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 257-326 


Comprehensive discussion of line disturbances due to arcing ground 
on insulated, dead-grounded and resistance-grounded systems, with 
description of arcing-ground suppressor and tests to which it has been 
submitted. Detailed treatment of line capacity under various conditions 
of grounding. General discussion of lightning disturbances. Theory of 
lightning induction. Elements in the design of transmission line that 
affect lightning disturbances. Arcing-over tests on insulators under 
various conditions. Profusely illustrated with photographs of arcs between 
lines, in horn gaps and over insulators, with oscillograms and circuit 
diagrams of the tests and of the arc suppressors. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by G. Faccioli on ‘“ Tests 
of Losses on High Tension Lines.”’ 


TESTS OF ARCING-GROUND SUPPRESSOR ON THE 40,000-VOLT SYSTEM OF 
THE SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY 
: C. I. Burkholder and R. H. Marvin Vol. xxx—1911,.pp. 327-335 


Description of tests of automatic insulator protector with high-power 
arcs for insulator. Circuit diagrams, photographs of arcs and oscillograms 
of potential rise and current. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by G. Faccioli on “ Tests 
of Losses on High-Tension Lines.” 


TESTS OF LOSSES ON HIGH-TENSION LINES 
G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 337-355 


Description of corona loss tests on lines of Central Colorado Power 
Company. Methods of measurements. Results in form of curves and 
in tables. Experimental law of corona loss. Equation of actual corona 
e.m.f. as function of spacing and diameter. 

Discussion. (including that of paper by J.H. Cunningham on “ Design, 
Construction and Test of an Artificial Transmission Line;’”’ paper by 
E. E. F. Creighton on ‘“ Protection of Electrical Transmission Lines ”’ 
and paper by C. I. Burkholder and R. H. Marvin on ‘ Tests of Arcing 
Ground Suppressor on the 40,000-Volt System of the Southern Power 
Company ’’), pp. 356-365, by Messrs. Ralph D. Mershon, Charles 5. 
Ruffner, L. C. Nicholson, Taylor Reed, J. L. R. Hayden, F. W. Peek, Jr., 
L. T. Robinson, Charles F. Scott, G. Faccioli and E. E. F. Creighton. 

Discussion of corona loss and critical e.m.f. laws. Experimental 
determinations. Actual distribution of insulator flash-overs among the 
three conductors of a three-phase line. Protection of lines from insulator 


spill-overs. 


ECONOMIC LIMITATIONS TO AGGREGATION OF POWER SYSTEMS 
Robert A. Philip Vol. xxx—1i911, pp. 597-630 


General discussion of the principles underlying the success of electric 
distribution of energy. Power diagrams developed for inter-connected 
distribution systems in which the e.m.f. at all generating and receiving sta- 
tions is maintained constant by varying the reactive power in each receiving 


es 


20 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


station. Numerical examples showing application of the line- performance 
equations and vector diagrams. . 

Discussion, pp. 631-636, by Messrs. A. E. Kennelly, N. T. Wilcox, 
E. A. Ekern, Edw. N. Lake, and R. P. Jackson. 

General remarks on practicability of maintaining constant potential 
in all parts of a large system. P 


TRANSMISSION APPLIED TO IRRIGATION 
O. H. Ensign and James M. Gaylord * Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 803-834 


Detailed description of the Minidoka and Salt River Projects of the 
Reclamation Service, covering power houses, transmission lines and 
pumping stations. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by R. J. C. Wood on 
‘Transmission Systems from the Operating Standpoint.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS FROM THE OPERATING STANDPOINT 
R. J. C. Wood Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 835-841 


Requirements of good service on high-tension transmission systems: 
regulation, reliability. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by O. H. Ensign and James M. 
Gaylord on ‘ Transmission Applied to Irrigation’), pp. 842-855, by 
Messrs. A. H. Babcock, C. L. Cory, E. F. Scattergood, Paul M. Downing, | 
J. A. Lighthipe, Ralph Bennett, C. W. Koiner, L.. J. Corbett, - Re We 
Sorensen, Ralph D. Mershon, O. H. Ensign and R. J. C. Wood. 

Capital charges against irrigated land. Reliability of transmission 
systems. 


CONTINUITY OF SERVICE IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
Magnus T. Crawford ; Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1049-1071 


Brief description of Snoqualmie Falls transmission system, with outline 
of the general method of manipulation in the maintenance of service. 
Log of service interruptions covering period of four years and giving 
date, character, extent and cause of each disturbance. General discus- 
sion of causes of interruptions, and methods of avoiding them. 

Discussion, pp. 1072-1079, by Messrs. R. J. C. Wood, P. M. Downing, 
E. F. Scattergood, G. H. Stockbridge, R. W. Van Norden, C. O. Poole, 
Ralph Bennett, D. D. Morgan, W. B. Gump and M. T. Crawford. 

Current practice in the operation of high-tension transmission systems. 


ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS 

G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1803-1850 

Account of switching tests on 100,000-volt transmission system of the 
Great Western Power Company. Detailed discussion of large number of 
oscillograms. Recommendation for switching on high-tension systems. 
Appendix by W. W. Lewis on construction and operation of the photo- 
graphic attachment to the oscillograph. 

Discussion, pp. 1851-1856, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Max H. Coll- 
bohm, D. B. Rushmore and Perey H. Thomas. 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 21 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 
Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1989-1993 


General discussion of answers to a list of questions submitted by the 
High-Tension Committee to companies operating transmission systems 
at 80,000: volts or more. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT WESTERN POWER COMPANY 
J. P. Jollyman Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1994-1997 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. ; 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY 
W.S. Lee Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1998-2001 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“ Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT FALLS POWER COMPANY 
M. Hebgen Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2002-2006 


- Answers to the list of questions submitted by’ the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission: System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER COMPANY 


P. T. Hanscom Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2007-2014 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. Detailed log of lightning disturbances. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. P. Jollyman on “ Transmis- 
sion System of the Great Western Power Company,” paper by W. S. Lee 
on ‘‘ Transmission System of the Southern Power Company ” and paper 
by M. Hebgen on ‘‘ Transmission System of the Great Falls Power Com- 
pany ’’), pp. 2015-2018, by Messrs. M. H. Collbohm, Paul M. Lincoln, 
L. C. Nichclson, N. J. Neall, J. F. Vaughan and Hugh Pastoriza. 

General remarks on the protection of high-tension systems. 


‘SOLUTION TO PROBLEMS IN SAGS AND SPANS 


Wm. Le Roy Robertson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2209-2228 


Comparison of the different types of equations for solution of “sag 
problems. System of charts and tables for facilitating the calculation 
of sag in transmission wires. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Pender and Thomson on 
“The Mechanical and Electrical Characteristics of Transmission Lines.” 


22 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


SAG CALCULATIONS FOR SUSPENDED WIRES 
Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2229-2239 


Short method of calculating sag. Description of use of method. Mathe- 
matical. development of formulas. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Pender and Thomson on 
“The Mechanical and Electrical Characteristics of Transmission Lines.” 


THE MECHANICAL AND ELECTRIC CHARACTERISTICS OF TRANSMISSION 


LINES 
Harold Pender and H. F. Thomson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2241-2279 


Equations and charts for.calculation of the mechanical design of wire 
spans under various conditions of climate and topography. Equations, 
charts and tables for the calculation of the electrical performance of 
various types of transmission lines. : 

Discussion, (including ‘‘ Solution to Problems in Sags and Spans ”’ and 
“Sag Calculations for Suspended Wires ’’), pp. 2280-2302, by Messrs. 
Paul M. Lincoln, L. C. Nicholson, N. J. Neall, Jean Bart Balcomb, W. 
L. R. Robertson, H. F. Thomson, H. V. Carpenter, Hugh Pastoriza, 
R. S. Brown, Frank F. Fowle, R. C. Darrow, P. H. Thomas, Harold 
Pender and H. F. Thomson. 

Calculation and design of transmission lines. Experience as to effects of 
wind, sleet and ice upon lines. ; 


THE HIGH-EFFICIENCY SUSPENSION INSULATOR 
A. O. Austin Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2303-2328 


Mathematical study of the efficiency of different shapes and types of 
suspension insulator. Judging an insulator by flash-over tests. Design 
of insulators for high tension. 

Discussion, pp. 2329-2335, by Messrs. E. E. F. Creighton, Paul M. 
Lincoln, P. H. Thomas, E. M. Hewlett, N. J. Neall, A. O. Austin. 

Behavior of insulators under high-tension stresses. Distribution of 
stresses between several parts of link insulators. 


TABLES OF HYPERBOLIC FUNCTIONS IN REFERENCE TO LONG ALTERNATING- 
CURRENT TRANSMISSION LINES 


A. E. Kennelly Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2495-2506 
Formula for use with hyperbolic functions in calculation of long 
transmission lines. Tables calculated for this purpose. Examples of the 
use of the formulas and tables in calculation of different types of lines. 
Bibliography of tables of complex hyperbolic functions. 
No discussion. 


14, ELECTRIC SERVICE DISTURBANCES AND 
PROTECTION 


PROTECTION OF ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION LINES 
E. E. F. Creighton ‘ Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 257-326 


Comprehensive discussion of line disturbances due to arcing ground 
on insulated, dead grounded and resistance grounded system, with 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 23 


description of arcing ground suppressor and tests to which it has been 
submitted. Detailed treatment of line capacity under various condi- 
tions of grounding. General discussion of lightning disturbances. Theory 
of lightning induction. Elements in the design of transmission line that 
affect lightning disturbances. Arcing-over tests on insulators under 
various conditions. Profusely illustrated with photographs of arcs 
between lines, in horn gaps and over insulators, with oscillograms and 
circuit diagram of the tests and of the are suppressors. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by G. Faccioli on “ Tests 
of Losses on High-Tension Lines.” 


TESTS OF ARCING GROUND SUPPRESSOR ON THE 40,000-VOLT SYSTEM OF 
THE SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY 


C. I. Burkholder and R. H. Marvin Vol. xxx 1911, pp. 327-335 


Description of tests of automatic insulator protector with high-powe1 
arcs for insulator. Circuit diagrams, photographs of arcs and oscillo- 
grams of potential rise and current. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by G. Faccioli on ‘‘ Tests 
of Losses on High-Tension Lines 


CONTINUITY OF SERVICE IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
Magnus T. Crawford Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1049-1071 


Brief description of Snoqualmie Falls transmission system, with outline 
of the general method of manipulation in the maintenance of service. 
Log of service interruptions covering period of four years and giving date, 
character, extent and cause of each disturbance. General discussion of 
causes of interruptions, and methods of avoiding them. 

Discussion, pp. 1072-1079, by Messrs. R. J. C. Wood, P. M. Downing, 
E. F. Scattergood, G. H. Stockbridge, R. W. Van Norden, C. O. Poole, 
Ralph Bennett, D. D. Morgan, W. B. Gump and M. T. Crawford. 

Current practice in the operation of high-tension transmission systems. 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 

Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1989-1993 
General discussion of answers to a list of questions submitted by the 
High-Tension Committee to companies operating transmission systems 


at 80,000 volts or more. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT WESTERN POWER COMPANY 
J. P. Jollyman Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1994-1997 

Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 


volts. 
Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 


“ Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY 
W. S. Lee : Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1998-2001 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High- Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 


volts. 


24 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT FALLS POWER COMPANY 
M. Hebgen Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2002-2006 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. ° 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
‘Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER COMPANY 
P. T. Hanscom Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2007-2014 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-T ension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. Detailed log of lightning disturbances. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. P. Jollyman on * Transmis- 
sion System of the Great Western Power Company,” paper by W.S. Lee on 
‘Transmission System of the Southern Power Company ’’ and paper by 
M. Hebgen on “ Transmission System of the Great Falls Power Com- 
pany ”’), pp. 2015-2018, by Messrs. M. H. Collbohm, Paul M. Lincoln, 
L. C. Nicholson, N. J. Neall, J. F. Vaughan and Hugh Pastoriza. + 

General remarks on the protection of high-tension systems. 


15. DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS ‘ 


ADVANTAGES OF UNIFIED ELECTRIC SYSTEMS COVERING LARGE 


TERRITORIES 
William B. Jackson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 131-151 


Statement of factors that make it economically possible to serve a 
large territory from one comprehensive transmission system. Maps and 
brief abstracts of a large number of hydroelectric and steam-electric 
distribution systems which cover extensive areas. Discussion of the 
advantages that a comprehensive system has over a large number of 
isolated small plants from the standpoint of economy and good service’ 

Discussion, pp. 152-165, by Messrs. P. Junkersfeld, W. L. Robb, F. 
Darlington, George H. Lukes, Norman T. Wilcox, Philip Torchio, L. L. 
Elden, Charles P. Steinmetz and William B. Jackson. General discussion 
of the advantages of a comprehensive distribution system over large 
territory and some of the factors that bear upon the success of such an 
undertaking. Actual comparison of the operation of the New York 
Edison plant with the London, Municipal and Private installations. 
Analysis of actual results obtained by the Boston Edison Company in 
the operation of a suburban system. 


ECONOMIC LIMITATIONS TO AGGREGATION OF POWER SYSTEMS 
Robert A. Philip Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 597-630 


General discussion of the principles underlying the success of electric 
distribution of energy. Power diagram developed for inter-connected 


distribution systems in which the e.m.f. at all generating receiving stations - 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX ‘ 25 


is maintained constant by varying the reactive power in each receiving 
station. Numerical examples showing application of the line performance 
equations and vector diagrams. 

Discussion, pp. 631-636, by Messrs. A. E. Kennelly, N. T. Wilcox, 
E.. A. Ekern, Edw. N. Lake and R. P. Jackson. 

General remarks on practicability of maintaining constant potential 
in all parts of a large system. 


CONTINUITY OF SERVICE IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
Magnus T. Crawford Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1049-1071 


‘Brief description of Snoqualmie Falls transmission system, with 
outline of the general method of manipulation in the maintenance of 
service. Log of service interruptions covering period of four years and 
giving. date, character, extent and causes of each disturbance. General 
discussion of causes of interruptions, and methods of avoiding them. 

Discussion, pp. 1072-1079, by Messrs. R. J. C. Wood, P. M. Downing, 
E. F. Scattergood, G. H. Stockbridge, R. W. Van Norden, C. O. Poole, 
Ralph Bennett, D. D. Morgan, W. B. Gump and M. T. Crawford. 

Current practice in the operation of high-tension transmission systems. 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION IN REINFORCED CONCRETE 
C. Edward Magnusson and C. H. Smith Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2055-2079 


Account of experimental investigation of damage done by stray cur- 
rents in reinforced concrete. Study of various methods of protecting 
reinforcement from corrosion. 

Discussion, pp. 2080-2101, by Messrs. Burton McCollum, E. W. 
Stevenson, G. D. Shepardson, George A. Hoadley, A. S. Langsdorf, 
Maxmilian Toch, Guy F. Shaffer, Harry Barker and W. L. Upson. 

Description of similar investigations by the Bureau of Standards and 
others. Criticism of the authors’ methods, especially of the high e.m.fs. 
used. Account of actual example of corrosion in a building. 


THE APPLICATION OF CURRENT TRANSFORMERS TO THREE-PHASE CIRCUITS 
J. R. Craighead Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2167-2179 


Analysis of the performance of series transformers with secondaries 
interconnected in various ways, the primaries being included in poly- 
phase circuits. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Messrs. E. C. Stone 
and R.-W. Atkinson on ‘‘ Cost of Transformer Losses.” 
COST OF TRANSFORMER LOSSES 


E. C. Stone and R. W. Atkinson E Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2181-2199 


Classification of transformer losses and complete analytical discussion 
of the cost of various losses under various operating conditions. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. R. Craighead on “The 
Application of Current Transformers to Three-Phase Circuits ”, pp. 
2200-2207, by Messrs. A. H. Pikler, W. C. Smith, E. A. Wagner, H. B. 


Gear and R. W. Atkinson. 
Progress in transformer design in a period of 12 years. Importance of 


long life as compared with energy efficiency. © 


26 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


16. CONTROL, REGULATION AND SWITCHING 


HIGH-VOLTAGE LINE LOSS TESTS MADE ON THE 100-KILOVOLT, 60-Cycle, 
180-MILE TRANSMISSION LINE OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER 


COMPANY 
E. L. West ; Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 77-85 


Communication to Professor Ryan by the author, giving detailed 
results of tests on extensive transmission system with and without load. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by Harris J. Ryan on “ Open 
Atmosphere and Dry Transformer Oil as High Voltage Insulators ’’), 
pp. 86-130, by Messrs. M. I. Pupin, G. Faccioli, C. P. Steinmetz, William 
S. Stanley, J. B. Whitehead, Erich Hausmann, Samuel Sheldon, H. W. 
Fisher, J. E. Noeggerath, A. E. Kennelly, F. W. Peek, Jr., George L. 
Hoxie, A. B. Hendricks, Jr., J. A. Koontz, C. E. Bennett and Harris J. 
Ryan. General discussion of Professor Ryan’s conclusions. Criticism 
and defense of electron theory. Formula for practical corona calculations 
on long distance lines. Method of constructing minute needle points. 


Relation between conductivity of gases and vapors and corona phe- . 


nomena. Results of tests on high-tension lines and also with short, 
spark discharge apparatus. 


THE REGULATION OF DISTRIBUTING TRANSFORMERS 
C. E. Allen Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 415-426 


Comparison of a number of the most important regulation formulas. 
Effect of different electric and magnetic constants upon regulation char- 
acteristics with varying power-factor. Modern winding construction 
_ for good regulation. - 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by F. C. Green on ‘‘ Prob- 
lems in the Operation of Transformers.” 


OIL CIRCUIT BREAKERS 
E. B. Merriam Vol. xxx —1911 pp. 495-502 


Brief discussion of the functions and operative characteristics of auto- 
matic oil switches, and of factors which influence their performance. 

Discussion, pp. 503-527, by Messrs. B. C. Jamieson, E. M. Hewlett, 
L. C. Nicholson, W. L. R. Emmet, R. D. Mershon, C. J. Barrow, H. W. 
Cheney, A. S. McAllister, Charles F. Scott, C. P. Steinmetz, H. L. 
Smith, E. W. Rice, Jr., E. B. Merriam, Chester Lichtenberg, A. G. 
Collis and E. Zachrisson. 

Experience and tests with oil circuit breakers opening short-circuits. 
Theoretical analysis of the influence of different kinds of load upon 
rupturing capacity of oil switches. 


VOLTAGE REGULATION OF GENERATORS 
Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 555-571 
Outline of requirements of generator and exciters essential to successful 
application of automatic regulation. Description of Tirrill regulator 


applied to alternating-current and direct-current systems. Examples of 
very large installations. 


H. A. Laycock 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 27 


Discussion, pp. 572-573, by Messrs. H. G. Reist, Carl J. Fechheimer 
and E. F. Alexanderson. 


Desirability of poor inherent regulation of large generators. 


ECONOMIC LIMITATIONS TO AGGREGATION OF POWER SYSTEMS 
Robert A. Philip Vol. xxx—1911 pp. 597-630 


General discussion of the principles underlying the success of electric 
distribution of energy. Power diagram developed for inter-connected 
distribution systems in which the e.m.f. at all generating receiving 
stations is maintained constant by varying the reactive power in each 
receiving station. Numerical examples showing application of the line 
performance equations and vector diagrams. 

Discussion, pp. 631-636, by Messrs. A. E. Kennelly, N. T. Wilcox, 
E. A. Ekern, Edw. N. Lake, R. P._Jackson. 

General remarks on practicability of maintaining constant poesia 
in all parts of a large system. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS FROM THE OPERATING STANDPOINT 
R. J. C. Wood Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 835-841 


Requirements of good service on high-tension transmission systems— 
regulation, reliability. 

Discussion, (including that pf paper of O. H. Ensign and James M. 
Gaylord on ‘‘ Transmission Applied to Irrigation ’’), pp. 842-855, by 
Messrs. A. H. Babcock, C. L. Cory, E. F. Scattergood, Paul M. Downing, 
J. A. Lighthipe, Ralph Bennett, C. W. Koiner, L. J. Corbett, R. W. 
Sorensen, Ralph D. Mershon, O. H. Ensign and R. J. C. Wood. 

Capital charges against irrigated land. Reliability of transmission 
systems. ¢ 


CONTINUITY OF SERVICE IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
Magnus T. Crawford ; Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1049-1071 


Brief description of Snoqualmie Falls transmission system, with outline 
of the general’ method of manipulation in the maintenance of service. 
Log of service interruptions covering period of four years and giving date, 
character, extent and cause of each disturbance. General discussion of 
causes of interruptions, and methods of avoiding them. 

Discussion, pp. 1072-1079, by Messrs. R. J. C. Wood, P. M. Downing 
E. F. Scattergood, G. H. Stockbridge, R. W. Van Norden, C. O. Poole, 
Ralph Bennett, D. D. Morgan, W. B. Gump and M. T. Crawford. 

Current practice in the operation of high-tension transmission systems. 


THE USE OF POWER-LIMITING REACTANCES WITH LARGE TURBO- 
ALTERNATORS 


R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. Schweitzer Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1143-1194 


Detailed account of exhaustive tests made to determine the action of 
reactors in the leads of turbo-generators under various conditions, with 
respect to the effect on the generators, on the secondary apparatus and 
on the stability of the system. Oscillograms of currents and e.m. fs.. are 
given for each test. Bibliography. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Charles P. Steinmetz 

‘‘ Development of the Modern Central Station.” 


28 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


SOME RECENT TESTS OF OIL CIRCUIT BREAKERS 
E. B. Merriam Vol. xxx—1911 pp. 1195-1212 


Account of short-circuit rupturing tests with oil switch fed from a 
12,000-kw. turbo-generator. Records of oil pressure generated, also 
e.m.f. and current oscillograms. Construction of oil switch to utilize 
the explosion energy. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Dr. Charles P. Stein- 
metz on “ Development of the Modern Central Station.” 


DEVELOPMENT OF THE MODERN CENTRAL STATION 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1213-1225 


Short sketch of the development of modern alternating-current station. 
Uses to which reactors can be put in localizing disturbance in different 


parts of the system and improving parallel operation of units. Electro- 


mechanical synchronizing of distant stations. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by R. F. Schuchardt and E. O. 
Schweitzer ‘‘ The Use of Power-Limiting Reactances with Large Turbo- 
Alternators and paper by E. B. Merriam on ‘‘ Some Recent Tests of 
Oil Circuit Breakers”), pp. 1226-1249, by Messrs. John W. Lieb, Jr., 
M. H. Collbohm, D. B. Rushmore, C. W. Stone, B. G. Lamme, W. L. 
Waters, J. J. Frank, Louis A. Ferguson, R. B. Williamson, Clarence P. 
Fowler, P. Junkersfeld and C. P. Steinmetz. 

General remarks on problems in operation of very large central stations, 
with special reference to'the use of reactance in the circuits. 


AUTOMATIC MOTOR CONTROL FOR DIRECT-CURRENT MOTORS 
Arthur C. Eastwood Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1519-1537 


Advantages of automatic control over manual and description of 
various types of series current-limit controllers, with curves and data 
on their actual performance in operation. 

Discussion, pp. 1538-1545, by Messrs. E. J. Murphy, Arthur C. East- 
wood, Ragner Wikander and Theodore Varney. 

Experience in the design of series current-control contactors. 


SOME LIMITATIONS OF RHEOSTATIC CONTROL 
G. R. Radley and L. L. Tatum Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1547-1561 


Discussion of the factors that influence the design of resistors for 
different classes of service. Data on heating and limiting temperatures 
for resistance terminals and contacts. 

No discussion. 


ELEVATOR CONTROL 

T. E. Barnum Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1563-1583 

Brief description of the construction and performance of typical passen- 
ger elevator electric motive power equipment. Photographs, connections 
diagrams and current-time performance curves. 

Discussion, pp. 1584-1585, by Messrs. Fred J. Newman, S. N. Clarkson, 
Theodore Varney and T. E. Barnum. 

Efficiency of worm gears. 


~~ ey 
. \ 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 29 


ELECTRIC LINE OSCILLATIONS 
G. Faccioli Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1803-1850 


Account of switching tests on 100,000-volt transmission system of the 
Great Western Power Company. Detailed discussion of large numbers 
of oscillograms. Recommendation for switching on high-tension systems. 
Appendix by W. W. Lewis on construction and operation of the photo- 
graphic attachment to the oscillograph. 

Discussion, pp. 1851-1856, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Max H. Coll-° 
bohm, D. B. Rushmore and Percy H. Thomas. 


HIGH-TENSION TRANSMISSION 
Percy H. Thomas Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1989-1993 


General discussion of answers to a list of questions submitted by the 
High-Tension Committee to companies operating transmission systems at 
80,000 volts or more. 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT WESTERN POWER COMPANY 
J. P Jollyman ‘ Vol. xxx—1911 pp. 1994-1997 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.”’ 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE SOUTHERN POWER COMPANY 
W.S. Lee Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1998-2001 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. . 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE GREAT FALLS POWER COMPANY 
M. Hebgen Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2002-2006 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by P. T. Hanscom on 
“Transmission System of the Central Colorado Power Company.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO POWER COMPANY 
P. T. Hanscom ; . Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2007-2014 


Answers to the list of questions submitted by the High-Tension Com- 
mittee covering line construction, protection and operation at 100,000 
volts. Detailed log of lightning disturbances. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by J. P. Jollyman on ‘‘ Transmis- 
sion System of the Great Western Power Company,” paper by W. 5. Lee 


30 ; SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


on “ Transmission System of the Southern Power Company,” and paper 

by M. Hebgen on ‘‘ Transmission System of the Great Falls Power 

Company "’), pp. 2015-2018, by Messrs. M. H. Collbohm, Paul M. 

Lincoln, L. C. Nicholson, N. J. Neall, J. F. Vaughan and Hugh Pastoriza. 
General remarks on the protection of high-tension systems. 


THE MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF TRANSMISSION 
LINES 
Harold Pender and H. F. Thomson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2241-2279 


Equations and charts for calculation of the mechanical design of wire 
spans under various conditions of climate and topography. Equations, 
charts and tables for the calculation of the electrical performance of 
various types of transmission lines. 

Discussion, (including ‘‘ Solution to Problems in Sags and Spans ”’ and 
‘“Sag Calculations for Suspended Wires "’), pp. 2280-2302, by Messrs. 
Paul M. Lincoln, L. C. Nicholson, N. J. Neall, Jean Bart Balcomb, 
W. L. R. Robertson, H. F. Thomson, H. V. Carpenter, Hugh Pastoriza, 
R. S. Brown, Frank F. Fowle, R. C. Darrow, P. H. Thomas, Harold 
Pender and H. F. Thomson. : 

Calculation and design of transmission lines. Experience as to effects 
of wind, sleet and ice upon lines. 


METHODS OF VARYING THE SPEED OF ALTERNATING-CURRENT MOTORS 
Gus A. Maier Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2455-2484 


Classification of types of varying and adjustable speed alternating- 
current motors. Comprehensive description of various types of speed 
control for induction and commutator motors, including rheostatic, 
compensator, brush shifting, pole changing, concatenation, frequency 
changer and regulating motors. 

Discussion, pp. 2485-2494, by Messrs H. W. Buck, R. N. Dickinson, 
W.N. Smiths G. A. Maier, C. J. Fechheimer, B. G. Lamme,'C. P. 
Steinmetz and C. O. Mailloux. 

Description of additional methods of speed variation. 


17. TRACTION 


SOME RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN RAILWAY TELEPHONY 
Gregory Brown Vol. xxx—1911, 1007-1036 


Outline of requirements of train dispatching service, messenger service 
and block service. Description of various telephone systems in use on 
railroads. Photographs of apparatus and circuit diagrams. 

Discussion, pp. 1037-1048, by Messrs. Kempster B. Miller, L. B. 
Cramer, Ralph Bennett, Ralph W. Pope, C. F. Elwell, S. G. McMeen, 
J. A. Lighthipe, 5. J. Lisberger and Gregory Brown. 

Experience with telephony in operation of railway and transmission 
systems, 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 31 


INDUCTION MACHINES FOR HEAVY SINGLE PHASE MOTOR SERVICE 
E. F. W. Alexanderson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1357-1369 


Description, theory and performance characteristics of phase converter 
for changing single-phase to polyphase energy. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by William S. Murray on 
“ Electrification Analyzed, and Its Practical Application to Trunk Line 
Roads, Inclusive of Freight and Passenger Operation.”’ 


ELECTRICAL OPERATION OF THE WEST JERSEY AND SEASHORE RAILROAD 
B. F. Wood : Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1371-1390 


Brief description of electric system and equipment. Cost of construc- 
tion, maintenance and operation charges in detailed tabular form, and 
logs of repairs and train detentions. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by William S. Murray on 
“ Electrification Analyzed, and Its Practical Application to Trunk Line 
Roads, Inclusive of Freight and Passenger Operation.”’ 


ELECTRIFICATION ANALYZED AND ITS PRACTICAL APPLICATION TO TRUNK 
LINE ROADS, INCLUSIVE OFZFREIGHT AND PASSENGER OPERATION 


William S. Murray Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1391-1456 


Analysis of passenger, freight and switching service of steam locomo- 
tives. Performance and economy tests. Characteristics and advantages 
of electric locomotives for the same classes of service. Statistical record 
of operation of New Haven Road, covering train delays, power house, 
distribution systems and locomotives. Wiring diagrams and construc- 
tional drawings for locomotives and distribution system. Cost data for 
electrification of railroads. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by E. F. W. Alexanderson on 
“Induction Machines for. Heavy Single-Phase Motor Service’? and 
paper by B. F. Wood on ‘“ Electrical Operation of the West Jersey and 
Seashore Railroads’), pp. 1457-1518, by Messrs. Frank J. Sprague, 
Edwin B. Katte, L. C. Fritch, J. L. Woodbridge, Dugald C. Jackson, 
N. W. Storer, John W. Lieb, Jr., Charles F. Scott, E. F. W. Alexanderson, 
Philip Dawson, W. N. Smith, B. F. Wood, John B. Taylor, R. E. Hell- 
mund, C. P. Steinmetz, H. Graftio, Gisbert Kapp and W. S. Murray. 

General discussion of the problem of equipping trunk lines with electric 
motive power. Experience with direct-current and single-phase systems. 
Standardization of electric apparatus. 


ELECTROLYTIC CORROSION IN REINFORCED CONCRETE 
C. Edward Magnusson and C. H. Smith Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2055-2079 


Account of experimental investigation of damage done by stray currents 
in reinforced concrete. Study of various methods of protecting reinforce- 
ment from corrosion. 

Discussion, pp. 2080-2101, by Messrs. Burton McCollum, E. W. 
Stevenson, G. D. Shepardson, George A. Hoadley, A. S, Langsdorf, 
Maxmilian Toch, Guy F. Shaffer, Harry Barker and W. L. Upson. 

Description of similar investigations by the Bureau of Standards and 
others. Criticism of the author’s methods, especially of the high e.m.fs. 
used. Account of actual example of corrosion in a building. 


32 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


18. LIGHT, LIGHTING AND LAMPS 


THE COST OF ARC LIGHTING AND GENERAL SERVICE FROM MEDIUM AND 
SMALL SIZE MUNICIPAL OR PRIVATE PLANTS 
W. Edgar Reed Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1121-1133 


Analysis of cost of lighting small communities. Character of various 
items that enter into the construction and conditions which modify 
them. Actual cost of lighting different cities. 

No discussion. 


19. ELECTRICITY IN THE ARMY AND NAVY 


PROPOSED APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRIC SHIP PROPULSION 
W. L. R. Emmet Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 529-544 


Reasons why electric propulsion of ships is practicable. Description 
of two proposed turbo-electric installations for United States warships. 
Characteristic performance curves and economy of electric equipments. 

Discussion, pp. 545-554, by Messrs. C. P. Steinmetz, Gano Dunn, 
Maxwell W. Day, W. B. Potter, H. A. Mavor, and C. H. Peabody and 
HG knox: 

Power requirements of battleships and advantages of electric propulsion. 


20. MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRICITY 


MECHANICAL FORCES IN MAGNETIC FIELDS 
Charles P. Steinmetz Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 367-385 


Elementary theory of the energy transformation in plunger magnets, 
giving equations for the mechanical work and the efficiency. Brief 
mathematical consideration of the mechanical forces exerted by short- 
circuit currents in transformers, cables and general circuits. 

Discussion, pp. 386-413, by Messrs. A. S. McAllister, G. Faccioli, 
Cassius M. Davis, Mr. Harper, F. C. Green, G. J. Barrow, Henry 
Pikler, John J. Frank, Charles F. Scott, H. C. Cox, V. Karapetoff, K. 
Faye-Hansen, J. Murray Weed, H. B. Dwight, A. C. Zelewsky, E. Jasse 
and C. P. Steinmetz. 

_ General discussion of the mechanical forces exerted on short circuits in 
transformers, equations, tests and experience. Energy transformations 
in plunger magnets. 


PROPOSED APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRIC SHIP PROPULSION 
W.L. R. Emmet Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 529-544 


Reasons why electric propulsion of ships is practicable. Description 
of two proposed turbo-electric installations for United States warships. 
Characteristic performance curves and economy of electric equipments. 

Discussion, pp. 545-554, by Messrs C. P. Steinmetz, Gano Dunn, Max- 
well W. Day, W. B. Potter, H. A. Mavor, and C. H. Peabody and H. G. 
Knox. 


Power requirements of battleships and advantages of electric propul- 
sion. : 


alee 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 33 


FLYWHEEL LOAD EQUALIZER 
W.N. Motter and L. L. Tatum ‘ Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 729-739 


Description of a flywheel-generator installation designed to take the 
sudden peak loads encountered in the operation of ore bridges. Results 
of tests of power consumption and actual saving in the cost of handling 
the ore. 

No discussion. 


TRANSMISSION APPLIED TO IRRIGATION 
O. H. Ensign and James M. Gaylord Vol, xxx—1911, pp. 803-834 


- Detailed description of the Minidoka and Salt River Projects of the 
Reclamation Service, covering power houses, transmission lines and 
pumping stations. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by R. J. C. Wood on 
“ Transmission Systems from the Operating Standpoint.” 


TRANSMISSION SYSTEM FROM THE OPERATING STANDPOINT 
_ R. J. C. Wood Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 835-841 


Requirements of good service on high-tension transmission systems— 
regulation, reliability. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by O. H. Ensign and James M. 
Gaylord on ‘‘ Transmission Applied to Irrigation’), pp. 842-855, by 
Messrs. A. H. Babcock, C. L. Cory, E. F. Scattergood, Paul M. Downing, 
J. A. Lighthipe, Ralph Bennett, C. W. Koiner, L. J. Corbett, W. R. Soren- 
sen, Ralph D. Merson, O. H. Ensign and R. J. C. Wood. 

Capital charges against irrigated land. Reliability of transmission 
systems. 


THE REFINING OF IRON AND STEEL IN INDUCTION TYPE FURNACES 
C. F. Elwell Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 857-866 


Brief discussion of the relative merits of arc and induction furnaces 
and the leading characteristics of each. Analyses of steel produced and 
itemized cost of production in different sized induction furnaces. 

Discussion, pp. 867-871, by Messrs. R. J. C. Wood, R. W. Van Norden, 
Earl W. Paul, J. J. Frank, H. H. Sinclair, R. W. Sorensen, C. W. Koiner, 
Budd Frankenfield, C. H. Vom Baur and C. F. Elwell. 

Data on methods and cost of operating electric furnaces. 


ELEVATOR CONTROL 
T. E. Barnum Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1563-1582 


Brief description of the construction and performance of typical 
passenger elevator electric motive power equipment. Photographs, 
connections diagrams and current-time performance curves. 

Discussion, pp. 1584-1585, by Messrs. Fred J. Newman, S. N. Clarkson, 
Theodore Varney and T. E. Barnum. 

Efficiency of worm gears. 


ELECTRICALLY DRIVEN REVERSING ROLLING MILLS 
Wilfred Sykes Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1587-1605 
Advantages of reversing mill over three-high mill. General discussion 
of the problem of driving reversing mills. Power requirements and 


34 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


methods of speed control. Design data for control apparatus and fly- 
wheels. Description of reversing mill of Illinois Steel Company. 
Discussion, pp. 1606-1616, by Messrs. Karl A. Pauly, F. G. Gasche, R. 
Tschentscher, Theodore Hoock, Wilfred Sykes. 
General discussion of the relative merits of reversing two-high and non- 
reversing three-high mills. 


ELECTRICITY IN THE LUMBER INDUSTRY 
Edward J. Barry Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1081-1085 


General outline of the uses to which electric energy can be put in the 
logging and lumber industry. 

Discussion, pp. 1086-1088, by Messrs. R. L. Noggle, J. A. Lighthipe, C. 
Pemschel and Ralph Bennett. 

Power required by lumber machinery. 


21. TELEPHONY AND TELEGRAPHY 


NEW AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT 
Charles S. Winston Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 915-937 


Description of construction and mode of operation of new automatic 
telephone switching apparatus. Photographs and connection diagrams. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Edward E. Clement on 
‘“The Semi-Automatic Method of Handling Telephone Traffic.’’ 


THE SEMI-AUTOMATIC METHOD OF HANDLING TELEPHONE TRAFFIC 
Edward E. Clement Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 939-974 


‘ 


Description of authors semi-automatic ‘ clearing-house ’’ method of 
operating telephone switchboard. Discussion of the relative merits of 
manual, automatic and semi-automatic systems. Study of the savings 
in time, money and space that can be effected by substituting semi- 
automatic for manual telephone systems. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by C. S. Winston on New Auto- 
matic Telephone Equipment) pp. 975-1005, by Messrs. J. W. Gilkyson, 
Mr. Keller, K. B. Miller, A. H. Griswold, A. H. Babcock, Ralph W. 
Pope, F. C. Newell, Jr., Ralph Bennett, W. D. Moore, Mr. Schuler, 
H. B. Tupper, C. L. Cory, Arthur Bessey Smith, eon? P. Clausen, 
C. 5S. Winston and E. E. Clement. 

General remarks on the relative merits of automatic, semi-automatic 
and manual telephone systems, experience with automatic and semi- 
automatic systems. 


SOME RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN RAILWAY TELEPHONY 
Gregory Brown Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1007-1036 
Outline of requirements of train dispatching service, messenger service 
and block service. Description of various telephone systems in use on 
railroads. Photographs of apparatus and circuit diagrams. 
Discussion, pp. 1037-1048, by Messrs, Kempster B. Miller, L, B, 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 35 


Cramer, Ralph Bennett, Ralph W. Pope, C. F. Elwell, $8. G. McMeen, 
J. A. Lighthipe, S. J. Lisberger and Gregory Brown. 

Experience with telephony in operation of railway and transmission 
systems. : 


MULTIPLEX TELEPHONY AND TELEGRAPHY BY MEANS OF ELECTRIC WAVES 
< GUIDED BY WIRES 
George O. Squier Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1617-1665 
Account of exhaustive investigation of transmission of high-frequency 
energy over existing telephone and telegraph circuits, superimposing the 
high-frequency energy on the telephone energy without interference. 
Use of wireless sending and receiving apparatus on wire lines. Con- 
nection diagram, resonance and other performance curves from tests. 
Discussion, pp. 1666-1681, by Messrs. Frank B. Jewett, Eeekss WwW 
Alexanderson, John B. Taylor, S. G. McMeen, Frank F. Fowle, Bela 
Gatti. 
Commercial adaptability of author’s system, Measurements on high- 
_ frequency circuits. 


TELEGRAPH TRANSMISSION 
Frank F. Fowle Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1683-1738 


Mathematical theory of telegraph transmission. General equations 
developed and applied to simplex, duplex and quadruplex systems. 
Discussion of changes in relays, terminal relays and line insulators that 
will improve transmission. Effect of various factors on transmission 
presented in tabular form. 

Discussion, pp. 1739-1741, by Messrs. Bancroft Gherardi and Frank 
F. Fowle. 

Choice of insulator and conductor material for telegraph line construc- 


tion. 


THE COMMERCIAL LOADING OF TELEPHONE CIRCUITS IN THE BELL SYSTEM 
Bancroft Gherardi Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1743-1764 


Brief statement of the formulas used in calculating transmission over 
loaded lines. Methods used and results attained in the loading of over- 
head lines and underground cables. Construction of loading coils. 
Effect of loading in modifying telephone practice. 

Discussion, pp. 1765-1773, by Messrs. E. H. Bangs, F. B. Jewett, By Et 
Colpitts, E. B. Craft, Allard Smith, J. G. Wray, Frank F. Fowle, Bancroft 
Gherardi and G. D. Shepardson. 

Changes brought about in terminal apparatus and outside plant by 
loading lines. Difficulties involved in the development of practical 


methods of loading. 


PROBLEMS IN TELEPHONE TRAFFIC ENGINEERING 
F. P, Valentine Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1175-1796 


Discussion of the factors that make up good service. Relative efficiency 
of different methods of handling traffic, with special reference to toll. 

Discussion, pp. 1797-1801, by Messrs. A. P. Allen, W. Lee Campbell, 
Bancroft Gherardi and F. P. Valentine. 

Efficiency of telephone apparatus. 


36 SYNOPTICAL INDEX 


22. MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS AND INSTITUTE AFFAIRS 


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS AND THE PUBLIC 
PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS 
Duagald C. Jackson Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1135-1142 
The duties of the engineer to the public, with special regard to his 
attitude toward public service corporations. 
No discussion. 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS IN MAKING APPRAISALS 
H. M. Byllesby Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1251-1265 


Developments of electrical industry. Part played by capital in the 
development of electric public utilities. Intangible values to be considered 
in the valuation of such properties. 

Discussion, incorporated with that of paper by Henry Floy on “ Depre- 
ciation as Related to Electrical Properties.” 


DEPRECIATION AS RELATED TO ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES 


Henry Floy Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 1267-1309 

Definition of terms entering into depreciation. Classification of factors 
that make up depreciation. Explanation of various methods of calculating 
depreciation. Tabulated cases of depreciation rates used by different 


authorities. Method of determining value of physical properties. Use 


of 50 per cent method. 

Discussion, (including that of paper by H. M. Byllesby on ‘‘ Responsi- 
bilities of Electrical Engineers in Making Appraisals’), pp. 1310-1356, 
by Messrs. Bion J. Arnold, W. F. Wells, J. W. Lieb, Jr., Schuyler S. 
Wheeler, E. Leonarz, G. L. Hoxie, P. H. Thomas, W. A. Del Mar, F. W. 
Harris, Horatio A. Foster, J. G. Hirsch, Alten S. Miller, Frank F. Fowle, 
B. E. Sunny, Halbert P. Gillette and Henry Floy. 

General discussion of depreciation and the appraisal of public utilities. 


TURIN MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION 
SEPTEMBER 17-138, 1911 

Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2507-2518 

Provisional report from the United States National Committee to the 

Board of Directors covering history of International Electrical Congress, 


organization of Congress, and brief notes on the sessions at the Turin 
meeting. : 


THE INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL CONGRESS OF TURIN 


Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2519-2533 
Report of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers Delegation 


to the Board of Directors, covering organization, list of delegates and list 
of reports and papers presented. 


rr 


SYNOPTICAL INDEX 37 


STANDARDIZATION RULES OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL 
ENGINEERS 
Vol. xxx—1911, pp. 2535-2585 


Standardization rules of Institute with International rules approved 
by the Turin Congress. 


REPORT OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDING APRIL 
80, 1911 
Vol. xxx—1i911, pp. 2586-2603 


Report of the Board of Directors and various committees. 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Acceleration, electric elevators. . i saree Sete et ee DOO 


dash-pot timing. . eRe er roe TU) 
reversing mills, power ne wis dselh SEh US tk ee Oa 
Admittance, transmission line, equation -.is-. tu Gnonun ocleen Peeeee Oe 
Ageicritical,, formulas. <ziesisate verted pee eee 
Air, critical surface intensity, definition.......................- 1858 
dielectric strength......... . 1979 
cause of increase near conductor surface.. 1 
electric; breakdown; theorys.ce se ae eet teeta eee 1883 
conductivity, Pheory ier nei anes ein ae eee 1883 
e. m. f. gradient at surface of conductor, equation........... 1931 
free ionization) AMOUNTS oman. peter ie ein eee ee ee 1861 
friction: formulaic ae ae ee ee ee 2434 
rupturing gradient chart for different electrodes............. 26 
strain required to extract electrons. ...........6.-.-2+e000: 33 
Aluminum, coeticient of expansions. si tesla eer 2292 
corrosion in concrete, tests. . Seiiieraace i atheciee. 1 eC ee ORE 
ClaStic Limit. 3 tic eitlaetele ere eros eta arate ere 2215 
elongation. . Re re oct os ee 
modulus of elasticity. . ; hicecc a 2m 
temperature coefficient of expansion. ayaa RRR eS 2215 
tensile, strength. . et ean ieee rmich ari oazions< eS 
Amortization, method of calculating TeV cyclen SE 647 
providing. . oye 683 
Apartment houses, power plants. (See ‘power plants. Soc shi Senne 
Apparatus, electrical, dielectric tests, international standard...... 2582 
efficiency measurement, International 
standard: Ani Redes ete aie See 2581 
guarantees, International standard.. seneh S208D 
losses, standard tests. . : .. 2548 
overload capacity, Intern: ational standard... 2575 
standard. . Arar tut fortis! 
rating, International standard. en ay 5, 5 ROL 
regulation, International standard. . sistema OO 
standard classification. . d .. 2642 
temperature rise, International standard.... 2576 
Standard wasn eceavaccn ere 2560 
induction, stationary, standard definitions.. 2542 
Appraisal public service corporation property...............000. 1259 
Arc, furnace, efficiency. . sere! Beth ec AE OOO 
Poulsen, generation. of high. frequency energy. . win sehr Eos ae 
time lag, shown by: oscillograinsy. a2 scuhainas ences ene 360 
Arcing e.m.f., effect of frequency... vitae, iis wean ate ean 188 
ground, action in establishing surges. . APO sp eee ae spe ee 321 
burning off line wire. ae ae 323 
conditions under which ‘self-extinguishing. eae 319 
effect,on line insulators. 47, davis. eee 320 
transmission line. . 319 
suppressor, general principles. . RS a hee 260 
Armature, chord-wound, effective turns, calculation............. 2393 
direct-current, geometrical neutral determination... ... 2419 
end flux, definition. s.':i. a aerate aan 2366 
effect on commutation... ean eae eee 2366 
formula... ee oiscave ase’ shea iole nn Riser cereReeee 2367 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Armature, (continued) 
fluxes, classification with regard to commutation...... 
interpolar flux, definition. . : SF 
e.m.f., calculation. . 
slot flux.. : 
commutation. 
Atmosphere, dielectric strength. . : Seay Oe eee 
Attenuation constant, long transmission line, ‘ferential, oF, Ui es 
telephone transmission, formula. . 
curve, long telephone circuits. . : 
effect on frequency. . 
high-frequency telephone c circuits. 
long-distance, telephone, reduction. . te NA hee 
Ball electrode gaps, striking SAMA hp SERIO a cnt cud ORO Tae CIE 
Band saws, power required. . a 
Battery, storage, car, on Erie R.R.. 
Long Island R.R.. 
cost compared with fly- ‘wheel. 
experience in New YorksEdison Co.. ait 
for railroad car operation... ..0....0.0...5+-+. 
reasons, fonmucine On Nee Cook, Rennie cte. 5 oes 
Bibliography of current limiting reactors. . ie 
electrolytic corrosion of i iron. 
hyperbolic functions, tables. Princabuc, epee cases 
turbo-alternator, short- Givers MOA PERN. oe seth. 
pOLLers weGeCted weUGta ms an ce oy eae. nla is phish oie ars acer 
probable [WIN fee ge soarverctr cis oot axe ieoan caksh/77y ceucaa es te CS NCAR 
SMOpSMOdC iaCbOre seers tre cir te aetna dste sels Sty os at 2 ole 
Okie Peale mCeLinitl OMe eam tde stint eee comin a eit died iene « clniele si 
Boston Edison Co., character of territory served. . eae: 
map of transmission system. . a. 
suburban service, analysis of actual results. . . 
i alsine@e eCtLickele via LOie mee tie cles. Sona eae sakes tele «eral © 
regenerative, with eee CONVELCCEG I mieten sree arene) om 
Brass, radiation power. . SPE, Ear PROMI A peeacAtet a OEM a ION Ta 
[SPS eS, ORG eines 5 30 oc aco sucht: ca a oes a cabecloribes CARICMO RCE Reni anne 
Brush curves, definition. . : 
Buck’s wind pressure formula. . 
Bunnel duplex relay, reversing current required. . 
Busbars, mechanical forces due to heavy current. Se nes: 
Cable, critical e.m.f., relation to number of strands!.:..........% 
disruptive critical e.m.f. OMACIeNt, TESLSmi es gh or 2 = ays 
Capacity electric, effect of frequency...........-..-- +e eee ee 
transmission lines, formula. . ‘ 
two parallel wires, formula, exact.. 
Capacity, one wire transmission line, earth return, calculation ex- 
finn! Soc s Sena 0 on eGes BONO ORIG ain oan 
Slectnion sOLlenoldstorm tl larenmemien t deeak ss skin es es: 
two-wire transmission line calculation, example........ 
one wire grounded, calcula- 
HOM pPEXAmIplo went wee owe 
wire surrounded by grounded conductors, calculation.. 
Carbon dioxide, striking e.m.f. between needle epee at different 
pressures. . ap absteph tame ar Rese Sie gRt> pte oN 
Carriage works, load factor... heat a NNO BP i ar RS 
Cars, railway, average lifes... 2.66. eee cate cee eee cee 
Catenary bridge, three-track construction. . PR Wre ee 
ty picalie as Hoel x eee a ee gt os 
construction on New Haven Road...............+4++: 
PETECSOISUICC Use een dinie seit ee ece so ett 
tangent bridge, six tracks, New Haven 
TOAG) CONStTUCHION 40 ov. wh ey eens: 
Cathode rays, Alexander Re I MIE re, dick cabs ws 6: 
power indicator. (See Power.)........+++5 uCriAg: 


39 


40 TOPICAL INDEX 


Cathode (continued) 


tube indicator diagram, method of recording........... 1109 

pi te re 

; vacuum, method of lowering............-..-----. «L108 
Cavitation, definition -2.-% i. 95>. aikiec =e eee 547 
Cement, chemistry of hardening process’. 2. se 4. emer ee ere re 2055 
compressive strength) ~.\ 2.5 osu 2-91 e me sinned ater 2066 
insulator, Shearing strength.,.+...+.|-¥-e -bieeise ee een 
resistance, measurement ars wees ncesier seen a 2061-2063 2066 

specific gravity... < vs deeper aie aterm hain a ee ee 2057 
resistances 3 «i. {estas one Oe ee ee ed ee oe oe 2064 

tensile strength. ons% cane eeteeetets err eit ee et 
Washington, specifiesgravityecscnices ee ise 

tensile strengtliee'3. 472 tat ele ante eee 2057 

wet, Specific. resistance. Sia. 1... ms eee ee 2064 

Central Colorado Power Co., map of main transmission lines..... . 78 
transmission line, description....... 2007 

no-load line losses, tests........... 337 

Central ‘station, average:size; 1902:to L907 5. S-aseeteels se eieiae 1245 
comparison, large and small, investment and kw.. 147 

operating -expense.cjacusnets <0 uae nee 148 

direct-current, 3-wire, service characteristics... .. 1213 


fixed charges compared with isolated plant....... 709 
high-tension, three-phase compared with low- 


tension dies iaeaks Ree eae See 1216 
instrument control panels, requirements......... 1230 
modern, development.:... <6 4 cs sah Oo eee 1214 
operating cost compared with isolated plant..... 709 
operation, importance of reactance.............. 1217 
wiring; layouts. saderie toe oeete beens 499 
with current limiting reactors..... 1220 
Chicago Edison, turbo-alternator, experience................... 1144 
Chicago Railways System, cost of maintenance and replacements 1297 
Circuit breakers, oil, behavior under short circuit............... 1230 
current interruption, oscillogram........... 498 
high-ténsion tests: 222 v5. 0 c.ceenneeee 520 
horizontal, break conditions. .:............ 1227 
mechanical pressure under short circuit. .... 513 
rupture; current, oscillograms sot. eee 520 
e.m.f,; oscillogramys.<s.ts) 02 O20 Om 
tests,.method sac. Jess A aki eon 
TOSUbts.. Tus Aneel UAL eae ee OT 
short-circuit, rupture oscillogram........... 1200 
speed-timieCurvems ee eee Oe 
utilization of explosive energy.............. 1210 
voltage across contacts, oscillograms........ 498 
Careutte, general equation: |<... cna Pnded eal ates eee 878 
net work, effective impedance................0. By Scere 884 
power division between resistance and reactance 896 
three-phase, resolution into single-phase circuits........ 2496 

Cisoidal oscillations. (See Oscillations.)..............000c0eceee 
‘ definition, WtidgNar Rock desk ry eee 873 
City of Niagara Falls, Map of transmission lines................ 137 
Clement semi-automatic telephone system...................-. 950 
Cloth, charring temperature:.< oy Pi) ba cco va ee 1554 
safe-working temperature 15 iweser ak ae See ee 1554 
Coak'consumption, isolated planhs.2icm aes ae ae ae ee 680 
steam locomotive, express service........... . 1393 
freightisenwicess.c ae... 1393 
; local passenger service. .... 1393 
hoists, probable life... . ite Dead, Ween ee 650 
Coherence-resistance curve for short-spark gap.............2---- 121 
Colorado Power Co.; map of transmission lines................. 338 


FOPICAL INDEX 


Commutating pole, parallel wound machine, ebete eas: 
Commutation, brush curves, definition....... ; ie eee ae 
XENI LES ea wet os Me at Stade gee ieee be ace 
ealadlaion,, c1ven) brush lead asin. «ine oeeee a 2 ores 
formulas, AOR ae iy Sone eT OPN 
chord winding. . CATES Gun eae le) 
effect of slot flux.. Sa isco io 
CumreniTG ensity CIS til tI Mler mene. cccesias tenes. soe aie 
effect of brush lead. 3 


field distortion. . 
interpolar armature flux. : 
electromagnetic-induction theory, development.. 
NC uReSy CON MCLOLn eerrnce tke eater tohaaie ates ae, acti « 
e.m.f, LO Aer wy Ae Sort Se ciety es 


iXersacttiky Qbear Sees See ere 
fluxes, classification. . 
equations. . 
interpole machines, short-circuit. is eee ne 
jOMUelal ANPEGOhU CIES: Abbas Meigs Oe out oc ona! yeh 2364 
Clrect Of SlLOb Wixi. cee ade LO 


reactance, voltage, calculation, table............. 
requirements, International standard............. 
Slot TLUsenCaAletilattOme Ss seria erbegtuchenweewent: yea es\)'ai< 
definition. . 
e.m.f. formula. . Sr See coe 
specifications, International standard............. 
Concrete, compressive CSP OTANA A ales, GE NAA ENSMDE Sate ttl Bis tony aos eS cece rote 
protective value, electrolytic corrosion, tests.. 
reinforced, aluminum, corrosion test....... 2074 
building, electrolytic corrosion, description. . 


compressive strength, effect of stray current 
corrosion, coating, effect on adhesion....... 
electrolytic, actual example. .2084 
alternating current. . 
Bureau of Standards 
investigation...... 
carbon electrode tests 
causes. : 
practical current den- 
STN aise ees chk age 
protection by alter- 
nating current...... 
reducing efficiency... 
protective coatings, 
WEES E & cy haated oer 
University of Ver- 
mont investigation 
University of Wash- 
ing‘on investigation 
Hi eg CR 
tests.. a, nea 
resistance characteristic. . j 
stray currents, alternating destructive action 
Gfiect Om TESISCANCE 2.7.4 salen >= « 
protection by aluminum coat, tests 
coating, effect on 
adhesion. 
impregnation with 
non-conductors . 
metal coatings.... 


2398 
2422 


42, TOPICAL INDEX 


Concrete, reinforced, stray currents, protection by (continued) 
metallic covering 


MELA VAY. ne wee 

reducing corrosion 
efficiency. . 

methods of “Clas- 
sification. soe. 


waterproounge ACO. «06% suets ee ageless 
resistance, measurement..............+.-:-- 2061-2063 
specific resistance: i: Js w/~ se wle se ¢ enemas Orn area 
wet, specific resistance. 
Condensers, plate, construction. . 
Conductivity, standard definition. . ‘ See ee es ots 
Conductors, electric field, effect of ‘grounding. . a pee PAR RIS Se 
e.m.f. gradient at surface equation? +o) 0 eee 
parallel, forces due to heavy @uITents.ccf-c-faae cies 
mechanical forces between, equation. beg Sea 
solid, compared with stranded as to corona formation 
stranded, compared with solid as to corona formation 
effect critical e.m.f.. 1863 
Coney Island and Brooklyn R.R., power plant, ‘description.. dare erates 
Connecticut River Power Co., e. m.f. TECulAatiotin. «andere 
Consolidated Gas Co. case, N. Y. report..............-.+-..-.. 
Contacts, choice of type for given service..............+-+.-+45- 
controlling factors in opening and closing............. 
limitations in rheostat design. . PNR TNG. on 
Control, speed, motors, a.c. commutator, analytical study dihshigegenea 
methods... 2... 2463 
polyphase, methods... .. 
single-phase on _ poly- 
PHASS CITCUICy cet 
induction by concatenation......... 
frequency changer..... 
internal concatenation, 
LAPT AT. <0.) exkoeteree 
pole changing........ 
regulating motor....... 
Heyland-Ruedenberg 
SYSUEMM st een acne 
Kraemer isystem.c.ieenan 
Scherbius system........ 
speed-torque, equation... 
armature, shunt resistance, determination. 
BuUtomaticn advantages... seid chases ataciene 
> hoiding-out.* magnet, uselm....4onnc eae 
manual, disadvantages.c 410. 6. om ws. 
regenerative with phase converter......... 
reversing controller, ibe eyes 
rheostatic, feasible cases. rE: s 
Limirtationisteieteca ete cr tierenarte 
Llimitron Step pitig arcane ene 
series current-limit contactor, construction 
1523 
objections to 
damping 
magnet... 
controller, construction 
mechanical... 
interlock. 
wiring dia- 
Sram. 
electrical interlock..... 
method of operation... 
starting curves........ 


«0 9 10 tere 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Control, speed, motors, (continued) 
voltage methods....... 


StaANGaArcmclacsiicablotiaia. cect c os siete tents 6 or 


pulsation...... 


variation, standard definition.. The eS 


transmission systems, non-automatic, advantages....... 


Controller, automatic elevator, performance..... 
Converter, frequency, effect of limiting reactor. . 


phase, active material, ratio to total weights. ce suki 
compared with motor-generator.............-. 


CLUICIEHCyirn ere re re ri Os 
general theory.........2.5. 
performance characteristics. . 
power tactOl...<v0se ss -- 


vector diagram, starting conditions............. 


weight...... 


synchronous, effect of current-limiting reactor... 1186 


split-pole, effect of 


current-limiting 


POACCOR a etches i eietenemsseataes. sire Tor areh ales oie 
Cooling air, electric machines, radiation power........+-+-++--3: 
. electric motors on board ship...........-.2+20- see 538 
oil, effect of heat radiation on friction of ventilating ducts 
Coordinates, polar, alternating quantities.........+.++-+ seers 
BAVAMtALES sin. ses ie 
GisadVamtaces tern ceensore 
rectangular, alternating quantities..........-.---- 
advantages ...... 
disadvantages.... 
Copper, annealed, coefficient of EXPANSIONS] cee arate) ta ess wee 
IIA eel IE aguante seks o ro DeGrOkiLe ceokonin) Cag cacuche 
Clomsation...ay es seins oer amnion se a Be 
modulus of elasticity.... 22. -s5.26.-.4+-- 2215 
temperature coefficient of Expansioiie. «= ame: 

tensile strength. ........-- +s eee ee eee 
Ronddctivity, standard. We 20 2. 0 nuit tai ons oe eas 
MicnomiOd tecth tre eco cease en ee Tees Ve aN I 
hard-drawn, coefficient of expansion......-----++s+++0> 
SlomeatiOUein. or...) oF cheh renin td gaire ss +s 
modulus of elasticity.... .2215 


temperature coefficient of expansion.......- 


tensile strength..... 


temperature coefficient, of resistivity, Internat. standard. 
table wre eter aaen 


Cores, laminated, space factor......---+---+>: 
specific weight......-----+-- 

Core loss measurements, high frequency....... 
tests, 40,000 to 200,000 cycles........ 


Corona, conductor spacing to avoid, equation. . 


critical distance, definition. ... 


between parallel wires. 


Pi PRennitioneed: we wh tt hg MRE ot ee es 


different conductor diameters, and spacing 
distinguished from critical loss e.m.f.....- 
effect of antecedent ionization.......---: 
captured ionization.......--+++- 
dirt on WiTe.. 6... eee eee eet 
electrode shape.....-.-++++:: a 
Rg SPR ge oe Maat ous i955 


frequency fhe. ks aes eee 
te 


frostins bs8s a LIES TE eae n Sheecees 
hard drawing wire........--++-- 
HAGE sue Pelee e's Me ce ees 
JOnIMATIONIA yo se ee ee eee 


44 TOPICAL INDEX 


Corona, critical e.m.f., effect of (continued) 


moisture. . iy thee toc RO 

parallel conductor-siauwe. Cnn 1862 

phasevunibalance 35: e np 62 

PLessure:jracisy Seeeaee See eee SLES 

testSsemess nastier: 1876 

TAINS ieee eee cee 1955 

sleet /aai). i's nee 1955-1958 1959 

SOK. 2 isndqae eee .1953 1895 

STOW? c a Aleit eee 1955 1958 

stranding.. ii Peeks ote OM LOS 

eertis Lo aire wet ay a 

wave £0008 swans cians l on ee 

wind .. 1953 
empirical equations, atmospherical ‘condi- 

tions..../: 5, Nasteten eo 2 eee 97 

equation... Stee Ses 67 

various atmospheric conditions.......... 69 
function of conductor diameter and spac- 

ing equation piso. eee Serpe. CEE 352 

gradient at conductor surface, caveniony 1931 

law.. ee ae nn A 357 

Paschen’s pressure law ... hepa, apace 

relation to conductor diameter .......... 1859 

frequency . 1871 

different diameters... 1873 

number of strands in cable.. 1867 

pressure, different diameters.. 1877 

ormutlas:. teiaaceee 1878 

stranded and solid conductors............ 1866 

radial distance, equation.. SPT ye Shere), ARS, 

surface intensity, definition....... i SSeS eae ee oe 

effect of ionization. Berets © peat 

equations te aoe eine ne 68 110 


relation, diameter and pressure. 1881 
pressure, different wire 
diameters... 1879 


formulas..... 1880 

requiredsto startnno ces cm tee 2 

disruptive eriticaliesmiadanas asta een eee eee 1909 

distinction from visual e.m.f...... 1966 

effect of barometric pressure..... 1951 

temperature’, cheese eee 1951 

equation English units.......... 1899 

eviden Ces ciiemct tags si ee LOO 

forniinla.: <a dais tes angina 1890 

gradient for cables, tests........ 1933 

Wires) téstscc. unin 2 1932 

relation to visual critical e.m.f 1947 

formation causé.it) 9 elicna eee aes eae 1885 
analogy to establishment of current in mercury 

Vaporslamip; yh! ki terre etc ee 106 

classification of dirt on conductor as to effect. . 54 

effechiof-altitwden.tsaeeey wi eee ee 40 

electradeshapes tans sate an ee ee 55 

electron theory, delanke, io hod 4" wei 125 

factore.causinig irregularity. ¢ ./s.’...< J. One 64 

uniformity, conditions that affect...... 

investigation, advantages of concentric cylinder ‘method.. 57 

ionic theory... dima. « «402d cena 1968 

loss, at diferent e.m.fs. during snow storms............. ee 
frequencies and e.m.fs.................. 

characteristic CUIVOs(sictah Deine elon kee een 1891-1892 1308 


due. to power equations s:: «s= s ues sate eae 362 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Corona loss, (continued) 


elleCuroiitedUenCy:. vapid. = ete eels or 1922 
grounding transformer cases.........----- 

line current. . Ree ee Ose seen tii, Oo 

on lightning disturbances. . ate Se a aorhe Doe 
equation. . Cea ag ae eR 


example of calculation. . 
experimental investigation. . 
factors which affect. . 
fair weather, complete formula. . 
equation. . 
from insulated conductor, effect of immersion in oil... 
ionization theory, discussion..........---+-+++++-- 
measurement. . ngs Spt HUNG Goth eer ee ER eCRLG 
accurate Bs tg. Se ee NSO EO ES PC OLS 
apparatus, connection. . 
near disruptive critical e.m.f.. 
observed at different e.m.fs. up t to 250, 000 volts. . 
tests, apparatus, description............- 
UE VES OE ra eee Reelin ie ete aiteheolio "1915-1916 
datattabtlateda. wats alors cess n=, shoe 1918 
on high-tension line. . oe oe 
tabulated data from various soarces st ne 
weather conditions, effect........-.-++--sse5 sees 
in oil, surface strain required HOUPEOUUCE sn cele ie sorta oe xe 
photographic Ghindig Mtce cama ye Sette hg en SS 
starting, surface intensity, equation. . A aes he 
surface intensity, relation to diameter. te A re NN vt a 
calculated and ob- 
ServVieGyrteri-ie tele 
terms, definitions. . ea ee 
tests, 250, 000-volt line. . ne 
visual critical e.m.f., distinction from disruptive Se DAD See 
equation We See ee Sate ee eee 
gradient, different diameters parallel 


parallel wires. 
relation to disruptive ¢ e.m.f.. 
very small distances. . 


Cost analysis, electric energy pe apnea 


conduits, are lighting system. . 
electric energy, classification. . 
electric energy production, factors. ‘ 
fixed charges. . 
gas engine plant. 
isolated oe bso 
steam Hee “a 651 
gas-electric power plant. . pate eae 662-685 
pounEmlOn meteebed apoigaene ate eet tt 
hotel power plant operation. . A item Jost ae 
irrigation, Minidoka project, construction. . SRE 5 Share be aoe ee 
eter amet eee: 
Salt River project. . 
lighting street, arc system. . be ee HER Pee I 
items that Bt ain Fiske WO, os ali 
large cities. . Se ti 
lining Réchling- Rodenhauser induction furnace.. =p ee 
locomotives, electric single- -phase. . Sea oe ore 
exe Handling by electricity s.awer).- sears te rt 
with fly-wheel load ieee i ee ee ae 
railway, average, yard construction. . Pe i ss 
construction. . Sgt hoa 
electric, d.c., car “maintenance. ee ee Scns 
repairs... ete ; 


46 TOPICAL INDEX, 


Cost, railway, electric, d.c., (continued) 


maintenance, transmission i stem. 1384 
operation. . aH Cae he 1382 
single-phase, electrification. . Te ee oe SD 
line construction................... 1441 
yard electrification cai: J.cca) cc.2 5 cates nee 
rehabilitation of old farms. . in etaseeveneeneersss es 846 
steam-electric power plant. . cik'h Wy eens, Sateen OD0- O90 merous 
ehgine- erected, ...”.. iaisi ox «gs secetees nee oR ee ree 675 
high-speed. «2.4 sean pnesa eam ees ae 675 
steel production in induction furnace. . Liat San Oe 864 
substations, railway, maintenance. . Sant toikpst aeeciee ates ap 
telephone, automatic services ects siee eee een 946 
manual, operation, \...)0.<...0% a dine aa 969 
semi-automatic operationesems. 2a). i aes eee 969 
transiormer, copper loss..4.cq. Hants ahaa ees ve ee 2192 
iron 10S8..6.45<.2.s cote ee aa ies eet eee ee 2192 
formula: sas tacks eae enh) a ee ae 2193 
losses “calculation, exainplesee-.sergctecien coe 2197 
magnetizing current loss). .-penran ee 2192 
formulat . <:.n)sates 2193 
operation, Classification: cee man aan ie Soe 2181 
eftect.of- copperilossasees <u. 8 aes 2184 
magnetizing current. . 2184 
resulation:formiulase je eee ee 2196 
SS: Zar yshe Piers <b ERPs Se 2192 
tanks, corrugated cast iron.................- 456 
steels nceu ctwheaa pate crak eae 456 
plain boiler plate2incwasuen ck oe ie 456 
CASb Aron Uochpatermean erat ee lee Sener 456 
Crank diagram, limitations...... ith te MOSS 
alternating quantities, advantages. eStats Soa 594 
rere arid Pris lxaeh yee 594 
Critical corona e.m.f., method of determining. . OY 365 
CrO6s ares s LLG. cnsna ty) hort cwn ag hich, ca Seen une een eee eae 1129 
wooden, insulating valuéiisc.\ sows. ss Scene 317 
Current-limiting reactors, air-core machines, iron core. 1238 
Current, standard definitions. . 2539 
Current, stray, e.m.f., probable 1 maximum. 2088 
Cutouts, porcelain, life. . iether 1129 
Definitions, standard. . 2535 
Depreciation, absolute, ‘definition. . Et ten eR ee 1279 
distinction from theoretical.............. 1354 
actual exasmpledsccti, stun yecdham tacks cake tie Ae eee 1297 
annual allowance, formula. . 1286 
determination, Anais hones oie et aot oak ee 1296 
calculation, conditions. . 1267 
use of Hollerith system. . 1316 
method inv cscs ccc eee ae 1128 
cost of production. as factor... < ..4<«uslen ox hess ean 1272 
Gen viCn ee remmwern 703-1269-1324—1332-1335-1340 1345 
development expenses as a factor................. 1271 
MOG TR INS oii tpn ate-shasia oe peed opted ee am en 1279 
due to inadequacy, Hebermninie stata 1294 
AQe...... 1277 
decrepitude.. wa), (Eihe 8) aR Renato 13) SS cre She ae ee 1277 
deferred maintenance. . 1278 
inadequacy. . i eer 
Obsolescence»... ca esweeetestei sien uate 1278 
determination i atstetes 250, 28 1294 
SU PDFESSION sw ius caneeigiel Maint spear ea ies 1277 
wear and tear... 15 ..:ccsie tee eeene ee 1276 
electric rail WAYS isc 140 byes Re ee ee 1348 
estimation, method «ssi, sine os ee ee 1279-1284 


es 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Depreciation, (continued) 


fixed charge in electric pnerey Paces Hod: Saeed | 
formula for critical age......... 


franchise factor. . 


fund, objections to. including ‘interest. 


funding formula. 
going value as factor. 
good will as factor. 


50 per cent method, ‘disadvantages. . ORS iE ae eee 


original cost as factor 


present value as factor.........0.-.000. cs 000 ees. 
intancible values as factOresywrtte eee emis civ evsa sw ots 


50 per cent method........ 


RACES MUTI OUChAtMEMOnILLe Sie tinesiene tions ret aiioi siehe 
SCraprvalie acmaAcvOLe cy notkaet. ecient 


SELVICE Wal Wer aS EA CUOiin emicmie Soe Giroietlee Waris % cus 
theoretical definition..... 


distinction: fromyabsolutel yo. ...<..5-.4 


total, determination...... 


Demand factors, standard definition. . 


Detroit Edison system, cost of maintenance and replacements. 


Development expense, definition. . 
Dielectric, definition. . 


effect of high temperatures. 

moisture on insulating properties........... 
hysteresis indicator. (See Hysteresis). 
mipture analysis of PHENOMena wn. .3 2. 8cig el st ss es 


strength, effect of frequency 


lamination 
standard definition. . 


ViatiaMoOmawa thy tiny CkKNeS Gran -amnel «ch, ame s/s 
terminology. «5... 6+ es eenes 
testing, circuit diagram..... 


effect of dimensions of test Po 
duration of stress. . Bore ere ee 
AOI OLLClECTROCEG 4 whe Maca sisteks sa teun cue aes 


test piece: . 
frequency. . 


generator, essential characteristics. Cae 
instructions for commercial work. . 
testsing, International standard. . 


construction special spark gap............. 
sources OL enetey required. ...2.5. 0-626... 


transformer, choice 


GesionsGa ann easter cat sw vases 


Discharge, electric, dynamic features... . 


MMC S LISA ULOMEOL MNT D Deli, cream Mel <jlteas sits 


photographs....... 


is &, mites nb uimicai, hs 0 Weds 6) eiwehes "ai 6 fee e. Ae 


relation between current and stress.......... 
short spark apparatus for investigating.............. 


definition. . 


spark, maximum surface gradient required. RO case suce 


Disruptive, critical e.m.f. definition. . 
Distribution, a. c., advantages. . 


cable system, arcing ‘ground. suppressor. i 


d.c.,advantages..........- 


oe wire service, characteristics. . nie 
electric, advantages in sparsely settled regions. ys 


losses in suburban system 


plant, suburban, factors determining success........ 
railway, d.c. 1500-volt, energy FOSS Maen eee cleats fi. jc 
Goublestracke TEACtaNCe. . 7c vee ee ones 


48 TOPICAL INDEX 


Distribution, railway, (continued) 

single-phase, 11,000-volt, energy loss... : 
average,yard construction, ‘cost 
four-track reactance. . » 
TESISEANCESs cies sue 

line construction, four-track, 
COSh.2s BS 

six-track, 

GCOSh. .osee 


measurement of trolley wear . 
selective system of clearing... 
six-track, reactance........-. 

TESIStAMCC st sc sie at 
steel contact wire.........-.-. 
experience. .. 
Crack wWesistanCGce. semen. ere 
voltage drop, New Haven road 
standard. e:mfs.. 0c jcc oe oe eas ete Sees ch seen 
frequencies. <4. seo. -052- «0s «9 op tems 
three-wire system, Tirrill regulator connections. ..... 
unified system, advantages. . 
for several towns, advantages.. 

use of current-limiting reactors in feeders.......... 
voltage drop, New Haven system........--.++-+-+- 
without e-m.f. GrOD. .. «5+ sales nate reer 

Diversity factor between different towns. Pe Re eerie i 
esibsbintcys REP amt Rar meu me Boks coe een 2 ese 
effect’ on l6ad factor. oc. > oa s «ees eee 
interconnected generator plants on same system. . 
standard definitions. a. iettsce ick ete eee 
Barth). potentials (1 2. .ch.< ide bevid oe ote Mega ate te orca 
Earth’s field, strength in relation to altitude. . ; Sheeae 
Eastern Michigan Edison Co., character of territory served. oe 

map of transmission lines. . 

Eddy currents, general equations 


losses, alloyed SHOGI OG shits aac bstorere te aaron ees 748 
iron at high temperatures.. a eet Ol 
standard steel... pewey &: * | 


two-frequency ‘method of separating from 
eddy-current loss. . ; 
Edgers, wood, power required. . Roe 
Edison loud- speaking telephone . ets 
Education, organization, defects in | present system. . ee rer 
proposed for state university. . Are 2339 
Efficiency, apparent, standard definition 
equation, electromagnet. . seen tire Sy eee Me We ees ea 
furnace, Rochling- Rotenhalisd. 2 oe an en 
gear less electric elevators. . 
induction furnace. . Re oman smo nr gas 
irrigation, electric system. REA Vee ar, Wem Se Oe aS 
measurement, International standard method 
plrase CONMETtETS... 6... svausegaeueie itn nit ioe eae 
Rankine, steam turbines, high speed. . 
low speed.. 


ge Ray wie Meu el LW} Be eee Ble ee 


rolling mill, reversing 
standard definition 
15) nN ET A iron i “aielte canta Powe a © Oe 
thermal, gas-electric plants.............-.-..-++5+-- 
steam-electric:plants) cc oe earns 
transmission;ecomstant potentiates. -00 artes 
worm gears. ° 


oe te eee 9 6 0 0.6 6 ge © Sens 50m « wats Lele ne. 6 vols lata einen 


electric elevators,,.,., 


‘nnn 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Elastic limit, copper, hard-drawn, tensile strength............... 
Electrical machinery. (See Machinery. ) 
MleuEt Calawitlds ea eLmiLLOMs .oaietaetetee sts eres creslay ye iayi, ats spe sais is ss 
Electricity, speed of propagation. . Be eeees Mec cele cies 
Electromagnet, a.c. theory constant- potential, . Fs ae a 
series. a 
air-gap, reluctance Hic ee en elecae 
cheap, magnetic circuit, design. Wek rene MY WN eck 2n2 
compact, magnetic circuit, design. . a 
constant-current, theory of operation i in series. 
continuous excitation, ampere-turns, formula..... 
choice of density. Aen oe ge: 
core diameter, ratio to 
coil diameter. . ; 
core dimensions, formula.. 
cost, formula. . 
energy output, formula. . 
flux density, choice.. 2030 
full effect of fringing... eee 
radiation surface. .,......- 
specific pull, choice......... 
volume, tormulaw.,... 2... 
weight, formula........... 
efficiency equation. . 
intermittent excitation dimensions, equation... 
flux density, choice. . 
liebitediuty Gesig mist. siss)-2.36 <0 Setter, cepa eee 
memes, formula... Bn obs als RONEN Ge aes 
plunger, a. c. work: equation Se Cc aes ae 371 
core diameter, ratio to coil diameter.. 
current characteristic. ae 
magnetic circuit, design. Beet 2049-2050 
mechanical work, CYORUIENHIO%4 3 MANS IAS Bic HOI 
performance. . 23 Seeley, ee 
work, calculation, ‘eqample. TE ene 
tractive, design, literature references. .... 
polar enlargement, design. . eat 
pole, small air-gap, formula. . 
pull, choice. . ; 
effect of fringing... er See ROME SS ete 
lIpSeRTORENE edie he ONE Oe che anak Pecans 
winding data.. ! 
E.m.f. high, measurement, experience with exploring coil. . 
voltmeter coil in trans- 
fOnmen sa eee tes 3. 3 
spark gap, effect of 
transient e.m.f.. 
mitchavalaies! (lahatonhnvexals, 2 Ao eeoen ea > yo boy Sica acecieee eee 
values.. 
unbalance, method of ‘overcoming. . AIAN Ate 
Biectrons) btiel theotynct se cise = oes an 5 ae ae ae ee ee ee 
negative Charge, amount. Soccer tle es Fees 
strain required to extract from air.......-...++++-03- 
theory, defense... i. ccs ose eee cele oe eles pee ewe 114 
Energy, electric, high frequency, generation by Poulsen arc...... 
production, cost, effect of using exhaust steam. 
Elevators, electric, braking.............-+ 222s e es settee ee awe 
dash-pot timing of acceleration............-. 
energy consumption AERC De nora sirttice eta 5 
gearless, circuit diagram.......---.+++-+455- 
counter e.m.f. system, performance... 
dash-pot control apparatus.......... 
ESGHI PULOtl Nye IeIet «io - eh aI aera lens 2, ¢ « 
SEeC. ek at: Re eRe lis ohn oles, =s 


rf 


50 TOPICAL INDEX 


Elevators, electric, (continued) 
method of acceleration. . 
performance curves. 
worm-gear advantages. . ens eR SRS Cn 
circuit diagram. REN oles tees ore tae 
efficiency. . sara svat sist ok cate 
speeds 5./indels ahaa Sl st0l oR Pais eae le 
relation between pump strokes and ae Lae Seba 
Emanations, radioactive in nature. ee 3 
Energy consumption, elevators, electric. . , th ee 
locomotives, electric, express service. spaparaNers 
local Service ee 
rolling mill, reversing. . Mors 


cost, for railway operation... ...+...+-.+0+ +25 8: 2-93 => 


electric production cost, amortization factor.........- 
depreciation factor.......-.--- 

effect of bleeding turbines...... 

load TACtOLoast heals 

all exhaust steam used......... 


factors... : So ah 
insurance factor. . ek Rete its so 
interest, Lactors sc ene aes 6388 . 


investment LactOfac s..csos ete 
isolated gas engine Leeg Jeers 
steam plant. . Saks 
marginal principle. . a: 
discussion. 
obsolescence factor. . gxtot 
supervision factor.......... 641 
LAKOSHE RS Cook Siete oa ee an eiegs ain ta es 
fixed charges, analysis. . Benes 
single-phase, transformation to Ere Pe Rime eRe: 
Engine, steam, 100-kw., cost erected.. Se mo ee a tr 
high speed, 100 kw., eosteh Wille coke eas 
probable lifes. i) Wied Mena ses oe ee eae 
Engineer, consulting, point of view in appraisals of public utilities 
electrical, duties to publica. . myiecrsae cot mien = (osrs 
Entry, construction, 30,000-volt. ..... 2.02.2... 22 sees eee eee 
Erie R.R. storage battery CALs a teievesy hele h wre Sr ebomeys death tof ora. 
Exciter regulation, effect on alternator dinate Ne iCe Rs hes ates re 
saturation curve..... TE ey DE ied ee re a 
Factories, electric drive, advantages. 
rubber, load factor. . 
soap, load factor. . 
sheet metal, load factor. . 
wood- working load factor. 
Baie Profit Meni teo ms ese 5 leo eyes e ven) ype /onete axe oe eee ie hie ome 
Fan, speed regulation, definition... ........5..06 ds4 sms setew gees 
Farms, worn out, cost of rehabilitation 
Fiber, hard, dielectric, characteristics. . ORR Ae 
strength at different thicknesses. 2d RE eke 
Field, electric effect of grounding conductor.................-.-- 
grounded phase, physical bane ke SEV RISE ochione 
magnetic, mechanical forces, general calculations. . é 
Flux density, induction motor air-gap, formula...............-. 
rotor core, formula. . 
pole, formula.. 


Flywheels, built-up, limiting speed............e. cece eee ee eae 
Weig litt: {eM Noe Wee ntert ancy Sites 

castisteel, limiting speedsm s.eireer meta hcrs on tatiana 

weigh tt FROG cues bteerr iets ereieers 


cost compared with storage battery 
load.equalizer, connection diagramiin... settee sie ere 
* motor driven, connection diagram..... 
steel plate, limiting size 


+ # Ow Oe Ine | 6 hes 6, 4 eho ene em 6 Ore are eae 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Fog, effect on corona loss...... 1.1... 60-6 seer rece ee denne 1895 
Foote-Pierson neutral quadruplex relay, Operavine Curren. cians. 
: Draqumavelanaornsy, SopR@lervleks Ikke’ 4 clu cho b pene biolpaites Oo Ganmom aden 
Ve ee SAC ab Le Me 2 Msn So ee ene 
HTeqien cy wliMatTSrOLgO tik OLiCaewer eis a cieh sie eeeie shea ene ers en 
ees eeaySleyel WEE eat bak ao eioe tuldea «pil Mi ere ein osc eo 
Friction, air, high-speed disk, formula.......-..-...--.+--5-55- 
Frier, neutral quadruplex relay, operating current............... 
IRGheaeeey Aine eso elie ao be Gaode 00am bide donb ump pono em Hinman 
GUO os Son oe gniteeiee Holo een oi edi cm aio igeer 
[OONASHE: LRNOOLGE a Grae cede te eaf & weiats SIND cinq eine tere 
ClECELC MAG VaINt ACES waite aL Monette nn oc spane 2 ote rs 1A) ys ieneimak 
COUSULU CHO il: Sane a eee he aise melts cshin, «ants 
energy required to keep hot...........2-.....- 
MICCMOCMOn SATO Pe pute eee ter Nnecet aiudsrs ss 
[MON MILGIOST NEO ga to wec p Dass womep agen Shoe re 
iMOpetausioOm me VOOA s,m. ese see ae sees 
ilshl (Gn oyan(AeNONNins Sok ge cadens gone games oon canoer 
15 tons cost on steel production.....:....-.- 
energy required to keep warm.............. 
produce crucible steel..... 
Kjellin; characteristics... 2.->--). <--> += 
DORA KONA ricci bots ag Ao cena 7 OEE aS 
Roéchling-Rodenhauser, 2-ton, cost of produ- 
Cle ISLES aaa ere ee 
5-ton, cost of produ- 
Cimensveel. amie: fee 
7-ton, cost of produ- 
elmeysteel ace ssc: 
advantages over 
RGAE 5 od oa oe 
Characteristics: 0... 
CONSIRUCTION: aoc. 
cost to keep warm.... 
OL Matto a ease nck 
producing steel 
royalty charges....... 
uniformity of mixture...............22+++5- 
Gases, dielectric, behavior under pressure......- +6. ++ +202 ese es 
strength, relation to conductivity........-.-.-. 
electric breakdown, theory........-.-.+-. 0s es see eeeeee 
condmetivity:..gen-.- +. 
ionization, energy required. ..:....--5--.-+ eee e eee 
striking distance, relation to COMCUCHIVAl yameieds ct meieue ac 
Gears, worm, efficiency....... Soa: 


Generator, a.c., 100-kw., cost erected. ¥ a ee ae eee » 
100,000-cycle, construction. ........-. ++ -se esses 


Rai MIK VOSS oP thine BROS 5 pan eeemugearty beat 
200,000-cycle, design.........-... see cere eres 
external reactance, choice of value.............- 
high-frequency, air friction, HOLIN Uae moe ceoewers = 

speed measurement........-..-- 
induction, advantages in hydroelectric plants..... 
behavior under short circuit.......... 
short circuit characteristics compared 
with synchronous generator......... 

internal reactance, valule............0-eeeeero- 
protection, internal vs. external reactance........ 
reactance, relation to speed.......-- +--+ s+ee-> 
regulation, poor, desirability... .....+..+++++50+ 
short-circuit, bibliography.....--....+5 seeeeees 
single-phase, protection from short CI CUTS... 5 - 
star-connected, grounded neutral, resistance value. 


n 


re) 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Generator, a.c., (continued) sie 
synchronous, short-circuit characteristics, com- 
pared with induction generator.............. 
three-phase compensation for unbalanced e.m.f... 
turbo, method of :coil braces casi eee res 
operation, -CXperienCe fase ate ee ee re 
short-cirewiticusnent, efiect.cr ae sania 
Observed: <- o.:5-4 3 ~enene 
4 per cent react- 
ANCES. as 
6 per cent react- 


series reactors 
1159 
relation to external re- 


disturbance, duration........ 
three-phase, wave form... 
single-phase, protection from short circuit. 
d..c., connections for Tirrill regulator....3......:..: 
probableslife..: vs. catie oo te cst ee eee aunts 

rolling mill operation; desigih ts sss. sae fa ee ee 

temperature rise, standard limits...... ............ 
Gill) ‘selector, descrip tion.cc. %~ 260s aaleeies oe eee ee tn ee 
Glass radiation: POWer eds wcesls obs ens eke eo ee ee eer eee eee ar 
Grand Rapids & Muskegon Power Co., map of transmission lines 
Graphite pencil marks, resistance son. i. 5. crsen ie ale eee ee 
Great Falls Power Co., transmission line, description............ 
Great Western Power Co., map of transmission system........... 
tests of oscillations and potential rises: 
transmission line, constants.......... 
HEscriptiones se ues 
Grounded wire, actual demonstration of protection afforded trans- 
mission line :% | yon PE male eaee weheaiaiee ieere ae 
copper clad steel, advantages. 722... nee 
effect on transmission line capacity............. 
installation, Central Colorado Power Co......... 
Great alls; PowersGo. 20 oct 
Great Western Power Co............ 
Southern Power Cows ss he oe 
necessity of frequent grounding................. 
Provectivervalus sik .o.c ee meester 
Guarantees, International standard 
airy wires; (See: Wire.) cco astray sre see “Peg Seen CII ae ieee 
Harmonic, third, star-connected transformers: ..........<.:se.. 
Heat absorbing power, metallic surtace..\... a+. ay ceeine een nee 
Various materials.....«Nows oer hee 
Heating by bleeding steam turbines...................3.000- a 
plant, fixed. charges craw.) \o<teamneit ser oe, eet ieee 
operating charges........... 
Herbert's formula for telegraph transmission................... 
Heroult; electric furmaces\(See Furnace.jo,. nn. ae eee 
High-Tension Transmission Committee, list of questions 
Hoilerith. system ofmakinpinventotyen ennui ae ce en ee 
Hoosick tunnel, catenary construction 
Winn B.dla gram. is hgh alee ah semen tee 
yard, catenary: Comsatictionnac £ anaemia eee 
Hotel power plant. (See Power plants.).............. 
: distribution of steam consumption 
typical'load curves. aimee eee ee ee 
Hotels, relation between number of guests and energy consumption 
Hudson River Electric Power Co., map of transmission lines... .. 
Humidity, effect onicorona joss). \.aece aie nee 1895 
Hyperbolic cosines, table....... ; 


ey 


Vie le erep ewe o).e' 4) wivelam im: @ ofa: Byet/sih, oe 


1164 


693 
695 
138 
1953 
2502 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Hyperbolic (continued) 
functions, correction factor. . 
tables, bibliography. . mG Oa 
transmission line, calculation eater an ee 
SIC SRC Omen eC ie erate er are tannins cme ie se 
tangents table. 
Hysteresis, dielectric, effect of frequency. . 
indicator, theory. . we cats ette ones oe 
measurement methods. rs thane Mea See 
direct method of measurement. epee oni eis ¥s5 
exponent, different flux RT oy oe ae ee 
LeMpPeravuneserantc sais. re 10D 
metmotrotcalculatin@e ssa «segs 6 os. soleus 
OO pmediatiONmor er Serie te tk cmieade he es Fee ie sire 


hogs alloyed Stel ne fea parce vme ag ee ae 148 
at high temperatures. . Pe ater cis ok LOL 
effect of high temperature. . Se hoa arwr gat hstera AAU) 
CPanel rStee leet reh ah iecacth scasiere ehae- yale. o> 748 


two-frequency method of separating from eddy 
AMEE CMTE ORG eee pe crete ere at oan sce eat elcetie is ze) Seid ce 
measurement, ballistic method compared with direct 
AT IGtHOCOVAly an cris SyasaCioda es EERO NUETC eae oo Cana ea 
Ice, effect on design of wire spans...........2-. sees reer enters 
ELAMSTMISSHOM WEMEGe tess dares ciel (edeutes eld eurtruees Cone oe 
Impedance, effective, definition...............-e eset ee eres 
equivalent, load, single-phase line, formula.......... 
three- ae lines ronmulas.... --1-1e. 
loci. . oO pear SE SS a 
mutual, ‘elimination. ro eeu OSE Oe EDT ey CEO enone 
self, elimination. . 
transmission line, equation. . Dito gs gene I 8 
Tnductance formula, solenoid. —.. 2... 52-2... eve ee ee eee 
high-frequency telephone circuits. Sets Ae 
BOLEMOIG TOLD A gs ore gospel suas | eee ee ee 
Industry, electrical, ‘credit due CADIGALISE, | iain seerumetn tino 2 5 ss 
PEOMOLEH 0s Sem fine) a earns aoe os 
Industries, general, effect of electrical bene Cen etE sae cette er 
Ink, India, heat absorbing SLE er eae ee pee 
radiation power. . Ogres cig SIR RE, cee 
Rperiite admin FepOth. 2 626. ch ha he rer ets 
financial report. . 
Instruments, control panels, “requirements. . ge 
corona loss, measurement, description. . 
standard definitions. De poe ok Sis 
Insulation, apparatus in open air. 
cotton, space coefficient. . 
effect of high temperature. . a ee 
‘moisture on dielectric properties. 
electrical apparatus, Seiel rules. . 2k 
enamel, space coefficient. . ; 
resistance, high-frequency. . 
Standarcine: - Be eet ed LAIN a She ths forint eae 
definition. a Oh eRe Ae ee Rae 
Bille, space coemicients. ....-- one e er ee 
transformer, relation of energy loss to temperature rise. 
wire, cause of breakdown on eit aps Of CONGMCtOR.. cans 
distribution of electric stress. Se 
equation for dielectric stress. . 
relation between outside diameter and e.m: nif. . 
Insulators, catenary construction. . «ay ee ng eee gO rane 
cement, shearing strength. a eo aR a a rome 
dead end, 14,000-volt, cost.. 
disk, calculation of angle. . 


54 TOPICAL INDEX 


Insulators, disk, (continued) 
diameter, relation to surface resistance.......... 
surface resistance, relation to diameter.......... 
electric, dielectric: strength? .-, .4.-e-.0+ 5+ <r ae 
fibrous, dielectric strength, characteristics............ 
glass, insulation resistance..e5 0.5 amen t ih eee 
effect of weather........... 
surface characteristics..- «20 tac at een 
line, arcing-over tests, circuit diagram............... 
automatic protector, performance tests.......... 
capacity, electric, effect of petticoat............. 
cement shearing strengtha.. 20. aan ee ae 
effect, ofareSr wt 1. tn a ee ee eee 
arcitio yg rotind «2.1. ee re eee 
frequency on eficiency..44..- a |e ee 


flash-over, description seen ieee eee 
distribution between conductors...... 

methods of extinguishing............. 

TLAGULE: ciepeeacihe cp eh eae ee ey eel ye 

Lightnin oP Stresses.eto a. ae oe eae ee as ae ee 
effect of surface resistance...... 

method of establishing arc-over................ 
poreelaimy LTS. S sca «ere cise conceal rence ee 
Suriace characteristics... ieee 

puncture e.m.f., relation to diameter............ 
rupture, analysis of phenomena................ 
selection, use of puncture e.m.f., time curve..... 
solid, dielectric strength, characteristics......... 
strengths .. Gove oe sO eee eee whist 
Stress. distribwtion ea, pae tees eee eee ee eens 
COMLTOL | conf ene ee hres eee 

striking efficiency, critical angle................. 
surface resistance, effect of petticoat............ 
PAVUTC He deshe os h witeacie Aer tees 

suspension. (See Insulators, suspension.)....... 
catenary, CONSLTUChiONn. 4.4) wee ase 

flash-over, photograph............... 
petticoat,diameter, relation to surface resistance...... 
surface resistance, relation to diameter...... 

pin, flash-over, photograph......... <a5 Ss ieee 


porcelain, puncture e.m.f.—time curves, different 
FACEOTIOSS vis cc. cai cktrapaein aan seated Ca ee eee 
strain, New Haven road, construction............... 
suspension, calculation of disk angle................. 
CONGUGLOTISNACiIng eee eee eee 

ESIGN. «ke minehon mart aed Pe eee 
distribution between units............... 
interlocking ve. cement... miner ee 

trOWUDLER. coh). meek vee rier Le ee ae a 

telegraph, instilation resistance.) see ee eee 
standard types qa. mc Ua ier eee en 
Suspension type. ceekkn Aen eteteee trae 

tinder hutigityi eS, anim eee eee eee 


Sid eye. a [siis nus) a0 ele 
Se Sie 9 We tate) ee hele ue) v, os) 2 Teab ae 


ee eee 


[2atesa cme alee e ws 


TOPICAL INDEX 


International Electrotechnical Commission, Turin, (continued) 
historical outline. ..2507 
OLSaniZa tonnes wor «=< he 
permanent results...... 
report of Institute dele- 
Cad OLenr ners 
Sessions... =. 
U. S. National 
Committee. 
reports and papers...... 
SECUIONs OLICELSs 5h aes ae 
Social teavuresers havens a. 
symbols adopted........ 
imterpoles. | (see Polesycommutating.). Gane scccsess es. .e esses 
Interpole machines. (Also see Machines.).............-+5.++..- 
GeLMITION Mme my atone eile nie soles aa 
HGIVESE IM CIERCOSE mle Witte neleha metre ettae cron cick ees ae om oy Sueiessie sures “SF 
Tonization about high-tension lines, sources..................>. 
Beeb ricisthconyemmee eet ir: ee ee en eiihe actaye als a 
DyACollisionttes tse pauses i moe tlre es 
saa SFVOU ensue duoc citads sid coPy PRE rea aT Cag pena ae occ acres rare 
ExperimenvallStUGYearimes sin va cll. ee ein mis 
free retrectwom (Criticalenmet mms o2 cer oe fa cas aco 
Sas menlereyeTeC Ute diye st, ces eis ht eee erect 
een, Ehiey Ban OVOKOllRve. bakes to.) Ain cits MIEN ENE Ooo Oey 
secondary, potential gradient to produce............. 
UM anCaRCroleles NON An cml oo dita mciemno Cunmasion A OUrsEe 
EITC ORY ANC HII CISTI ere he Giten as Mae Th elena sra is eta srs cxe 
Va DOLMPLOCU CUMS IaCASUTE eh. ene eyatolte.(  sacrelersiegs -)a 6 
Hous mDLlciat hor yaar seh ile rebkocite Cla arses eye ee tent = ole 
energy required to produce...........----..-4s sees seeees 
freemmMmarniuicde or Changey smc aes octet: opera ee 
AEN ROU raavorsbaly pols yavoll cin 55g cua A cn b Sieemrcneliblo uiceeechchalo ake 
OVCLISCAS RT eeu ices See tanta ean ee ted 
negative charge, amount... 0.2... 6. ee eee 
Gentiitionmeeme a erie st ee eee Pre gesess ctr won enhrie 1 
NOMONCLALUTS Moe teers tte cent eae iceaetice rae) wae aie yodert iene 2 
POSILIVE, GeEHNIIGM. OSes ee ee ee ee ees 
Momierthieory, ClCOlOMe nl kes ete st, ye wi yrs oles ches ele toe 
Tron, behavior at high frequencies............-. 02.1.2 essere es 
Cast Advantages aS TESISUOM aa. es ae rtd be ea 
TATAtLOMLCOMSEA ILM Eme etme etinNc te aie eus pcrnacedes iain apna 
Gale TEMPETATUTE, icp eens ee cee te ne te ce on 
core loss curve, 60 cycles... ... . eee ee eee 


TTA NGY:CleSp epee @ ieee fecencolets Giese tls afar ne 

relation to ampere-turns at different fre- 

GUE D CLES mac petiens tartrate etm. 

PROCHUGIICY Menno ni cion sidiy aya see ores 

corrosion, electrolytic, bibliography..........6..-.+++++-e 
eddy-current 1OSseS oot See es es mt ce are es 748 


high temperature, effect on hysteresis loss......... . 768-770 
hysteresis loop, calculation..........50 6+. sees ee eeeeee 
1 


losses, average in electric machines.........- +--+ seeseeeos 
magnetization, relation to frequency......--..+-+25 esses 
magnetizing current, relation to frequency.......---+--++: 
loss measurements, conditions which affect...........-.+- 
time required to make.........-....+-: 

sheet, testing outfit, dcscription...........+.+.+205> 
shop testing outfit, connections..........-+++++sssres 
testing, disadvantages, small samples...........---.-- 
losses, Epstein method compared with Robert- 

Sah SOAKCLE UXOXO amie cia a CONIC mea OO 


56 TOPICAL INDEX 


Iron, loss, testing (continued) 
outfit, description. 2+. o2.1 «sels renee eee 
tests small samples, reasons for using..............-- 
two-frequency method of separating eddy-current and 
hysteresis: lOSS€Sx 2 sistei-t2e <i ebsahens egestas eens 
magnetic testing, at high temperatures...............----. 
difficulties with various methods.......... 
general requirements. ae a dene. ale 
permeability, critical frequency........- 22... -+ se eee eeees 
frequency at which it equals air............. 
pig, analysis from induction furnace...........-..-+-+.-- 
power factor, relation to frequency..........-..+-+++++0: 
saturation curve, GUscyCles.n ss ag sen ersten earn eee 
1740: cy cles ics vafoisicg atone eee nee 
from: 1740) to 200,000 cycles: a ere 
sheet, effect of handling on specific gravity................ 
japanning on wweileht> mone ei 
radiation constant.j0 -ec pela eee ee eee a 
Irrigation, capital charges against land.............-....-.-- 843 
centrifugal pump, performance characteristics. ....814 
cost of rehabilitating olds farnis.22.m sm< lectin ete ate 
electric system, efficiency various units............... 
net ehiCienC¥ecwtyiewk in noeerne ees or 
transmission ‘NG... .\stctpdeiepdcestaeaceied tena 
ground water pumping, advantages................-- 
land <capthalcharges t=. Aces lee erento tone eancias 843 
Minidoka: project description qsmrriel ara oye suse et ore 
pumping pit, advantage of concrete caisson........... 
Stations, design: 3 sic, c mas sae demtastaegumenccn ae 
SaltcRiver project. sa. 2.14 Gea la ein ee Oe 
COST. i. satymieusy cases ae 
storage capacity.......... 

seas 

Isolated plants" (See PowersPhan ts.) inc. ae evened odeoe eee usc tie 
fixed charges, compared with central station..... 
operating cost compared with central station..... 
LVOTVe TAGUATION DOWEL. 51.5.0 rae emeres nearer int cl CIeN ops, on cfemear oie eae 
Janesville Elec.'\Co., map of transmission line................... 
KGellin induction furnace. (See Furnace.)s7..0.. «. supe teense eevee 
characteristieg.§ ac. aun weiss 


incandescent. carbon, operating. cOSt.\..... ns welsh eae soe 
effect of regulation. . 
effectiof radiations “cae sid sacs acre en 
relation of candle power to e.m.f........... 
tungsten, operation cost, effect of regulation 
regulation required for proper 
OMORALIGNs tim toy mecnbh ata aed te 
Lamp-black, heat absorbing power 
radiation constantiigc. sacle as apeedamaeaer aes are 

POWER, Soy. inpancs sascha e taal teed telat eres 
Leakage, transmission line, equation 
Library, appointment of Dr Catteniea osc aurea pearl eee 
Lighting and water plant, investment, ...s.\ muscles Ue suhicevemen 
operating charges........... RES 
street, prices for service in large cities.:............... 
Lightning arresters, electrolytic, experience, 10,000 volts......... 
aa gap arcs, instantaneous records 
Ni Rt cre SAM Sy et eles | bras vile eee 
disturbances, effect of corona loss. su. aes ss sctcre. ois 
ground wire with wooden poles. . 
lightning, rods 5 narcepome easier 
wooden: polesinv. weumratienmenamien 


~~ 


induction, theory 
protection, arcing ground suppressor, general puacioiss 


TOPTCAL, INDEX 


Lightning disturbances, (continued) 


log, Central Colorado Power Co.. 


location. 

tests. . sacs 
[MOISES la oe aetect es cacy echairaeRes ORs ON ck eee 
Taylor’s Falls transmission line, Aaa 
rods, effect on lightning disturbances. . 


oh stroke, observed effects. . Neapea i banantenn Sic Ee REE 
Liquid insulators, dielectric oe ee em, eee aie 
Hoad-tactorietrecton Giversity LaCtOr?. op ..cctes oc oes. cane te 


ERENCE ESEr VCS. ee Maes Sei erersl tae: Caio se ve as 
ME POUMSTLS Ap Senor real svars ee; Saleh dre faa) vite alee 
breweries...... 
carriage and. wagon works. . 
cement mills. . Ch Gabon ot One Lie meee 
Pate LE or 
HALACH A THOMSON Saree tite cic ae i eases! saeco lait wee aes 
GMAT MICNWOLCSe see he ee aehatici tal aires eos bee 
printing plants. Pe Cee ies aoe si seen se 660 
refrigerating plants. . oad OSC ERE IN ORE 
rubber factories. . are dida Ait hee Cee eae 
BEES ONG Es eo a ke 
ee ee gee os 
tanneries. 
textile mills. . 
wood- working factories. . 
standard definition. . 


leGeomosives, avetrare lisse mcs sores cc cc Sele e Harte ee vies ee ene 


electric, colonial type. advantages. . 
d.c., energy consumption compared “with 
single-phase. . ee : 
express service, energy consumption. 
local service, energy ao se as, * 
double Mallet type, advantages. . wae 
express service, energy curves. 
Pennsylvania R.R. type, tractive effort. 
NUCL Mh eee eae ales 
fepaiv shop layout..0/.........2-..+.1453 
single-phase, cost. . 
direct- ounree wiring ‘diagram. 
energy consumption compared 
Treaty (lle xcosestaepeen wens nt eee ear 
express service, energy con- 
sumption. . 
speed curves.. 
freight, construction.......-- 
description. . 
New Haven road, construc- 
tiOnws seas 
description. . 
speed. . 
tractiveeffort 
weight.. 
service, qertoieaence test. 
local service, energy consump- 
tion. . 
energy curves. 
Speed-curves.<. 
MMLGA Cpe wwiteee se it w+ Sane 
speed-torque characteristic.. 
switching, description. . es 
WCISMUS Ey es cme wees us og is oe 


58 TOPICAL INDEX 


Locomotives, electric, single-phase, (continued) 
wiring diagram. . wae es 
“switch, service, advantages........-.----: 
freight, average horse PORES: RO ar He PES 
performance test. . a 

steam consumption. . eran on ety 
speed characteristics. .....-..+-+--+seereeseretee 
spring suspension, effect on track maintenance erate 
steam, consumption, express passenger SELVICE.iae ae 
express passenger, coal consumption.......- 

service DOERR DEES test. . 

freight, coal consumption. . ae 
local passenger, coal consumption. 55 Se eey ete 
MiUlCAGES. x iais. saps icici +) ol akeesha tater aiMeeaprsh™ Oloess= getRek= 
Mallet type, tractive effort...........----- 
Weight. 260 hives recuse tee ere 


switching performance test.........--.-+--: : 


service pene nakaieccanr on eee 
steam consumption. . = i ateaet a 
Logging plant, electric equipment..........--. ++ esse eee eee 
Long Island R.R. storage battery car.. ty ee ee oe 
Lumber industry, uses of electric energy. Ls jh) eee idee ae de ate 
Machines, electric cooling air, radiation power.. 
dielectric tests, International standard.. ... 
efficiency measurement, International standard. 
guarantees, International St ATICALG cmsccreue oitens 
POT: LOSSES. Acorn Corea eae Se ae nen tae arene 
lossesi’standard! test <.. a5 aciets unc eieweden erate 
overload capacity, International standard...... 
Standard: 25-4, aueeageawd seers 
rating, International standard...............- 
regulation, International standard............. 
standard definition. . ete Sir 
standard specifications..............2.5++++5- 
short-circuit forces, calculation..............-- 
temperature rise, International standard....... 
rating, rules adopted by International Electrotechnical 
Congressiat. sts erecta eis ar rete tone eae 
standard, déhnitiontoras was sce ecr ease 
Shops load Gactor a: Perak .uckatea ht eemeees eer tees 660 
speed regulation, definition cate ctoney 1s s)-eeceiteearners 
standard performance specifications and tests......... 
synchronous, parallel operation, function of reactance.. 
1224 
temperature rise, standard limitss. .. 0. .).<0 nck oe 
interpole, behavior on short circuit.................- 
brash: settinigas cts ceri eit ae ene 
detinition. vc — meek cee tee eae ae eon 
effect of saturation. . 
overload capacity. . 
parallel wound, operation. . 
Magnets, electro. (See Electromagnet. ) 
tractive pill formulas ctictmnckicn ou alco eon ime 
Magnetism, residual effect on rolling mill system 
Marble, radiation mo wer: «iridtes-cu.it ot terete Wiese ietale legs wei dea ees 
Marble works, sidadsactor.avaduawue em one estes ead ne oe ears eee ae 
Marginal principle of figuring costs, definition.................. 
Meéasurément, corona losseck atv ata ne ae eee eee 
Measurement; coronailoss, accurate: ga.semcereee cee ere 
apparatus ;ecescriptiomennes 1 as see 
dielectric International standard................. 
strerigth,, standard methods ss. senate 
efficiency, International standard method......... 
Standard method saan 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Measurement, (continued) 


lapWeAm Sy ove Xe eine te Rae en Ae ee cen eae eee 


ySUCRESLS MGITECE TOTO sh sap cisineis sur the ofan epee eb 
compared with ballistic 

. TMETNOC seach. o anomtin Ges 
ATOMMLOSS I CAlSOLSeeM TOM MLOSS es acw deel cielerse = epee 
Concitions which aect. cnt ssc sace% oe 

time cequired: tosmake. . ec. cn cee oe 

machine losses, standard method. .........2 065.0 
no-load losses, high-tension transmission line...... 
DOME Pe ALEGUCM Cyt iy). atelers a © ace oes iets ale 
rermlattone standard methods) scot sacs secre se 
MesiSbanCe | CONCHELEW 4a, ys cuneate wis se 2061-2063 
Sele pblonerseinyd Ce Menem tals Hace aaar.peruels hor eee 
temperature, standard method inc) 2.0.25 ..08s = 


Wieralldersunrace heat awSOLOINS  POWef ae. cs ae. curls ates aie 
WidhiomCement | OaG nACto Gaetan Metis icn Nat ant sys iolrieh se vee Seles 
akaybue: WayeVelitayel Roya Sx G Reb oo oeion © Rackone et oldad RSS tneie een Cren ome 

m textile, load factories. 2 came ates es as eee ee ee 
Milwaukee railway system, cost of maintenance and replacements 
Minidoka irrigation project, cost of construction.........-...... 


OMPSMAOLOM ise error ae eels) swe 
descrip tone qrakto to otrocs hore kor 
drawings of power house............ 
hydradliciequipmenty .o.c.e.. o- 
AVVEUP er tect le telaen-W Sas deuahebias fale Caw atv: 
(sXobamyoshaveahtuani lovee, oma 5 ogeh ce aes 


Motors, a.c., commutator control analytical study.............. 


are 


laNAlexebisler Glatiisherd oon en ae ooo. 
armature and field......... 


IDYextrahleKearenaals.5 6G eG oe aoe 
polyphase, control methods........... 
repulsion, Winter-Eichberg diagram... 
OTIC GlibNeatyone 5 o gan poobesab of ere Ge 
single-phase on polyphase circuit...... 
RAY DES teametetete pe eke dolor atejfenensiiol ela) steliel ue deneislerajie = 
varying speed, classification........... 
indjuction, air-gap density, formula..............=. 
concatenated, internal, diagram.......... 
synchronous speed, formula... .. 

control by concatenation................ 
frequency changer............ 
pole-changing=.............- 
regulating motor....... 
Heyland-Ruedenberg system...... 
Kraemer system, description....... 

_ Scherbius system, description...... 
design, circle diagram, disadvantages..... 
effect of number of rotor slots..... 

slot and zig-zag leakage. . 

leakage coefficient, effect......... 
minimum copper weight.......... 
relation between leakage coefficient, 

rotor, diameter, and core 

WeraWedulsvs 0m oro eoeontt oe 

of copper weight to ratio of 
corelength to polepitch 

efficiency to ratio of core 

length to pole pitch. 

power factor to-ratio of 

corelength to pole pitch 

efficiency characteristic, | compensator 
COLDRO UN ni eitene aaseer Goostats oe whee 


60 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Motors, a.c., induction, efficiency characteristic, (continued) 


railway, standard rating 

Standard ispecifiicationS.. cease imi tte 
reversing, ideal mode of starting..:.......5.....<..+--0: 
standard speed classification 
synchronous, field adjustment with voltmetar........... 
temperature rise, standard limits 


resistance control 
secondary control 
for propulsion of battleships. . 
ship propulsion speed torque characteristics 
42 
iron loss;Calewlations see sees os ais = sia Soke eerie 
leakage coefficient, formula...... 
effect on mechanical dimensions.. 
magnetizing current, determination.......... , 
formula.. ce 
output equations. . Spee roy re NF 
polyphase, circle diagram. SS ae ee Oe Re hear 
power factor characteristic, compensator con- 
trol ees. = see 
resistance control 
secondary control 
maximum current, formula....... 
formula) 2.) Pol eee 
reactance formula. . We 
rotor core density, formula. . 
volume, formula. . oan eee 
frequency, SeeIPA to ee ee 
teeth volume, tormula. 02. 227 nae osc ae 
short-circuit, reactance formula.............. 
single-phase, analysis by resolution of second- 
ary field into components.... 
circle diagram, relation between 
magnetizing and no-load current 
emf formula, (atta - eae 
magnetizing current, relation to 
MO=]Oad CuUlrents.<..0 - tae 
pole flix; formulae. se eee 
rotor current, distribution equa- 


tion. 
graphic "representa- 
tion. aes 
wave form.... .2120 


wave shape analysis 
magnetizing current Wave 


form Savas ean ete 2112 
working current wave form 
2113 


slip regulation for rolling mill drive........... 
speed-current, equations, compensator control 
rheostatic control... . 
compensator control... . 
rheostatic control...... 
stator copper losses, formula................. 
core volume, formula 

Leet, TOtST, LOMITA ee ks wie eee a 
torque, full load, in terms of pull-out torque.... 
maximum, pull-out, formula 


speed-torque, equation 


a} 09a) $618 66 Ble pw ws eh 6, Bin hm ere ies 


Motor-pernerator phase icomverter: mete een eee 


Name plates, International standard 
Navy, battleships, electric propulsion, advantages 


disadvantages... ......... 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Navy, battleships, (continued) 
Money TequImedeto TE VELSe: « apcic sic eho se ns oe 
EAE il OUEC MINE certian cia'sle ales Sie.s te see alee 
collier, electrical equipment for propulsion............... 
propulsive coefficients for battleships...................- 
U.S., battleship No. 35, power required to propel. ....... 
proposed electric propulsion in- 
SUA Teo Mee Tecate hejces, mes nese cals 
Needle gaps, striking e.m.f. curve........... RT Myton soho 
Poms winiute, method Of MAKING J. oo. ce os oe ee oe 
striking e.m.f. at different air pressures........... 
in carbon dioxide at different pres- 
TELE rte RENE aie eats ye eR 
New York Central R.R., reasons for using storage battery....... 
THAD CISIESTS WMR ly a aie See a Oe harper 
Edison Co., comparison of operation with electric 
Dlatius 1a. WONG Ofte semi cic ae 
experience with storage batteries......... 
New Haven & H. R.R. catenary constructions........ 
qn eIGee ceo oe aoe ae 
COMET AE EAULLECS: cis, oj sient aoys aye e = 
Harlem River yardlayout...... 
LOS Olmbtatm ela Sires siete tasaiess 
measurements of trolley wire 
SCENE eo Ree ROC cree 
single-phase loco. freight con- 
SPAT CMGhla my Getidar 
GESCEUPUION es Wee clea 
performance test..... 
ACA Cis waste Recs glys rae 
speed-torque charac- 
GEMISUICS a caie s sleua are 
Seam LOCO, ELOIS MtGjs oc teere oles< 
performance test..... 
Teen h ANG ENS exege Deen a) Shue OO Ec 
typical catenary bridge con- 
SULUCTLOMSs hoa +s xt st uta 
system, wiring diagram....... 
SU Nieotr tracitg betes Ge tata UL OAM oes ree eee es ye cree page ins Peep serge siovefinia @jeneuel Wet ns 
Non-inductive load, standard definition............-....-+++555 
North Shore Elec. Co., character of territory served............ 
map of transmission lines..............-- 
INGOs Stara GaTi wen ee sae hodeedel + euerh «wl seeKayetssenetnieues untae cen the 
Obsolescence as fixed charge in electric energy production........ 
Oil, dielectric strength between cylinder CHOCELO CCS tie ete Sat 
CMECh OL PLESSULE, Baga me iiels tre = 
tests with various shaped electrodes........ 
effect on corona loss from insulated conductor............-- 
striking distance between spheres, relation to surface intensity 
surface strain required to iomize........-- 26+ eee eee eee eeee 
produce corona..<......-. +. bese 


transformer, GeNSity..... - 26. 2-2. -eee- 

frozen, dielectric strength.......-.....--+++-+> 

insulating quality, methods of testing........--. 

SPECIIC CAPACILY. 00. - cee et eT eee 

TYEE ew Sa cl, OS ACHE Minigr enter ER 

temperature distribution..............: 

testing, disadvantage of usual Spank Bapr cs veces 

velocity in terms of temperature, equation....... 
Omaha & Council Bluffs Ry. system, cost of maintenance and re- 
PIBCOIONIS, 7 ooo wees wt at ae ot nett ti tw en aes a 25 ee ce 
Ontario Power Co., e.m.f. regulation, equipment, description.... 
Ore handling, cost, effect of fly-wheel load equalizer. .....--..54- 
by electricity, COSt....... 00s cesses eee eee e ree eeee 


62 TOPICAL INDEX 


Oscillations, cisoidal, definition...... 


general equation...........+--+e2++eeeeee 


physical conception.........--+++++++++-- 


PLOPELties. 6.6%. oa Ae wou ese nee ee oe eer 

rules for changing to cosinusoidal......... 

scalar, charactet,) cer sc sate cle rere ee 

cosinusoidal, rules for changing to cisoidal.......... 

damped frequency formula...........-..--.--+++:- 

free, characteristicsia ae... cane tare eee ee 
equations: ce yee eee ons ee te ere raee 

natural, in mercury arc rectifier circuit............. 

produced by closing high-tension switches........... 
Oscillograph, films, method of handling.............-.-+-++++++: 
photographic apparatus, description.............-. 

O PCL AUION versie torte yeas ores 

recording methods. asiae ee entatees eee Sane es 
Oscillograms, reproduction... ......-.--+.-- +++ ssseesees ences 
Overload capacity, International standard...................-- 
standards: cars ee etre ee ee alenaee yemenene ewer 

Questions, High-Tension Transmission Committee............-. 
Pacific Gas and Electric Co., map of transmission lines.......... 
Paint, insulating, dielectric’strength......3..-.- 6.21. 63 ee oe 
Paper, charring temperature... 00.0.5 2.5 fers els ss se ea as ale oe 
Electric) CharacteristiCam. ¢ seis omarid tiem take 2 alayel tel ete ees 

safe working temperature... siete o acpee st o ete cranes aie es 
Parallel operation, general problem............-.--.---s+++0e-- 
power station, electro-mechanical synchronizing 

synchronous machines, function of reactance. . 

transformer, Y-delta and delta delta.......... 
Pencil’maricsresistanGe.. sss. a euiectatle 2 fe ereteic te rice ane een camera 
Pennsylvania R.R: locomotive, power rating.................... 
Permeability, relation to flux density at non-magnetic temperature 
Phase:converter.”-(See Converter. yo. seisetan te te) nies ea seems 
Philadelphia Railway System, cost of maintenance and replacement 
Photometry, standard definition 
Physicalsvalues detinviran. ones. avass caves alae ef naeeaen cee he cee nee 
Pins, insulator, locust, life 


wooden, Gisadvantages... ons. en wius aude aoe te 

instilating Wallies o.....cen tec ete erase 

Prpingy proba Ble tes... 0< yn. PA TEN R NIT A Sora Yet 
Planers, wood, power) required). 0. awe onto yokes neo ited ete 
Poles sced ar wile. ss oi ikea e sia teal Coles Ole oie enon Te atch eee 
Poles, commutating, armature e.m.f., formula.............. 2388 
brushySetting.. sv. Saha ce Sitch ETE NI ates ote nt ie 

Calowla tion aera eccrin reack ere eee aoe. oe nee 

chord windings. MN vowels tresnemanonnn as 

COSIST ee Fane reel onc coor a eae ee ene 2430 

efrect Of Saturation? \ccwas node cere an 

erm: f), formila ly. Vese caeteree ieee te eee eee 

LACE: PLOPOPUMOIMS Te ee eae coe ere abactians Sone amine 
Proportions scenes cae See ao Ane ae 

Saturatiany SOULS! mice oe eee a eto aie 

turns; formulate, meee an eee cee eae 


wooden, effect on lightning disturbances................. 

with ground wire, effect on lightning disturbances 

yellow pine lites). 2 os Seer cee Se OA eh ate eer) ee 
Pole-top construction, 60,000-volt 
Porcelain, tensile strength 
Potential of earth 


2 6 6 gl Ga Ferel ie @ (6: Blea le @) oye) KieUS S Ub) p) Bue. Ores a ay, basa & 
8 eRe el 8 eee 6 6 ase me & bee Oe Ge CURL OUR e Niel @cea 8) 0) are: Glee e <s Sene 


6. 6.0).9. @ 16) 6) Buehs, U6) ere w Ow Im lee) 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Poulsen arc for generation of high frequency. . 
Power diagram, transmission, constant potential. . 
measurements very high frequencies. . 


Power-factor Heroult arc furnace. ..........000006ccs sv esee 


Power indicator, cathode ray.. 


Kjellin induction furnace.. 

phase converter. 

Rochling-Rodenhauser induction furnace. ae 
Beat datGecentitrotuermm yea cktes Fite ate erele Gis ste. Wen gen 
accuracy. Bk SOM ar di ST oOo Re re 
connection oo ae 


biveon yan. 
magnetic, description. . 


Power plants. (See also Central Station. je 


comparison between large and small as to invest- 
Te tib hands kal wi bus erent its ciclo esa aoe. ayers 
operating expense 

hydroelectric, advantages of induction generators. 
parallel operation, electro-mechanical synchronizing 
gas-clectienineiscOst sae as > we Oe oe eae 685 


HReUaChAareeSeeuisterenee: oun eb ceclnss 685 
hep SUE eater 
OpEralinoicoster teenies... 25.080 
lbs Oates aoa 


thermal efficiency. . 
hotel, cost of operation...... SA ice 
distribution of steam 1 consumption. ee Pa 
typical load curve.. £18 6c, it he 
AUC ULI STILICOSE UL Win ater at errno ieee ete te 
isolated, cost of energy production....:.......... 
steam-electric, apartment houses...............- 
clubs, coal consumption. . 
cost 150-kw 
of energy ‘production 460-kw. 
effect of load factor on cost of energy 
EER ERCO SUM tee Ute ela Sees Saar 


hotel, coal consumption...... ee 
OpeLaving, COste—aa a 1s 
4 


thermal Sa ae Ei 
required to accelerate es mills. . 
reverse a ship.. eee 
requirements, band saws. 
battleships. . 
reversing mills, various types. . ate 
rolling mill, aey eteiag > Fe ean A oan See Ce eee 
sawmill machinery. : 
wood edgers.. 
planers.. fete UN acts 
stations, “parallel operation at ‘different e ee aa ers cobiie irs 


Press board, composition. . 


dielectric, characteristics. Fat A Dy Oa AE ew 
strength, tests. 
variation with ‘thickness. . CPs 
various numbers of layers. ee 
diled, arcing @.m.f.itests. 2... oss EB ee es 
creeping e.m.f,, tests. . Sh TE 


64 TOPICAL INDEX 


Press board, oiled, (continued) 
dielectric strength, relation to stress duration 
TEStS x, e's10: Jeet wee et edema 
specific capacity, different temperatures....... 
specific: CAPACity. «ski asaee = cae ioters emer erase ate sir be 


varnished, dielectric strength, relation to stress dura- 
ti 


eer capacity pas Biers Sete 
Printing plants, load factor. . a a tee hy pees he tO 
Profession, definition. ecole tee oe terme ater toler tages 
Property, physical, formula for critical age. . Fy eee 
Propellers, power required to reverse smepmmis irene eae are 
Propulsive coefficients of battleships. . 
Public utilities, appraisals. . PA iene PRO kt 
cost of maintenance, pctaal! ag 2 stein ee 
replacements, actual.. 
Revelonsneatts credit due capitalist. . 
promoter. . sgessnaneen 
expense, definition... . et ee tee 
fair profitt.:.tegatus. Son iiene St Bost coe eer: 
PECUEN S PAs eNhcrelctians orah ciaret tae elle rear 
franchisevvaltle f srscreccho.<t1.-0 tet e oie cap ames i ako 
intangible values. . crib eae 
inventory, use of Hollerith system. chon. par eee ee 
physical property, formula for critical age. 
value, determination. . 
value, definition. . sete 
report on Consolidated Gas case, ‘New York...... 
Pulsation,.standard:dehnition... 0. meson ere aees tee at eee 
Pumps, centrifugal, performance characteristics..............814 
Radiation black surface, effect of metsrdeaere Piswe aide. cd PVR 
constants, various materials. . We aS ee 
heat, metallic surface to Biren. 8). aoe Bees ce eee 
powerolivarious materials: -6 nm oc ete iste Gen 
Steffan-Boltzman law.. 
Railroads, trunk line, electrical application standardization 
1468-1474-1477-1482 
Railways, ClOCtric..s\ostii serney eels coe Sie> © sidiam Wit obuetennmehtee oe niGNe ees 
construction, cost. . 
development expense. . 2 Re tire beeen ee 
d.c., 1500 volts, energy Tose aise ee 
car maintenance cost...............+5+5- 
TOPDIN: COSh aA Mpc oa es ieee 
cost of electrification. . aye? ik te eee 
maintenance.k.ic <a wee re 
Operation.cy% acat came seen 
electrification scars etree os eee 
transmission, cost of maintenance......... 
freight service, effect on load factor............ 
gear -broakagediiws ink mae eN WR We ahs ales «rer 
woing value. nie swe ra Gale RMN Ze 8 ins whee mie ole 
Pinion: breakageswae ones Atiaem kes occ ee eae 
single-phase, il, 000-volt, energy loss.. An 
e lectrification, COSteee oe ean ; 


experience on Blanknese line...... 
Brighton (England) 

linessAhaioey hemes 

fTEqUENnCY ACHOICEI. ace niente 1492 


steel contact wire, experience..... : 

storage battery, operation..................-. 

track constructioninn: ae arene ree 
transmission line construction 

trunk line service, definition......... 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Railways, (continued) 

; WanoseleCuriiea (LOU COSUm elle a. ier vidi ricriene ts serete oie 
Reine eC OMeCOTOna LOSS. Moenteeaite ss es slot seine + os 895 
Rays, cathode, Alexander method. 77... 021. ett ee anes 
Reactance synchronous, determination...........--.+-+++e+ee0s 
Reactive factor, standard definition............... ES Gs 
Reactors, current-limiting, action under short circuit............. 

Dilstoonhapiverratre mat ose ese 4 2 

EO MMETUCH OM sreraretss ote eaedel« shoks aisle) Aico reso = 

ENG, IG 4 + poe 8 OP oe 

effect on frequency converter......... 

split-pole converter.......... 

Stability olsySvetis. meal. 

synchronous converters...... 
1180-1186 

in central station operation........... 
senerator leads!.....20........1416 

sreigy MGs counco bors isos. o pe Orato 

ECSC SAM AL Mei aideca hss tensyetetevereha-e ens 

GOT Waele oa. ob chow am oS. Cronos omnes 
CMELATOL Se eres erie ener =| 1416 

sectionalizing buses..........-- 

performance under short circuit..........--++-++-55- 

Rectifier, mercury arc, natural oscillations, character. ee os. s- 
Refrigerating plant, load factor.........-+s- esse ee eerste ees 
Regulation, alternator effect of exciter regulation........ <---> 
necessary conditions.......+.-.+-+-++++-- 

poor, desirability.......... 6. ;+++++20e05 
e.m.f., Connecticut River Power Co., equipment, des- 
CrIpODicis oe ee Mee a tee ee alee Sls 
effect on candle power.......-- 6+. essere ceee 
life of incandescent lamps........--- 

necessary conditions.......-...---+-+2teee 
Ontario Power Co. equipment, description. ... 
International standard....... 0... -- sees eee tees 
load, motor driven fly-wheel, connection diagram.... 


relative cost storage battery and fly-wheel equip- | 


dekard Rancher tao che 

evanwayolaael GlesiobanlOilinis «ld 0 Acic oo Mme Ue caOID LO DD og 
RES hc been Siu.opuanice a> Gia DN Cia Oats 
transformer, average value.........--+ see cree eres 
AtINR hile Che he gulaem oO me mic ule Caos OID 
characteristics, different percentages iron 
loss, constant, 
active material 

power-factors, 
constant im- 
pedance...... 

power-factors 
constant react- 
anCermartecutls 

power-factors 
constant resist- 
ANCE Hee eect oxe 
effect of arrangement of magnetic and 
electric circuits.........--- 
copper loss.......+-2--+s 005s 
low value on destruction risk. . 
on exciting current......... +++: 
power-factor.....- -..s++e5+5 
factors which effect.......+.--++e+e55> 
Pil AS eins sete ale ste ee age ose 


ComparisOn.......+eeeeeneeres 


relation to losses and rating......+.++++ 


66 . TOPICAL INDEX 


Regulator, field, Tirrill, connection diagram.......-++++--+++-++5 
Tirrill, application to synchronous condensers......... 
transmission lines.............- 
connections for d.c. generator...........+++-- 
diagrams........--ss.eeee eee es 
four exciters in parallel. . 
three-wire d.c. system. . 
two d.c. generators in parallel. . 
exciters in Sareea sie Maren 563 
cycle of operation. . stia a! ahaiso iat 
Reinforced concrete. (See Concrete, Reinforced. ). 
Relays, duplex reversing current required. . 3 
neutral, quadruplex, operating current. . Do nae 
polar duplex, Opefabionsa ick eke ies aa ee 
reverse-power, defects. . ‘ 
selective, electromagnetic, ‘connections. . 
electrostatic, connections. . : 
telegraph, 150-ohm, ratio of operating t ‘to > releasing ‘current 
time-limit, experience various Mb : : 
telegraph ampere-turn formula. . 
design factors. . 
effect of polar enlargements. 
Resistance, high frequency telephone circuits. 
insulation. (See Insulation.).. 

Resistors, cast-iron, advantages: ©... jetspuetiels Spin elie tone 
prid, sate temperatures... ee eae eens 
maximum current capacity... 
minimum current pe ae ik 

material, limiting features. . . 
terminals, troubles. . : eee ets 
Retardation curve, typical, battleship. . olin beech sac Rayo c Pee 
Rheostats. (See also Resistors. ) ammRth plea eoieda Meher coat 
choice. of type of.contaotieran ts sshinieid. ce nese 
design contact dimits oc. acpi. view oath: ee 
heavy current, construction. . 
1FON. 11 DbON, CONSE UCHION Mii. cache Steric reer 
limiting features of resistors. : 
terminals, troubles due to solenoid. . 
River, water, specific resistance. <<). «01 «sis snare ele ere ote 
Rochling- Rodenhauser induction furnace. (See also Furnace.).... 
characteristics........ 
Construction-.cin ere 
royalty charges....... 
Rolling millichoiceof ty perc cic. vacm teresa ide Sera ein noemeerens 
drive, Ilgner system, disadvantages................ 
effect of residual magnetism on operation........... 
electric apparatus, money value at present installed 
tabulated data of installations lace 
world.. é 
generator, choice. . 
design. . Se TRCN. «RR ae ae Se eee 
inclined spindles, laasen je Ae yl See ee 
induction motor, slip regulation. . 
Motor Choice s..nceaaacs pedkieam: pantera ee ee 
methodsiof voltage control... .......2......+e 
reversingnearly Installation c.- share ene eee 
CfiClenCyiicbtne arn sega Ata oe ee ce 
electric horse power installed since 1906. 
energy consumption. . ; Fost 
experience with Ilgner system. . 
Illinois Steel Co. plant, description. . a 
NE Ncayeh emery Guth c5 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Rolling mill, reversing, (continued) 


power required to accelerate.............. 
REX [RUROINI Fg hols Doo DOb on Uumanoce 
various types. ..«.... 
AROS Oe IS alee: Can dbo oes sh ec bona ouoeod 
WSS OMe aus oboe bc eb obinedun Om ae 
two-high vs. reversing mill..................-.1608 
Roosevelt Dam, storage capacity......... 2.2. e eee ee ee ee eee eee 
Salt River irrigation project, description.........+...e+ee eee eee 
ihe COS oo Foe ondo PHeOON Mob OO 
Wan grooeos ee CoGh NGOs COU ao Seo 
plan of power house.. ..........-- 
LOMAACRCAPACUDY celai ela uel> stash es 
PRAMSMMSSIOM Ith Geecs aie cael wlelelel > ter ele 
typical pumping station 
Saturation factor, standard ant sis “ 3 SMa) SMO SEGRE OOD 


Shellac, heat absorbing power. ....-..-1 ++ -e esse se ere r sree ee 

Ships, electric propulsion. . 2.0... 2-s2mseeeeem erste setts 

AV aTtace Sa ac Nasir as fs giaKes aie OPO 

Gasad VARtAGES werd cielo aie ere ier 

installation, weight of parts..........-. 

iors Ce eee Ene e a Oooh a oUt. mcioe 

electrically propelled, brief description........-+-+++++++- 

electrical characteristics............ 

steam consumption......-...+++--- 

power required to propel...-.0..0- pest ene nenee cries 

RON oes Ces Sond ch Red co dom oto ae ae 

propeller speed, choice.........--.eeeeese reer streets 

propulsive coefficients. ...< +. 0+ sn seeeere eres re eters 

turbine driven, steam consumption.......+--++++++s+ ese 

turbine propulsion, disadvantages. ....-.---+sser sr trtees 

Short-circuit forces in electric machinery, calewlationgc.. uv... ts 
rate of current increaSe........---+ +++ sere 

Signaling railway block wires, CharacleristiCS...ucie secon eae 

substation diagram........-..-+.-: 

loud speaking telephone for block wire service 

1035-1040 

train despatching. (See Train Despatching.)... 

Rivers radiation POWE! «<0... wesc see wr egitim te ny ne smn tes 

Skin effect, general equations. ........---seeee eee rere tree sees 

: measurement, high frequency.....-¢.---++++eee eres 

tests, 40,000 to 200,000 cycles......- +--+ ++++err sees 

Sleet, effect on corona 10SS. ..n%) nese seer eerste toons: 1895 

design of wire spans. .....--+.+++ssecee eres 

transmission lines...........+eeeseeeees Aes 

precipitation, copper, iron and aluminum wire tests........ 

Slip regulator, automatic, arucblenten. Sotto a totem ao ooo 6 Geo 

Bcokecetlect on corona, 168S.,..- goa ceiseen neve es oe ens + 1895 

stacks, probable life..........--. Fee to th Oo ee en Oe  e 

Snoqualmie Falls transmission system ...--.---s+0eerce errr ttt 

method of operating.......- 

record of service interruptions 

5 See oN 


Snow, effect on corona loss..... 


South Carolina, map of proposed transmission system........-- 


Southern California Edison Co., map of transmission line......-: 
Power Co., map of transmission system....--- . 139-328 
transmission line, description......-..+++-- 

Solenoid, capacity formula... .. 02. ..+- sees e reste 


inductance, formula.........-.--seseeeerererer trees 


68 TOPICAL INDEX 

Space factor, laminated steel........... Se ees a SRS aaa 

Spark, discharge, maximum surface gradient required Woes ee 
super, potential, definition...........---,-+-+-+2seeee: 


time lag, shown by oscillograms.......-..-----+--++-+:: 
Spark-gap, ball electrode, striking e.m.f. curve................-- 
effect of non-inductive shunt resistance.............. 
transient ©,in-f. 0%, Pees oe ee ence 
e.m.f., factors which cause irregularities.............. 
at high altitude; tests.= S2se ere ere 
short, coherence-resistance curve..........-......... 
striking ‘e2mn.£2.7: 5 en Sota enc ee ede ee 
Sparking distance across conductors of different diameters...... 
reactors in series with transmission line, 
Significance: 2... sci tscsewet 
transmission line............ 
standard :.auivieds. ak Oe eee ee oe oer 
e.m.f. across series reactor, frequency calculation...... 
' Specific:capacity, effect of frequency: 2 aut aera ee 
Spectriun electromagmetics eee ate ere penne Liao a ee ee eRe 
Speed tfany regulation, (definitions tyes oe ae eee 
relation between speed current and resist- 
ANCE. Hs Minis Het A ee Se 
high frequency generator, measurement................. 
machine;-reculations detinition sacs. 22 y ce ces eee 
relation between speed, current and 
Pedistariceeie a oe cae ene wear es 
Squier’s multiplex telephone:systemacc mee est ee 
Standard neutral quadruplex relay operating current 
Standardization tulecspee een eee ee Oe oe ae eee 
Steam consumption, distribution, hotel plant.......7........... 
electrically propelled ship........... 537-541 
freight locomotive jasncs ce ahi ee 
locomotive, express passenger service...... 
switching locomotive: e.c.aee eee eee 
turbine driven, ship 
railroad, Oak Point yard layout 
Steel, coeficient of expansiOncna sa aera ame ie easier ieee eae 
cost, production ini electric furnaces. ei ea ee eee 
crucible, energy and cost, for production in electric furnace. 
Clon gation. ss s.24-y Setar eae ae eee lech ee ce ae 
high-carbon, decalescent point................ 
measurement, method of checking 
recalescent point 
laminated)spacé factor aeiyuan i sites vu nee eee ee 
Specific weighty wi.i. ieee ed pee re eee 
low-carbon, decalescent; pointwaa.. wanes mien meee 
recalescent:poiht.agee ee aes ce a eee 
modulus of elasticity 
radiation power wus ces ok oe eR eee 
rolling, power required, various elongations.............. 
silicon, eddy current exponents; tests............... 
effect on transformer designJ.). cea ne eee 
hySteresis exponentssetests-nacs rae ee oe eee 
stetian-Boltzman. radiation la wiaedscae wre ee mee eae 
Stray currents.’ (See Current): nienme wees oe eee eee 
Street lighting arc. comduits Gos teeedery ares nie eee eee 
cost, 100-lamp system 
items) thatrafiectsc pores ares 
equipment; depreciation. ss a7. wee 
contracts, various large cities 
equipment, depreciation 


SH ode 6 91 6 wile ee Fie oe a 
Ce ei ee ee a Oe a a a Le 
SE Me a Lr oe) 


equipment, taxes 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Striking distance, air, different electrodes......:.......-+.+-..+ 
conductors, different air-pressures........ eae 
iammeversasmne a tect run: 

Spheres of different diameters..............+... 

eum.t. curve from short spark gaps..........+.-2va.+«+- 

Stroh duplex relay, reversing current required..............+.... 


Sastarioneralkhway COUStRUCHON. cera scorer os gs 
(ORIEN SATB RS EN OYCORS 5 ko OS be aes teers era cc 
equipment.... 


transformer, importance of ventilation............... 
Super-spark potential, definition............---. seer seers 
Surface coatings, dielectric, characteristics...........--..+.++-- 
Surges, cause of arcing ground...........- 22-45 eee eee tees 
Switches, choice of type of contact.............-.:-+es seer eee 
high-tension apparatus inclosing...........--.+++++- 
polyphase, effects due to non-simultaneous 


3 CLG SCR eee aes wart ow sen site ga cai yace 020 

Oil, arialysis Of TUPLUTE. 25.6 1. ne eine sec Fee 
capacity and resistance in multiple 

series.... 

inductance and resistance in 
AULA PICs ete os Sara eee 


induction motor in circuit....... 
synchronous machine in multiple. 


automatic, speed-time curve...........-++-++++++: 

utilization of explosive energy.........-- 
behavior under short circuiit.............+---+-0:> 
high-power, rupture tests, results... ....-....++5-- 


high-tension, rupture, tests.....-..-----s0+eseeeee 

horizontal, break conditions... .......-.+++++++0: 

mechanical pressure under short circuit..........-. 

Tapid-break,. period... +42. - ese ile teeta es 

rupture capacity, Elect OL CUFLCIL, wrsciesiel = 21 oi =o 

DO alee Wes cieatts tutor tre ert: 

power factor.........501 
current, oscillograms......-.-+--+-+eeeeees 

Gam ty OSCUlOSTAM, ehi.ct nee tes oe eee 508 

ESS etme GN OG ewaeeeas mau cctet rie tiie) aan ene rus 

PE GTILES Rta SE Meinwh ienerae fa eceler ase ee 

short-circuit, rupture oscillograms.:........-.+--- 

typical central station, layout.......-----++++e0> 

instrument panels, requirements...... -.---+--++:- 

probable, ile ccm 2 eee 

Switching, high-tension, closing fransmission-line:.........-...-- 
CFLOCESUCULG. CONALCS: seo eae reuse oe eee shes 

opening line.:.....0-+56.+ sess ete ete 

transmission line, opening, test... ....33 

single-phase, test 1835 

unmdesitabiltty. ..... os owt opens ne eee 
transmission line, effect of closing, test. .......-- 1825 
GUEbaAlancerectswcul cetiiru-ci ote 

from low-tension side...........--. 

PIED Saree terete eierciee Gieko ts a 

oscillations, nature........<.-.---- 

Synchronous reactance. (See Reactamce.) i. vente pitas s 
Symbols adopted by Inteinational Electrotechnical Congress. . 
irate VAHL. oz pheno ABU OURO Or CRG CuO ccq ND aan ce Mirae 

AGRA GOL lo A A RiSS Gos Oa ea raCnn ra een 

Synchronous operation, general problem........---+s++++ 504s 
Gre pies, IoAd TACtOl oe yet nee Seen i Seen et tT 
Bees Pecderali ne aa wee = Sekt i et 
areceilly ley oe TE Gy RI Rees ee ec a 


Telephone, apparatus, electrical constants, measurement 
automatic, calling devices, description. 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Taylor’s Falls transmission system, lightning Ear pega 
Telegraph, bridge, polar duplex, operation. . : : 


terminal resistance. de ar eens en 


circuits, distance, limits different ee Met a Ochce ese ea aes 
differential polar duplex, theory. . 


quadruplex, operation. ese ft ee 


duplex relays, reversing current required............. 
pee electric waves guided by wires.......... 
(Alsou see Tnsulators:) oye ct seie erent 
CHOICES roles att coset Sea ie tater eee nie 
multiplexing, methods... oie lise susie tere aa 
polar duplex relays, operation. . : Stern Atte 
quadruplex neutral relays, operating current.......... 
relay 150 ohm ratio of operating to releasing current. 
ampere-barn LOrm Ulan coc eet oll aerate 
design factors, sycses acts eee tenon artes et ete 
effect of polar enlargements.~ .. <5 o 22 waej0 ee 
train despatching system, description. . Otc: ees aanaees 
transmission, choice of conductor miatetial..2.c holeke 


differential polar duplex operation. ..... 
ratio of releasing 

to operating 

current...... 

quadruplex, maximum length 

of line, formula 

ratio of ‘releasing 

current to oper- 

ating current. . 

duplex, maximum length of line........ 
for various resis- 


effect of insulator compound........... 
insulation resistance........... 


general equation... ee tame LOSS 

Morse, fundamental requirements.. 
quadruplex, determination of conductor 

properties. . s 
length of line for various re- 
sistances. . : 
maximum length ‘of line. 
simplex circuits general equation........ 
ratio of releasing to oper- 
ating currents.) iewr 
determination of conductor 
PIOPEEUCS ere en tele etree 
effect of line leakage........... 
relay characteristics on 
length.. 
logarithmic element, in terminal 
effect. . 

maximum length of line various 
conductor material........... 
relation of maximum Anew to 
resistance. . RP acd 6 
speed, formula... 05... nmedae yet ae 
theory 


ae) 


circular polywiper switch, construction... a 
description...... 
common battery operation difficulties 


seen 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Telephone, automatic, (continued) 


connection of subscribers to first selectors.. 
connector switch connections..........--- 
GOSLLOMSCIVICO MT i tones tune cilrisisialis felis ule 916 > 
disadvantages. ss. cee ssa eee 
distributing board, ARTI ONily, 5 geo cok ood is 
description............+.) 
OPETAMOM pene mee. oe 

double rotary switch, construction........ 
Skesomjoiwlorsl. Gag on onan ee oe 

first selector connections........--++++++- 
TESAAEIGE) HK@halhocbic a Amie Gio chiara gnc. Gad cucan) wane acinar: 
line switch connections......-..--+++000- 
magnetic stop switch, construction....... 
number of mechanicians employed........ 
polywiper switch, wiring.....---+-+++++-- 
reverting calls.......-.--.-5sseseeereees 
savings due to reduction in operators.... 
second selector connections. ......--+++--- 


switches life-test...1- 2.2.0 ee ee ee eee eres 

switchboard definition..........+++-+++++> 
operation, description.........- 

two-wire circuit.......- actin: 


central office equipment, efficiency...---.---+s+++05+ 
circuits, attenuation curves. ....---.- sree reer 
speed of propagation of electricity..2.«..---- 
transmission of electric WaVeS.....-+--+--++> 
duplex, bridging COMMECLIOD Hee in oie ony ae ts 
diplix, circuit diagram......---+-+-++++ +2033 
for wire circuits.......-.-+eeeeee 1623 
AASHTO Cedobbinod 5G aed Bem do ad on cor Uicle oo cCHae 
selectively tuned circuits.......-+++-2+5550+ 
series CONNECHION. 2. se. ss ewe teem ee 
experiments, electric waves guided by wires.......--- 
high-frequency circuits attenuation Curves.....------ 
choice of frequency...... ---- 
coefficient of coupling........- 
effect of frequency upon atten- 
TA CLOT enema 
terminal capacity on 
recistanices....-..+- 
alectrical dimensions of tuning 
Alememiuiens ab ope son oles 
equivalent inductance......- 
insulation resistance.......--. 
interference elimination...... 
multiplexing, methods......- 
relation between impedance 
and frequency 
receiving current 
and capacity 
TeSsistances..ss ee ee oe ree 
curve.........1647 
selective impedance.........- 
selectivity curves.....---++-+ 
signaling difficulties. ......-- 
stiffness, function.......--+-- 
use of condensers......-+-- ; 
systems, choice of frequency....-+-+-- 
intercommunicating circuit........--s+--++ 1 eee ng 
relation between line e.m.f. and 
fetigtics 5. eacws ns tees 
lines, attenuation constant, i vey isaeubll lear pea itmpeseen ed ties 
cable, description of N. Y.-Phila. loaded line.... 


72 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Telephone lines, cable, (continued) 


method of placing loading coils.......... 1752 
current ata point, formiulaccnwen oni a ette oe 1745 
efficiency, effect of loading........... 1752-1756" 1762 
equipped with oan aa in United States.. 1763 
loading coils design......... : wo ses AD 
LOSS2k ko ae cee eet ne eh ee 1750 
PeSistance. 200 ness Ocoee ke eee 1752 
methods of loading. . boi he ae ES 
New York- Washington ‘loaded cable.... ....... 1768 
on-transmission: 4oWers. sin toast - el are 1996 2005 
open-wire, electrical characteristics...... ie iS 
phantom cable circuits, use of loading coils. 1758 
terminal losses, devices for reducing....... . 1754 
effect of terminal transformers.. 1755 
underground, longest in the world............. 1757 
wave length, formula. . Stoic en ae 
loading coils, application to ‘phantom ‘cable. . Ree 
break-down test...3.1. 282 = 2.) ee ee 1759 
changes produced in terminal apparatus 1763 
construction features. soe eee 1768 
date of patenti ind... oo hee: ae eee 1743 

description of New York-Philadelphia 
cablenis wine ena shah aoe eee 1756 
CESION | agi ene SOAP ae hace ere 1749 
features...cwaucteenGe etoe ee One 1768 
dimensions and resistance............. 1760 
early test. of Pupin’s systems... 22. 1771 
effect on clearness of son Aus ete ee 1747 
crosstalk see 1772 
emiciency se ee -1752-1756 1762 

experience of American Telephone and 
Pelégraph'Gog ee syeccie ee aici 1770 
LOSSES. h steseocden: ct So eet SEER ee 1750 
method otranplcatdone niece sae 1749 
snistallation a sn: aisa~ cn 1761 
miles used in United States............ 1763 
New York-Washington cable........... 1768 
patents, date, i..0.Go ikke nee eae 1743 
resistance; ...c.5.).0 see oe MO eee 1752 
sub-marineicables. a... crime eee 1763 
useian- cable cirGinitsse.e ecw cnieceeene ree 1752 
long-distance attenuation reduction................. 1676 
_ cross-talk elimination........ 1676 
loud-speaking, for block wire service........ “1035-1040 1043 
dison ss.he 5 oad ee eee 1043 
manual idle wires percentnge: gs 70% 2h cen tae ch ae 939 
IMEASUTE'OL-SErVICEs ga Nee ares eee 985 
MOVEMENTS Of Operatorsn sa. een ee 966 
switchboard limitations,; <s.8 2 GG Vacees pa ee 
trunk calle cost. +o. 3044 ot eee ar ee ee 941 
N. Y.-Phila. loaded cable, description............... 1756 
open-wire line, electrical characteristics. . mee WE Ss) 
Operator, CONNECTIGNE syne Rieke etre ree 990 
energy expended sas. nnu,. ere ees nee eee 967 
labor compared with semi-automatic........ 966 
limitation ...cieetouie eens ase ee 939 
lines petoperatorseyawen aoe eee TOE Le 942 
within reach of one operator............ ” 984 
movements in making connection........... 966 
operating. costsidcicce ke See Be ee 969 
CXPENSEE) scans ease Ol mere eee 973 
force required ms). adee an ele 968 


operator, efficiencysciavne, sae oe eee 943 


TOPICAL INDEX 73 
Telephone operator, (continued) 

CMake sine S Mists & SRN Rae ao Ore eae 948 
Steps tommake comnections....... 2: oso. a: 940 
subdivision, limit.. Ni a oe 941 
multiplex, commercial applicability. Rae: ee L OOO 
Pupin coils, patent, date. . aS 

railway service, block wire, “substation connection dia- 

Eft ae I ee ere Cnn ie ee aC 1035 
Fepeivienrs pCrticalIred GENCY... 6. qe cee! oie yte tweens ons 1624 
semi-automatic Clement aggregating. . fri 954 

application of connection. 957 
automatic switches, opera- 
TOY thet as ANS Bee 959 
duplicate sending machine... 961 
operators key séts......-.-.. Ol 
system principle........... 950 
Witte diagTaim sess © < +i 952 
fundamental principle. . i oe HOO 
labor compared with manual......... 966 
GOAAMING COS nosis cametao dooce one 969 
EXPOMSe acy a siiahe seus haters ers 973 
operating force required. . er Mace 968 
switchboard, commercial Rae ee 967 
GeSeri pio Merce. tkeers 936 
OPEFAtiON es one ee ela acn w AUOO 
service factors...... Rem Pee LO 
labor efficiency, determination............ 1778 
operating force, selection. . tara ee LiLo 
training. . eer eel OU 
methods, efficiency. . | Nee errs won eMee 
operators.call capacity.........0c.......-4. 1798 
efficiency, average. .....,:.0..... 1800 
qualities, essential. . 1776 
toll calls, the switch ‘board necessary ‘for various 
methods...... Es Ee aR eee BD) 
center operation, definition. OM et seas 1792 
operation method of New England Tele- 
phone and Telegraph Co.. 1792 
relative labor, various methods 1788 
ring-down method.. 1788 
single-ticket call- circuit ‘toll 
operation...... 1788 
FIVE LOC ers eetteray syste 1788 
two-ticketimethods .y..cc6 ss. s. 1783 
short-haul method possibilities. 1794 
UIE GCGbbNE., 5 ub og an aeho oiau ot 701 eopeniaIe ol goto aie 1032 
CInC tata Tanne Marae betes ceneiciaah- = lec 1033 
toll circuits, definition. ......... se. gees hs eee ee 1785 
(SING oee sadn Ole Pune Cin Gc cone Oe 1784 
ie eae ae SENS od TRO ome tow) 
Graflic CixCuits, AEMMILION, oh... cswew ee epee ner ee ops 1785 
efficiency. . BMlostsceang Whey 
clearing house system, circuit ‘diagram. Be erent 964 
department, duties..........--+seee creer 1775 
percentage trunking business........... +.++:: 942 
quality of service. al 989 
train-despatching, adjustable ‘coil in way station...... 1028 
ehSCESa re teuatnt eee gee aP TN os 1046 
early Use... 0.66. sees eee ee ees 1008 
MESH is tse: Otele raccieire tive, -felem locator ys 1047 
Gill selector, description........... 1012 
line circuit diagram......5%.. 0.09% 1016 
selective signaling spinods: aoe el OFT 


system requirements.............. 1010 


74 Z TOPICAL INDEX 
Telephone, train-despatching, (continued) ee 
way-station, circuit diagram..... 1015 
Western Electric, line circuit. .... 1023 
selector, descrip- 
HO ea ee ee 1018 
substation  dia- 
TAI oot toe oe 1021 


way-station, cir- 
cuit diagram... 1026 


Wray-Cummings, circuit diagram.. 1019 

key, description. 1017 

service, block wires, characteristics...........-- 1034 
message wires, requirements...........- 1030 

wires, patching box, circuit diagram..........-- 1030 
descriptions .--<- ea ei 1029 

substation talking circuit...............- 1025 
transmission, attenuation constants, formula......... 1745 
cross talk, effect of loaded coils.......-. Pee ie: 
current, formula ses occ siete rele lies 1745 
definition of quality .<......-75+----- 1024 

VOIUME Benn. sos aoe eee 1024 


differential polar duplex, circuit diagram 1694 
duplex, determination of conductor prop- 


EEGIES oo cy soca tiecae aerials ola ee oenet eels 1718 
effect of loadine.ajchusn ieee 1747 
efficiency, definition........ ........-- 1744 
effect of loading....1752-1756 1762 
loading coils, effect on cross talk........ 1772 
in, CADIE CIFCUICS 1 .<.ccraae 1752 
TESISTAN COnmn.. Bertie aie oe 1752 
longest underground line..............- 1757 
losses in loading Coils. 0.0 scsi. + <1 ere seri 1750 
method of loading lines............--+6- 1749 
operative limits various conductors...... 1727 
phantom cable circuits, use of loading 
CORLISS tae ae 5 he ok eet caro uum sis a akon aeiees 1758 
Quality, deGdition. s ....n5>>k oboe See 
reflection coefficients.................. 1689 
simplex circuit, maximum length of line, 
POPU Bon ie orcs oes oe ois eine 1692 
effect of terminal characteristics 1717 
sub-marine cables, loading.............- 1763 
terminal losses, effect of terminal trans- 
FOTINETS ce onia ula Kee ae 1755 
methods of reducing...... 1754 
Volume, CEMNItION.o.n oem esresr aiaieleceels 1744 
wave length, formula.. 2.0... 6s. ce es we 1746 
Temperature, effect on dielectrics........ 0. ssc ee erence eee e ees 427 
measurement, standard method...............-.5- 2559 
of red heat for iron .wire...... FE AE PEARS OC 1555 
rise, International standard.................5.+++. 2576 
standard: limits... te moe te an oe sepa renters te 2560 
transformers, methods of investigating......... 428 
Terms, technical, standard definitions...............-..+.---+> 2543 
Terminals, high-tension, Great Western Power Co...........-++- 1996 
Southern Power Col. 7.05. s. Mo towae 1999 
Terne plate, radiation constant..........e. ee cee eee ee ee secon 433 
Théory; definition. «...... .::jieies owudle tare tate a nto ane eae ales Wie mae 1139 
Third rail construction... s.cccs sectarian ce eee nears 1376 
Time-sending’ by telephones::.ccmies ot nieve reales ilies belcis see 1032 
Tirrill field regulator, connection diagram............-..+-+++6. 559 
regulator, \(See regtilator.) ce miieyie eke tele eiciets tere nicer on 
Track maintenance, effect of spring locomotive suspension...... 1428 


Train despatching, early use of telephones....................- 1008 


dituatrii 


TOPICAL INDEX 75 


Train despatching, (continued) 


requirements of telephone system.......... 1010 
(HOARE Mite eas ORM a akan a cee read eet cone 1009 
telephone, adjustable coil in way station...... 1028 
(CUEIRE CHRC erat inh nie = Seige, Mii Sutera eee ae 1046 
TS CHIMU Sreeee ena tiseist ost LOL 
fine merrciigndiagnatiees «4.4.00 LOLG 
selective signaling methods........ 1011 
way station circuit diagram........ 1015 
Western Blectric, line circuit. ....%.0.0..80.-- 1023 


telephone, Western Electric selector, description 1018 
substation diagram 1021 
way-station, cir- 

cuit diagram 1026 
Wray-Cummings, circuits, diagram. 1019 
key, description. 1017 


Transformers, 200,000-volt, design data............--.---+++-00- 174 
arrangement, magnetic and electric circuit of differ- 
GUANA OSS aoa aoa ae ite Gaon e coo Olen ane 424 
Breakdown itivertialy CAUSES... ctu. ote ete = oi 478 479 
combined core and shell type, arrangement of mag- 
UGH GhaKel Go ule ebgouin ss qacemnd dieaniouG as cnemcn 424 
Commer ionsmuiavPatilc si ehvccsqy tarsi ew ne Tee £62 
(EnaNa SeHbeNONSE Yon wicicnctae Geo eee DOR NEG RC 471 
construction, active material, effect of losses....... 2187 
cooling, corrugated case, relative space required for 
Gull avorel ehbteny ating Orhonite Wns mocap cae ecm 446 
equation head producing circulation of oil. 440 
oil, effect of heat radiation on friction of 
GEEKS 5 cinco GH ad sh Clo DMO eso oO ao 442 
radiation capacity, effect of color......... 456 
relative merits of various types of tanks... 447 
requirements of tanks...........-.++++-- 447 
temperature distribution in oil........... 439 
gradient from tank to air..... 445 


rise asfunction of loss,equation 453 
velocity of oil in terms of temperature, 


SOO 3 1505 0 HO DOO OOS UO UO Oca 440 
VOPpen OSs, COSt. 2. cen. o- e Se wt te ae ee ee ees 2192 
effect on operation cost.......-...+.. 2184 
Regulation tek. Shy rec ens 208 
COLENL OSS PCOS Utes anette foelaesctenta eyefioleleyeseeu= (y= 2192 
Celta eee i eke i coe. SOS 
decrease from 1897—-191i, curve......... 2203 

core type, arrangement of magnetic and electric ; 
PGi AA es ee ees ee 
short-circuit forces, actual effects...... 391 
danger to end turns from Che MAOEbIlea G gies Ge oid Gon 1842 
design, 200,000-Volt.......-.--- 2 ee Se eee er eee ee 174 
data from 60 to 200 cycles...........++---- 2447 
effect of silicon steel.........-. esse ee eee 2201 
drying process in place........--+++- ee seerenees 458 
eerie ee |. a eet ation se i PAB 2204 
house, importance of ventilation.......-.-+--+++++ 461 
GAGbAll atom fLSba setae 1s ee rere ushers et 2200 

insulation, relation between energy loss and tem- 

DEPARTS LISC ie fhe aic.nin yes Wires nn iecnese se ye NE ners 212 
leakage flux forces, calculation......-++-+--+s++:> 378 
reactance equations... .....--+ ++ esse rene 401 
life, saving due to long........ +. 04 +e esse eee 2204-2205 
losses, cost, calculation, CxXaMplel cscs ete ee 2197 
relation to ratio of copper to iron losses.... 2190 
decrease from 1897-1911, curve..........-- 2203 


effect upon amount of material..........-.- 2187 


76 TOPICAL INDEX 


Transformers, losses, (continued) : 
explanation of decrease with increase size. . . 
relation to ratio of copper to iron losses..... 
relation to regulation and rating........... 

magnetic density, disadvantages of high........... 
magnetizing current, effect on cost of operation.... 
1GSS4 COSt ies. nc serie ee 


mechanical forces under short circuit............. 
mutual impedance, definition..................-.-- 
operation, breakdown, internal, causes........ 478 
Gases’ of failures: cee eerie 

cost, classificationcn wns, a oiaee he esas 

effect of-copper LOSS ok cia eens 

magnetizing current, effect........ 

importance of house ventilation........ 

value of reactors in leads as protection 


reactance, determination: ...c =<... 7 ae ae 
internal importance. spit on Gs ee 
regulation, average Values atc conse chee aie otek 
calculations... sean = hee ee 
characteristics, different percentages 
active mater- 
ials, constant 
iron losses... 
percentages iron 
loss, constant, 
active mater- 
12) awek Rae ee 
power factor,s 
constant im- 
pedance..... 
power-factors 
constant re- 


power-factors 

constant re- 

Sistance. ac.) 

GOSU formulas. cy ere ac tase Sees Soe 

effect of low value, destruction risk..... 

relative arrangement of mag- 

netic and electric circuits.... 

GH CXCibine Su treny eee ee ere 

POWEITAClLOP Sire te eeu ke 

factors which ettecti. cent eater ens 
foriiulasres Ge. nos ee eee aa ee 

COM PATISOM ea peice es 

JOSS, "GOB Uni. tsctyy ct ereloge ombchene tens eke i oe ston ate 

relation to ratio of copper to iron loss... 

selection for piving service, ener meee eee 
series, connection, two on polyphase 
cross-connection, definition................ 
diagram een esate eee 


effectof’stray ftlds.. setae tame tere eran uit: 
protection from high frequency............ 
secondary circuit, interconnection...... 2177 

: loads, cost of phase shift....... 


422 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Transformers, series, (continued) 
straight-connected, definition. . 
straight-connection, diagram.. 
performance calculation 
example.. 
Y-connected, voltage, formulas... 
shell type, arrangement of magnetic and electric 
CIretitSer +. 
short-circuit ‘forces, “actual effects. . 

, SQUAWOL Ase ee ee 
Shopp-ciromln MCULTEMU, CO MALIONG.ncctsisis a as vee 
LOLeRSe CALCUL atl ON peste seem cis sl asec: 

See ae 
stresses. d Be twaveeds 
calculations. aA 398 
relation to leakage reactance.. 

six-phas2 connections. . : rs Sea ee AAR 
standard sizes to carry i pence ele ore ote 

star-connected, reason for third harmonic. . ai 
aiveal WSs linoiisark ao ok cia dens a baS COE cnEa 


tanks, corrugated cast irom, cost..............-.-- 


Shel COSE Mecreeae cists sien ers ies, 2 

plain boiler plate, cost.........-...++++-- 
cast-iron, cost.. Bese neue 

radiation capacity, effect. of color. epetadetSccssu.ckis es 

relative cooling qualities of various types.... 

MEG UIC ETM CHU 1 ye cto eta: een ara yo sono) is a 


temperature rise as a function of loss, 


QOH Sa goe ey Anion oped adem ceoemO mre 
types, classification. . eo rey oe eee 
temperature distribution in Sa eee 
gradient, character. Meee cies 
ABB ouNubhaal GENS. ocke aalen eee eo oo 
rise, methods of sea are nige eae 
standard limits. . Lae 
three-phase, 5000 kw. reactance. . 
short- circuit current. 
“undesirable connectionS.........2..---+-+-eseeeee 
weight, relation to rating.. : 
winding, hottest layers, temperature rise, equation 
short-cireuit stress, tests. 


temperature rise, hottest layer, ¢ equation. . a 


Transmission, constant-potential, characteristic af eae var- 
ious frequencies. . eee 

influence of frequency. Mier geile so 

maximum power. . é at, 

power diagram, development. has 

relation between output and re- 


actance. 
reactance and 
efficiency.... 
PCOS Heeigamoe DOG ce eeoetS - 
vatiable reactance, constant re- 
SI IKON eno NY Ce iy Crs yh oe rer 


e.m.f., regulation peat Pe gs tteemthe tenes he eam 

line, a admittance, equation. . 5 en thee rors 

artificial, construction......---++++eseee eee 

esto Me ge yea eae een ote 

atmospheric TOSS NEQWALION. . scpeepe ee ss ica 

attenuation constant, equation..........-+-. 
calculation, 100 mile, formulas, A peat 

approximate method.. 2277 

electrical constants, chart... me 

EXACE MCTNOUNs wesw ome crews veces 


78 


‘ 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Transmission, line, calculation, (continued) 


hyperbolic functions, chart......- 
ice and relation between inductance 
ANd CAPACILY.. acaducltets ts ine 
equivalent impedance of receiver, 
formlatiesst-e as teee Cas ere 
capacity, effect of overhead grounded wire.... 
> formula. eee ote oaks aie ale ee 
charging current, different voltage, tests... 340 
Great Falls Power Co........ 
Western Power Co.....-...-- 
Southern Power Co...:....- 
conductor spacing, equation to avoid corona. . 
factors that affect......... 
suspension insulator....... 
corona e.m.f. for different conductor diameter 
and SpAacihigssi.d A retciaw ore ales es 
formation. (See Corona.)...-:. 00. 


effect of arcing ;eround......<. oe emis =m oe 
e.m.f. at any point, equation..........--.--- 

loss, factors which affect. ...-........- 
energizing methods..........--+-+++sseeees> 
entries.me(Seet HaithieS.) cae oii ciete = tare lt mee 
EQUATION ce ci sevem Wiese eecaetegetn tes bireletctan cee crete 


equivalent loading, table................+35- 
high-tension no-load losses, measurement....... 
. tests, instrument 
connections..... 

single-phase, switching test. . 1835 

SWALCHIT ot Ad Mgewte nao) ie enter es : 

test Mic tiemtosareke 1825 

ACE, OLE OCs cc ler o.c Ds srs clara Sher ea neo ene 
impedance, EQUAMON. o. vine vie owe ele sieenencs 
qnductance. formtUlasca. son Meret eens 
inspection, patrolmen required.............-. 
insulators: “(See Insulators.) \. «ee eee ee 
leakage; eqtiation. cin cu. cn ue einen ers 
loading, standard classification: /'........-.- 
maximum current capacity, 60,000-volt...... 


e.m.f’s, and wire spacings 
equation tis... ver 

tests. 116,340,342 

relation to e.m.f., dry weather.. 
rainy weather.. 


/ wet and dry weather............ 
one-wire, earth return, capacity calculation, 
example; irre rata ces pean OMe tobe ce hues Raia 
operation, effect of closing circuit; oscillograms 
opening circuit; oscillograms 

grounded phase, physical theory of 

Electric Helder orn. csvs cue es 

observed e.m.f. and charging current 

IN LONE Liner teen hee senior 

at generator and at end of 
longilineres bse ene see 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Transmission, line, operation, (continued) 


relative importance of transformer 
and line no-load losses.......... 
why spill-overs usually occur on on 
sFavsivileniOies sevd pes oa mo ate G ap old 
oscillations produced by opening..........-.. 
polyphase, switching.........-.--+:2++++00- 
power factor at different e.m.fs.; tests....... 
PACTOLSE WHICH AteCt at ai centers 
power loss, factors which affect............-- 
protecuon, problem. : 7)... 2.12. ete ee re 
railway constiuction...........+¥-++ esse eee: 
reactance, characteristics..........-+-++s+se5 
regulation Chart... 62 eee 2272 
regulation with Tirrill regulator..........-.-. 
resistance, characteristics...:....--.+++-++-: 
sag calculation, catenary, formulas and tables 
favorable 

cases. .... 
compared with actual measure- 
ATISTLUSS ices camer di cites ae ees esie Act 
loadines tables ye tricia rtrar 
various methods...........:- 
Sag, MAXIMUM, CAUSE........---ee eerste 
series reactors, sparking distances.........-:- 
single-phase, calculation by hyperbolic logarith- 

Bd CAEL TD Le Somerset de aera clsnetel auslieS le foenye) etede -Ae 
sleet etlectesneee ete 2 ire ec eel 
spans. (See Wire SRA) eee ace eo ter 
calculation, example............-+--- 
loacine Chatty. sec - © 
deflection, calculation....:.....+++++: 
ASSIST ona ce carte ca ees ome 
American example......7...+-- 
LACKOLS Ain reser ea) ee oe 
Ware Gavel ISS Seen somo Dome on 
effect of equivalent loading..........- 
temperature... 2... ese eee 
equations development.......--- 2236 
horizontal force, formula......-...-+-- 
ideal characteristics......-..2---+-+::- 
ratio resultant force to weight......... 
relation between sag and length......- 
relation between sag and total stress. . 
stress, length and sag 
and total stress 
sag calculation. ..+.-..-.-0s-+ seers 
supports at different levels........---- 
calculation... 
swinging, CaUSeS....--s..eee rece tees 
temperature, determination of effect... 
vertical force, formula........--+2+++> 
standard span, Central Colorado Power Co.... 
Great Falls Power Co......... 
Great Western Power Co.... 
suriounded by grounded conductors, capacity 
CAleulations con el mintionee eds eye ee 
switching, danger to end turns of apparatus. . 
disturbances, nature........++-+-- 
effect on balance.........--08+-+> 
low-tension side.........--+-«s++>> 

BRO THOUS cites embers Ses raage onsen os 


ECP Reap Spc DONE ot pCemmeuns 1828 


79 


80 TOPICAL INDEX 


Transformers, line, (continued) 
tests of oscillations....-7. 0 = bee eae 
relation between e.m.f. and charging cur- 
PONE. cuires crete 
at generating sta- 
tion and at end of 
long line.. 
three-phase, calculation with bre rbolic 
logarithmic tables. . = 
two-wire, capacity calculation, example. a earn 
one wire hina 
example... 
wave form, effect of frequency.............. 
wire spans, formulayey. er ett eee 
Standard: em fss./ rae ice a te eee aed ale deal 
frequencies. . ae 
system, 100,000-volt, minimum ‘size "generator .. 
disturbances, CUSES, Saar sae ol ese pitee 
high-tension grounding through resistance, 
advantages. ....... 6.0. e see e eee e eee ee 
interruptions, logs ten se) ee 
logging plant.............2-.-eeseeeeeee 
operation, non-automatic, advantages..... 
observed relation between e.m.f. 
and corona losses. . Oe 
parallel Operation. aentis see wae 
different e.m.fs.. 
importance of phase regu- 
Watt Onis, ere octane eee eee 


regulation requirements. . HE aot 

reliability, requirements nae Re Te PS aie ot 

service, continuous, definition........... 

short-circuit, method of clearing.......... 

Snoqualmie Falls, description............ 

operating method...... 

Groubless causes. focc «aw siete’ tule corte ie 

towers, construction, Central Colorado Power Co. 

without ecm. ts drops a... 2 cetera ereen aa neener ee 

‘lrolley wire, wear measurements’. 205 - .c. aye sieyeienw elon tonsete cayenne 
‘Trin linerservice, ;dennition. ..... 1 se ce ceie a uae cholo ettiael es arene 
Turbines; steam, bleeding, advantages... .. ecm ce smn oes wtce ees 
disadvantages, for ship propulsion............. 


high-speed, Rankine efficiency....: Sie sous har oe ace 

Weight per Ly Dueswase 1 ore nk mnnents 

low-speed, Rankine efficiency. .....5..-5..52... 

weight’ per Ds pica scsi Ste ee Geko eens 

Rankine eficiency. Sica. gee het gust ciPncier sain arene 

saving: by bleeding for heating................. 

use in sawmills. <i jiees ones coat telnet reaseties 

weight per h.py. eres seine. cre cecke eine beers creer 

Turin Electrotechnical Congress. (See International.).......... 


United Railways Co. of St. Louis, system, cost of maintenance and 
TEPIACCMENLS:. |... 5.5 ny - Frg ee renuins aie tac eee ee oe eee eee 
Utilities, factors of depreciation.” i... seats ay asics ve Suen 
Valne, economic definition) 4,5... eee ee ee 
mathematical expression. . Oersrad atte SOBs GAR eS 

Vapor product as measure of ionizatian cee hs eee 
Vector diagrams, directionfon rotation assem erent eee een 
elementary. 2 5 cnc ce ee ete es 582 

notation, Cho1cet + os emcee ee eee 

rotation; direction). “tis, aan ee ee 

Wagon works; load factor. 775550. 4. eee eee ee 
Waves, electric; transmission long wiresas. nee ene 


1803 


\ a \ 
\ \ : 


TOPICAL INDEX 


Western Electric, intercommunicating telephone system........ 
train despatching selector, description........ 

West Jersey & Sea Shore Ry., cost of construction.............. 
detailed cost of operation and main- 


locsor train divisions. y-rsnr da: 
ORSANIZALIOM Me rue en ete eck ie: 
power house equipment........... 
(Dlatie ta erie ear 
Substation equipment... ........:- 
ja ebelenin kc gb loo moe es 
SECON cre © en 
SVSCCMM, AD) tetera 
technical description... ........-: 
third-rail construction........-..- 
tracliconsipuctiOnaees so... nee 
transmission line construction..... 
trolley construction........:.#..- 
White lead, radiation power..........- Se td Sean tee CRE 
Windings, maximum safe temperature.....-.-.---- 0+ eyes reise 
space coefficients, silk, cotton, and enameled insulation 
Winds, electrical, definition. ......-..-.-2 sesh eden reser 
Wire, copper, weather-proof, life..............0e peer eect 
copper-clad steel, advantages over STOUMNG WALL ie sloee leer = 
Dan Gide crea Aart we eee Ne a 
Wiring, central station, layout.......-...--- see eet eet ene 
diagram, direct-current locomotive.........---+----+505 
Picetrie ClEVALGIIU en sale = hake ves v's LOG4 
INGRY ou Niembt ap ca dd miS\ Steines erento tea loreimters 
reversing controller..........-. 0+ + esses eee 
series current-limit control........2.-+--+++0+:- 
electrical interlock.... 
mechanical interlock. 
single-phase locomotive. ....-.-.+.+++eeerrres 
layout, central station, with current limiting reactors.... 
Wood, charring temperature...........---- +15. ee tye ters 
dielectric, characteristics..........-- 
- strength across grain, tests.........-.+--+.++: 
Withmoraitiye CEStSi suis aolwlets tn cos 
safe working temperature. ......-. 60.0562 e ete 
specific capacity across grain...:....--3 +... sere eres 
Worm gears, eficienCy.. 9... ne ee een te ce nents ses 
Wray-Cummings despatcher key, description......---..6++.-+55 
Variation, standard definition........--...e-+ epee eee 
Vector diagrams, International standard, rotation............ 
rotation, adopted by International Electrotech- 
Peal CONGTESSEi iS. saya idle Woy wh alee Tepes 
Voltages. (See e.m.f.).....--2. eee cere 
Water, Cedar River, specific PESTS CAME OE Li eee ee ke rte 
Lake Washington, specific resistance....-..5..--.-s+000> 
river, specific resistance...... ; 


salt solution, specific resistance......-..--..-- em ke 


Wind, effect. on corona loss... 15. 6.61 eye 1895 

pressure, Formula BUCK Sater sce ee awe eng Ae i 
Windings, armature. (See INPSEAERSShH OS) ISG AADC, Clerc aru ne NC oes er Yaa 
Wire, aluminum corrosion in concrete, testS.........- .. 2074 


relation to surface between intensity and diameter 

copper, annealed, breaking GyELe ib morn canned shui ream te aes Sr 
tensile strength. .......-5+ ts ses eres 

GloMBAviON CEStat se wees 5 oe ae OS ete a 
hard-drawn, breaking weight.......-6...+ 25+. +90 

tensile strength........--+6tetee eres 

disruptive critical e.m.f. gradient, testsS...... 0.6.6 tees e ees 


Wire. (continued) eae 
spans, calculation, cabeuae aed pacabola 
ASO. Aen rene 
charts, method of use. 
Exam Pl05.45,-207.. aoeke 
loading hasta 10 ee ; 
deflection, calculation: cerca nee rar 
relation to tension....... - Ee. Sali 


Americas examples gan. coer oe z 
effect of mechanical loading... ......-..:95; 
f : temperature: Acs. cu- saan aessetet icra ne 


ice and sleet... oe ae Se i en a 
jaepe: classifica ‘ion Nes ea 
t2mperature, determination of effect... cca 2 

effect of equivalent loadings. 2a42 aee.2. eee ee 
é tempetature “anise. 3, ak Faas ee 
equations, developmentmec ¢. .clese = aeres es 

horizontal force, forraula. + .1-eck. Soe Ue 
iGé: (elects; soe! Bl acgis oe hee on Pee icy We k 

ideal. characteristics. . 9...) 2: neat ieee en 

loading, standard classification. .... iy ae yee 

ratio resultant force:.tonweight® =. S:-acee ae ee 
relation between sag and length................... 
totalistressan Ais kt oe 

stress, length and sag........... 

+ sand totalistressi@is a Gc eee 
resultantcforcesformidlas- amor. ee eee ee 
sag calculations. .......0. 2...) 04s eB it ess wes 

Ma THIN WIM: VORUSC ie nee eee colt res 
relation to temperature. RP ee CRS = 
Sléet efhe cheat h ck her A ae ag 
supports av different levels, calculation......... 
deflection, formulas. . 
| pSagF formulas........ 
j supports on same level, deflection, calculation .... 
swinging, causes....... ots. Ga nee eh ee 
tension, distribution..... Y ct EL os -otans, e eae 22! 
relation. to. deflection, 12 ...2e0- ame rea 
Wind pressure, formula ...c. 2 see ao ee 
vertical force, formula. . 
steel, relation between surface intensity and diameter. 


DATE DUE 


PRINTED INU.S.A 


GAYLORD 


REFERENCE 
FOR READING ROOM 
USE ONLY 


SS 
SSS 
SS 


SS 
SS 


SS 
= 


SSS SSS a 


=~ ~ SSS 
SS 


