SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_winter_2009.pdf

WINTER 2009 11
contributed by families — Jewish artifacts 
or, in Reggio, objects typical of the region; 
figuratively , in photos, drawings, and other 
images of family that appear throughout a 
classroom; and literally , in the frequent 
presence of family members in the class-
room, both formally and informally . 
How does the philosophy of JECEI 
mesh with that of Reggio schools? The 
Reggio philosophy is well suited to the 
Jewish experience and teaching. Both are 
reflective, as in Talmudic tradition, seeking 
layers of meaning in experiences: Judaism 
in the teachings of sages, Reggio in the for-
ays of children. Both are collaborative, 
emphasizing the importance of group par-
ticipation: Jewish tradition in a congrega-
tion bedecking a Sukkah or a community 
caring for its needy; Reggio practice in 
small groups of children elaborating each 
other’s ideas in their projects. Both are con-
cerned with the emotional well-being of 
each individual: JECEI schools through the 
respect that is given to each person; Reggio 
schools by emphasizing the rights of oth-
ers. The coincidence of Judaism and Reggio 
is embedded in a shared belief in the dig-
nity and importance of every person.
JECEI was founded in 2004 to engage 
the families of very young children in life-
long Jewish life and learning through 
exceptional early childhood education. 
Conceived by Michael Steinhardt and a 
group of other funders, JECEI’s driving idea 
is that by offering the best preschool educa-
tion steeped in Jewish precepts, families 
could be drawn closer to Judaism. Jewish 
ideas are elaborated through what JECEI 
has defined as seven lenses, including masa 
(journey), b’rit (belonging) and k’dusha 
(presence and intentionality). While 
beyond the scope of this article, the lenses 
and Reggio practices have direct parallels. 
As a mark of quality , JECEI strives to 
embed its philosophy in Reggio practices. 
The Municipal Preschools of Reggio 
Emilia began in 1945 when mothers, sur-
veying the ravages of World War II, sold 
war detritus — abandoned tanks, guns, 
helmets — to raise funds for a preschool. 
They built it on values of respect and col-
laboration, hoping to avoid future wars. 
Impressed by reports, Loris Malaguzzi 
(1920-1994), a young teacher, bicycled 
from his neighboring town to see the 
school for himself. He ended up staying for 
the rest of his life. Malaguzzi was a brilliant 
leader, philosopher and educator who 
forged what today is a community commit-
ted to its founders’ values. They believe 
that from birth every child is rich, strong, 
and powerful, and has the right to early 
childhood experiences that respect the 
individual, develop his or her multi-faceted 
potential, and expand the joy of living and 
love of learning that are the birthright of 
humans. These commitments are similar to 
Jewish teaching traditions that have devel-
oped over millennia.
Usually we speak of children’s needs, a 
perspective that puts power in adult hands. 
Reggio educators recognize children’s rights: 
to have a voice in what goes on around 
them, to be in beautiful environments, to 
work in small groups and to use tools and 
materials of professional quality . Imagine 
schools with clutter-free rooms, natural 
materials, soft colors, generous amounts of 
daylight, a variety of thriving plants, 
museum-like apparatus, plentiful and varied 
supplies, provocative use of mirrors, climb-
ing/tumbling apparatus in every classroom, 
and no commercially produced graphics but 
rather walls covered with huge panels that 
tell the stories of children’s experiences and 
reveal the life of the classroom.
Individually or collaboratively , young 
children in Reggio Schools do work of 
exceptional quality , far beyond what is 
expected from them. By eight months babies 
paint, at age three they mix their own 
paints, by age five they create huge, detailed 
murals. Academics occur naturally , not 
through table-work assignments “pushed 
down” from grade school, but from the 
“bottom up,” stimulated by children’s inter-
ests. It is similar to a Seder that, designed to 
inform children, meanders in response to 
their inquisitive minds. Reggio work is not 
identical “paper plate” art; in fact, it is not 
art as some think of it but rather is an indi-
cation of how children are thinking about a 
project or problem. Children learn reading, 
writing and math concepts not to become 
“kindergarten ready ,” but because these 
skills help them solve problems they them-
selves pose. The kindergarten year, spent in 
preschool, is when prior experiences come 
to fruition in complex projects which chil-
dren conceive or their teachers pose.
Reggio schools are based on socio-
cultural theory proposed by the brilliant 
Jewish prodigy Lev Vygotsky (1896-1934), 
who died of tuberculosis at age 37, his 
ideas imprisoned behind the Iron Curtain 
for decades. Alex Kozulin, an authority 
on Vygotsky , wrote (personal email): 
“Vygotsky’s concept of psychological tools 
may have been inspired by the wide use in 
Jewish culture of different symbolic devices, 
such as mezuzah or tsisit, for the organiza-
tion of a person’s memory .” Socio-cultural 
theory accords an important role to symbols 
in the development of language and 
thought. In the words of another brilliant 
Jewish psychologist, Reuven Feuerstein 
(1920- ), the theory posits that “mediation 
is the factor that makes us human.” In the 
hands of Reggio teachers, who are masters 
in knowing just when and how to intervene, 
mediation is a new art form. 
Because the Reggio Approach is content 
neutral — there is no mandate to cover 
specific material — Jewish content can per-
meate a classroom, embedded, as in JECEI 
classrooms, in materials on shelves, books 
in the classroom library , topics of conversa-
tion and themes of projects. The following 
story will help illuminate: A JECEI leader 
had recently made one’s relationship with 
God the topic of an inspiring, soul-search-
ing teacher enrichment session. A young 
JECEI teacher could not fathom talking to 
children about God, a relationship she was 
struggling to define for herself. Shortly 
after, on a glorious fall day , she and the 
children were in the park. Ginkgoes and 
maples filtered the sunlight in a spectrum 
of reds, yellows and oranges. The world 
shimmered, enveloped in the colors of 
Joseph’s coat. Suddenly the teacher “saw” 
God in the children’s joy as they played 
amid crisp smells, a bounty of leaves, shafts 
of sunlight. Noticing how awed they were 
by the leaves swirling gently around them, 
she said: “Tell me what you think God is.” 
“God,” said a child almost five, “makes all 
the beauty come down.” The spontaneity , 
the openness, the group’s relationships, the 
poetry , the spirituality epitomize Reggio 
practices infused with Jewish ideas.
A unique opportunity exists for the 1300 
or so Jewish early childhood centers through-
out North America: To foster ever greater 
bonds among children, families and commu-
nity through the powerful duo of Reggio phi-
losophy and the JECEI mission. Were this to 
occur, it would provide a new vision for Jew-
ish early childhood education. 
■ 
AS WE TRY TO FIND WAYS of implementing best practices 
in education, there is much that Jewish early childhood 
education centers can learn from the Reggio Approach.
