SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_summer_2004.pdf

SUMMER 2004 3
I
f success in the Jewish community
were measured by the accolades of
our staffs and directors, we could
claim victory in the struggle for ren-
aissance. Practically every day , I hear
reports of spectacular initiatives that have
galvanized Jews towards renewed commit-
ment. Isolated examples are used to prove
the most profound conclusions. With
remarkable sincerity , executive directors
ask me to join them in their leaps of logic
and to agree that hypotheses have been
proven through little more than hearsay .
When listening to these stories, I some-
times feel that I have entered an alternate
universe where the weather is always
balmy , the sun never sets and serene
smiles plaster every face. If I ask whether
the accolades are backed by outside evalu-
ation, I am usually met with blank stares.
Unfortunately , too many executive
directors and staffs fail to understand
the need for objective evaluation at all
stages of a project’s trajectory . Instead,
they content themselves with anecdotes
told in the rhapsodic language of a love
song. Such elegies share common traits:
they prove the program’s success, affirm
the wisdom of the directors, and validate
the good sense of the donors. Not a sin-
gle preconceived notion is debunked.
The dangers inherent in such a pro-
fessional climate should be obvious.
Money is wasted on misbegotten initia-
tives; resources are misdirected; strengths
are ignored and weaknesses allowed to
flourish. However, effective philanthropy
builds from one successful initiative to
the next. We therefore imperil our
agenda when we omit research and eval-
uation from our programs. Ultimately ,
flimsy assessment jeopardizes funding
itself. When professionals are hesitant to
provide objective, outside evaluations of
their programs, my suspicion is immedi-
ately aroused. If they cannot withstand
scrutiny , I wonder, how serious are they?
To be sure, it is understandable why
program staff might present unsubstanti-
ated anecdotes as objective truth. We are
invested in our projects not only finan-
cially but emotionally . Wishful thinking
is a powerful urge, and no one wants to
focus on a program’s flaws, particularly
not when speaking with potential fun-
ders. In such a climate, it is easy to be
guided not so much by objective analysis
but by faith, which affirms each
of our expectations. Nonetheless,
without rigorous evaluations of
our initiatives performed by out-
side observers, we have no way
of knowing whether our efforts
are effecting true change. In my
view , one should battle one’s own
instincts and avoid, indeed
ignore, unquantifiable anecdotes.
While others may view this as
too harsh in light of the contem-
porary state of research in the
Jewish world, I believe it is nec-
essary to be pristine in our
numeric demands, indeed per-
haps excessively quantitative.
Quantitative analyses are a
necessity for all parties invested in our
initiatives. Donors cannot make funding
decisions in a vacuum. They require
objective analysis to plot strategy and to
ensure that their choices correspond to
their overarching vision. Program pro-
fessionals require outside assessment to
ascertain the near- and long-term vitality
of their projects. Oftentimes, programs
must be tweaked or even systematically
restructured when the original goals are
not being met. In some cases, when
evaluation reveals that the original
objective is not feasible in the current
climate, the goals themselves need to be
adjusted. Finally , the ultimate beneficiar-
ies of rigorous evaluation are the pro-
gram participants themselves. Freed
from the straits of wishful anecdotes,
participants will avail themselves of the
most resonant, compelling and even life-
altering Jewish experiences available.
Admittedly , there are certain areas of
our work that are not easily quantified.
How , for instance, do we know whether a
teacher truly succeeds in imparting Jewish
connections in his or her lectures? Spiri-
tuality resists quantification; it would be
simplistic to attach a number to the stir-
rings of the soul. Even the definition of
success is problematic. Should we survey
participants at the end of a lecture, or
years later? I’m not sure we have easy
answers to these questions, but I continue
to feel that whenever possible, we should
structure our research and assessment in a
way that leads to quantifiable results.
At Jewish Life Network/Steinhardt
Foundation, we try to foster a spirit of
entrepreneurial philanthropy . Some-
times, we even succeed. Understanding
that start-up ventures assume high risk
both in the presence and in the absence
of intense research and evaluation, we
nonetheless base our philanthropic deci-
sions on quantitative analyses whenever
possible. Hopefully , this helps us make
more intelligent decisions — and con-
vince philanthropic partners to join us.
Ultimately , rigorous assessment is smart
business, and we need all the intelli-
gence we can muster.
Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of Jewish Life
Network/Steinhardt Foundation.
Why We Need
Measurementand
Accountability
by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
Without rigorous evaluations of our
initiatives performed by outside observers,
we have no way of knowing whether our
efforts are effecting true change.
