SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_winter_2001.pdf

A
merican Jewish leaders are perplexed.
Our people are living in the richest
country in the world, afforded an
unprecedented freedom to practice our religion,
accepted as never before by our non-Jewish
compatriots—and yet, by and large, they are not
interested in their religion, heritage and culture.
What are we doing wrong? Studies so far have
pointed to shortcomings in outreach as well as to
the dominant pull of American culture. But there
is a larger factor that is often overlooked in our
rush to assign blame. It is time we examined the
structure of our community and the contents of
our tradition to determine how closely they reflect
Jewish life in America today .
Historically , Jews have suffered at the hands
of oppressors. The history of the Diaspora is
replete with instances of carnage. That the most
catastrophic trauma was perpetrated in our very
lifetime only reinforces our self-image as an
oppressed people. Over the course of generations,
then, Jewish identity was informed by persecu-
tion. Lacking exposure to the open society , Jews
found strength in a life of oppression. In a socio-
religious sense, the persecution “proved” that
Jews were morally and culturally superior to their
persecutors. The self-perception of martyrdom left
an imprint on Jewish consciousness that is diffi-
cult to remove.
The climate of persecution did little to prepare
Jews for life in contemporary America. When con-
fronted, on the one hand, with a history bound up
in remembered tragedies, and on the other with a
present rich in freedoms, it is clear that people
will choose the latter. If synagogues and Hebrew
schools focus on catastrophe rather than celebra-
tion, there should be no surprise that so few
American Jews, particularly young Jews, are
drawn to Jewish religious life.
The fungus of remembered oppression has
infested our communal bodies as well. The infra-
structure of the American Jewish community was
built with an eye towards relief efforts, defense
against anti-Semitism, and protection against
Israel’s destruction. Decades after such concerns
have receded into the background of American
Jewry , the community is still fueled by pogrom-
riddled perceptions of human destiny . Fear con-
tinues to sustain some of the most prestigious
Jewish American philanthropies today . Mean-
while, the American Jewish experience is charac-
terized by prosperity , integration, and joy . On
many levels, there is dissonance between Jewish
community life and one’s own personal experi-
ence. It is no wonder, then, that a relatively small
percentage of Jews are actively engaged in their
communities.
Make no mistake: history has taught us that it
is easier to unite people through fear than
through joy . But if Judaism is to sustain itself in
the open society , it must adjust to the reality expe-
rienced by individual Jews. This reality is
defined mostly by secular joy .
In America, far more of our time and
energy is now within our ability to control.
We have freed ourselves from the struggles of
recent generations, when our main challenge
was economic. Our children are progressing
to a lifestyle we can only begin to hypothesize.
As America experiences its greatest prosperity ,
people emphasize “quality of life.” Jews and
others, freed from historic necessities, will
increasingly concentrate on leisure, culture,
and family .
It is time for us to reorient Judaism to
the spirit of our age. It certainly would not
be the first time in Jewish history that Jews
living in a flourishing society have imitated
its customs. Italian Jewish culture in the
Renaissance incorporated important ele-
ments of art and literature. The Jews in
the Golden Age of Spain sang drinking
songs, and some of the great Hebrew poets
emphasized parties and celebrations.
During almost all periods of prosperity ,
Judaism has shown that it can guide people
to a joy that is deeper, more value laden, and
more humane.
Are joyous elements to be found in the
Jewish tradition? Absolutely . In fact, in Biblical
times all the Jewish holidays mentioned in the
Torah were joyous: Passover, Sukkot, Shavuot,
Shabbat. Even Yom Kippur was a happy day .
Sukkot was a holiday set aside totally for
rejoicing. Shabbat has a powerful primary
emphasis on oneg, on the pleasure of food,
family , song and dance. The Bible stresses
the importance of pleasure in this world.
Our task in this generation is to bring these
core resources in Jewish tradition back to
the fore. We must focus on the positive
aspects of traditions and life rituals, and
we must elevate the simcha of song, dance,
and community so that Judaism is once
again a religion of rejoicing in life. I am
confident that a substantial number of Jews
would freely gravitate toward this kind of
Jewish experience.
I first met Shlomo Carlebach when he
was relatively unknown. Although I had little
Jewish education and very little emotional
attachment to synagogue or prayer, I was
stirred and enthralled by the joy of Rabbi
Carlebach’s singing, and the dancing and
warmth that accompanied it. The connection
to spirit and community was palpable and joy-
WINTER 2001 3
Universal
Pleasuresof
JewishJoy
by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
The
connection
to spirit and
community
was palpable
and joyful.
I wondered,
why was this
the exception
and not the
norm?Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of Jewish Life Net-
work.
