SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_spring_2010.pdf

that even the most sophisticated foundations are driven by individ-
uals who value personalized cultivation. Relationships are as much
about donors as organizations. How can we link our agenda to
their philanthropic goals and interests? What were the successes
and failures of their other philanthropic investments, domestically
and in Israel? Israeli organizations must develop better active lis-
tening skills and treat donors as clients and investors. We know
that personal relationships will be crucial in helping us weather
this storm.
STRATEGY 4: Appreciate the dynamics of family and
foundation philanthropy
Often, Israelis focus on building relationships with top leadership
and ignore the process required to ensure ongoing support. Future
growth depends upon our ability to work respectfully with knowl-
edgeable program officers, spouses and next generation decision
makers. As a veteran in the field of community organizing, I can
attest to the fact that today’s client can be tomorrow’s mayor. And
as the world witnessed in the last U.S. election, the community
organizer and lawyer of today may be the President tomorrow .
STRATEGY 5: Embody sound organizational management
YEDID’s unique ability to help people help themselves and their
communities often leads to stories of heartbreaking injustice, the tri-
umph of courage and legal victories. However, the devaluation of the
dollar, the economic crisis and Ponzi scheme betrayals, coupled with
the dramatic escalation of client needs, has forced us to cut our
already extraordinarily lean budget. Involving staff members in the
difficult decisions made all the difference, as it led to their willing-
ness to work more hours for less pay We are continually recruiting
and training more volunteers to help those in dire need. YEDID has
outlasted so many other NPOs because we have taken proactive mea-
sures and we have budgeted based not on pledges but on receipts.
STRATEGY 6: Leverage resources
American donors respect organizations that diversify their income
streams and leverage philanthropic support with government funding,
volunteer resources and domestic fundraising. YEDID enjoys 100 per-
cent board campaign participation, and center staff and volunteers
raise funds from local businesses, creating a sense of partnership
between Israelis and North Americans. Moreover, a significant percent-
age of our former clients become highly trained volunteers and work
alongside professional volunteers from the fields of law , business,
accounting and social work. Using this unique model, YEDID is able
to serve four times as many clients as one would expect from our bud-
get. Several foundations, organizations and individuals offer matching
gift opportunities to further our development efforts.
STRATEGY 7: Bridge the ideological divide
In Israel, the primary political division among citizenry remains
whether one is for or against “land for peace” concessions. Con-
versely , ideological divides regarding social issues are bridged more
easily . For example, YEDID secured 44 members of the Knesset to
agree to support bills eradicating food insecurity and child hunger
by developing a school lunch program and family food subsidies.
YEDID is the only national organization to integrate innovative
strategies and to empower low-income populations to break the
cycle of poverty . Highlighting victories in consensus building is yet
another unique accomplishment.
 The voluntary sector in Israel, an outgrowth of our experience
of nation building, has the potential to perform at the forefront of
global nonprofit innovation. Our philosophy is replicable, and deci-
sion makers throughout the world seek to learn YEDID’s best prac-
tice techniques. We will continue to follow the aforementioned
rules of engagement, and we will be flexible and forward thinking,
allowing for growth as we continue to raise support in the Diaspora
as well as in Israel.
■ Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of The Steinhardt Foundation for Jewish Life.
by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
T
he Jewish fundraising world is in a serious decline.
And I say this without the benefit of statistical
research and analysis. It is more of a sense based
on experience and intuition. This experience, combined
with strong feelings from those around me, leads me to
conclude that there is a nearly profound drop in giving
to Jewish causes.
 For a long time, I have been of the view that this situ-
ation was in the making — for intergenerational reasons
if no other. But my sense is that the current decline is far
more immediate and more dramatic. Maybe I’m wrong,
but what if I’m right? What if Jewish fundraising is no
longer declining incrementally , but has truly fallen off a
cliff? How long can we blame this on a recession or on
Madoff?
 The community’s establishment recipients of tzedakah
are loath to acknowledge a decline in receipts, consider-
ing that to be a failure, so numbers are not easily forth-
coming. But if my intuition is correct, and again I
emphasize it is only intuition, then the changes that I
have foreseen in the Jewish institutional world may
already be here — unannounced, unexpected and
unhappy .
 We have been living on yesterday’s fumes for too long.
Old fashioned anti-anti-Semitism, unrealistic Zionism,
superficial and, in the end, meaningless congregational
life (including painfully unspiritual Bar and Bat Mitz-
vahs) are finally taking their toll. Yes, there is a new gen-
eration with hundreds and hundreds of new
organizations attempting to emerge on the Jewish scene.
But each of them is small and, alas, by their nature, I
think doomed to remain small — one of the unhappy
byproducts of pluralism. Thus we may be entering a new
period devoid of leadership except in our youngest gen-
erations, where there is a spiritual renaissance, a little
inchoate but hopeful nevertheless.
■
COUNTERPOINT
SPRING 2010 15
