HOW ТО TRADE 
IN STOCKS 


The Livermore Formula for 
Combining Time Element and Price 


BY 
JESSE 1. LIVERMORE 


DUELL, SLOAN & PEARCE 
NEW YORK 


COPYRIGHT, 1040, BY 
JESSE 1. LIVERMORE 


All rights reserved, including 
the right to reproduce this book 
or portions thereof in any form. 


first edition 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Ву QUINN а BODEN COMPANY, INC., RAHWAY, N. J. 


ТО МІМА 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


I. THE CHALLENGE OF SPECULATION 


HE game of speculation is the most uniformly 
fascinating game in the world. But it is not a 
game for the stupid, the mentally lazy, the man 
of inferior emotional balance, nor for the get-rich- 
quick adventurer. They will die poor. 
Over a long period of years I have rarely attended 
a dinner party including strangers that someone did 
not sit down beside me and after the usual pleas- 
antries inquire: 
“How can I make some money in the market?” 
In my younger days I would go to considerable 
pains to explain all the difficulties faced by the one 
who simply wishes to take quick and easy money 
out of the market; or through courteous evasiveness 
I would work my way out of the snare. In later 
years my answer has been a blunt “I don’t know.” 


3 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


It is difficult to exercise patience with such peo- 
ple. In the first place, the inquiry is not а compli- 
ment to the man who has made a scientific study of 
investment and speculation. It would be as fair for 
the layman to ask an attorney or a surgeon: 

“How can I make some quick money in law or 
surgery?" 

I have come to the conviction, however, that 
larger numbers of people interested in stock-market 
investments and speculation would be willing to 
work and study to attain sensible results, if they had 
a guide or signpost pointing the right direction. 
And it is for them that this book is written. 

It is my purpose to include some of the high- 
lights of a lifetime of speculative experience—a rec- 
ord of some of the failures and successes and the 
lessons that each has taught. Out of it all emerges 
my theory of time element in trading, which I re- 
gard as the most important factor іп successful 
speculation. 

But before we go further, let me warn you that 
the fruits of your success will be in direct ratio to 
the honesty and sincerity of your own effort in 
keeping your own records, doing your own think- 


4 


THE CHALLENGE ОҒ SPECULATION 


ing, and reaching your own conclusions. You can- 
not wisely read a book on “How to Keep Fit” and 
leave the physical exercises to another. Nor can you 
delegate to another the task of keeping your rec- 
ords, if you are to follow faithfully my formula for 
combining the time element and prices, as set forth 
in subsequent pages. 

I can only light the way, and I shall be happy, 
if through my guidance, you are able to take more 
money out of the stock market than you put in. 

In this book, I present to that portion of the 
public, which at times may be speculatively in- 
clined, some points and ideas which have been gar- 
nered during my many years as an investor and 
speculator. Anyone who is inclined to speculate 
should look at speculation as a business and treat 
it as such and not regard it as a pure gamble as so 
many people are apt to do. If I am correct in the 
premise that speculation is a business in itself, those 
engaging in that business should determine to learn 
and understand it to the best of their ability with 
informative data available. In the forty years which 
| have devoted to making speculation a successful 
business venture, I have discovered and still am 


5 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


discovering new rules to apply to that business. 

On many occasions I have gone to bed wonder- 
ing why I had not been able to foresee a certain 
imminent move, and awakened in the early hours 
of the ensuing morning with a new idea formu- 
lated. I was impatient for the morning to arrive in 
order to start checking over my records of past 
movements to determine whether the new idea had 
merit. In most cases it was far from being 100% 
night, but what good there was in it was stored 
away in my subconscious mind. Perhaps, later, an- 
other idea would take form and I would immedi- 
ately set to work checking it over. 

In time these various ideas began to crystallize 
and I was able to develop a concrete method of 
keeping records in such a form that I could use 
them as a guide. 

My theory and practical application have proved 
to my satisfaction that nothing new ever occurs in 
the business of speculating or investing in securities 
or commodities. There are times when one should 
speculate, and just as surely there are times when 
one should not speculate. There is a very true 
adage: “You can beat a horse race, but you can’t 

6 


THE CHALLENGE ОЕ SPECULATION 


beat the races.” So it is with market operations. 
There are times when money can be made invest- 
ing and speculating in stocks, but money cannot 
consistently be made trading every day or every 
week during the year. Only the foolhardy will try it. 
It just is not in the cards and cannot be done. 
To invest or speculate successfully, one must 
form an opinion as to what the next move of im- 
portance will be in a given stock. Speculation is 
nothing more than anticipating coming move- 
ments. In order to anticipate correctly, one must 
have a definite basis for that anticipation. For in- 
stance, analyze in your own mind the effect, mar- 
ketwise, that a certain piece of news which has 
been made public may have in relation to the mar- 
ket. Try to anticipate the psychological effect of 
this particular item on the mind of the public— 
particularly that portion of the public which pri- 
marily is interested. If you believe it likely to have 
a definite bullish or bearish effect marketwise, don't 
trust your own opinion and back your judgment 
until the action of the market itself confirms your 
opinion because the effect marketwise may not be 
as pronounced as you are inclined to believe it 


7 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


should be. To illustrate: After the market has been 
in a definite trend for a given period, a bullish or 
bearish piece of news may not have the slightest 
effect on the market. The market itself at the time 
may be in an overbought or oversold condition, in 
which case the effect of that particular news would 
certainly be ignored. At such times the recording 
value of past performances under similar conditions 
becomes of inestimable value to the investor or 
speculator. At such times he must entirely ignore 
personal opinion and apply strict attention to the 
action of the market itself. Markets are never wrong 
—opinions often are. The latter are of no value to 
the investor or speculator unless the market acts in 
accordance with his ideas. No one man, or group 
of men, can make or break a market today. One 
may form an opinion regarding a certain stock and 
believe that it is going to have a pronounced move, 
either up or down, and eventually be correct in his 
opinion but will lose money by presuming or acting 
on his opinion too soon. Believing it to be right, he 
acts immediately, only to find that after he has 
made his commitment, the stock goes the other 
way. The market becomes narrow, he becomes tired 


8 


THE CHALLENGE ОЕ SPECULATION 


and goes out. Perhaps a few days later it begins to 
look all right, and in he goes again, but no sooner 
has he re-entered it than it turns against him once 
more. Once more he begins to doubt his opinion 
and sells out. Finally the move starts up. Having 
been too hasty and having made two erroneous 
commitments, he loses courage. It is also likely that 
he has made other commitments and is not in a 
position to assume more. Thus, by the time the 
real move in the stock he jumped into prematurely 
is on, he is out of it. 

The point I would here emphasize is that after 
forming a definite opinion with respect to a certain 
stock or stocks—do not be too anxious to get into 
it. Wait and watch the action of that stock or 
stocks marketwise. Have a fundamental basis to be 
guided by. Say, for instance, a stock is selling 
around $25.00 and has been holding within a range 
of $22.00 to $28.00 for a considerable period. As- 
suming that you believe that the stock should 
eventually sell at $50.00, and it is $25.00 at the 
time, and in your opinion it will sell at $50.00, 
have patience and wait until the stock becomes 
active, until it makes a new high, say around 


9 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


$30.00. You will then know that marketwise you 
have been justified. The stock must have gone into 
a very strong position, or it would not have reached 
$30.00. Having done so, it is altogether likely that 
it is on its way to a very definite advance—the move 
is оп. That is the time for you to back your opin- 
ion. Don’t let the fact that you did not buy at 
$25.00 cause you any aggravation. The chances are 
if you had, you would have become tired of waiting 
and would have been out of it when the move 
started, because having once gotten out at a lower 
price, you would have become disgruntled and 
would not have gone back in when you should 
have. 

Experience has proved to me that the real money 
made in speculating has been in commitments in 
a stock or commodity showing a profit right from 
the start. Later on, when some examples of my 
trading operations are given, you will notice I made 
my first trade at the psychological time—that is, 
at a time where the force of the movement was so 
strong that it simply had to carry through. Not on 
my operation but because the force was so strong 
behind that particular stock. It simply had to and 


10 


THE CHALLENGE OF SPECULATION 


did go. There have been many times when I, like 
many other speculators, have not had the patience 
to await the sure thing. I wanted to have an inter- 
est at all times. You may say: “With all your ex- 
perience, why did you allow yourself to do so?” 
The answer to that is that I am human and subject 
to human weaknesses. Like all speculators, I per- 
mitted impatience to out-maneuver good judg- 
ment. Speculation is very similar to playing a game 
of cards, whether it be poker, bridge or any similar 
game. Each of us is possessed with the common 
weakness of wanting to have an interest in every 
jackpot, and we certainly would like to play every 
hand at bridge. It is this human frailty which we 
all possess in some degree that becomes the inves- 
tor’s and speculator's greatest enemy and will even- 
tually, if not safeguarded, bring about his downfall. 
It is a human trait to be hopeful and equally so to 
be fearful, but when you inject hope and fear into 
the business of speculation, you are faced with a 
very formidable hazard, because you are apt to get 
the two confused and in reverse positions. 

As an illustration: You buy a stock at $30.00. 
The next day it has a quick run-up to $32.00 or 


11 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


$32.50. You immediately become fearful that if 
you don’t take the profit, the next day you may see 
it fade away—so out you go with a small proft, 
when that is the very time you should entertain all 
the hope in the world. Why should you worry 
about losing two points’ profit which you did not 
have the previous day? If you can make two points’ 
profit in one day, you might make two or three the 
next, and perhaps five more the next week. As long 
as a stock is acting right, and the market is right, 
do not be in a hurry to take a profit. You know 
you are right, because if you were not, you would 
have no profit at all. Let it nde and ride along with 
it. It may grow into a very large profit, and as long 
as the action of the market does not give you any 
cause to worry, have the courage of your convic- 
tions and stay with it. On the other hand, suppose 
you buy a stock at $30.00, and the next day it goes 
to $28.00, showing a two-point loss. You would not 
be fearful that the next day would possibly see a 
three-point loss or more. No, you would regard it 
merely as a temporary reaction, feeling certain that 
the next day it would recover its loss. But that is 
the time that you should be worried. That two- 


12 


THE CHALLENGE ОҒ SPECULATION 


point loss could be followed by two points the next 
day, or possibly five or ten within the next week or 
two. That is when you should be fearful, because 
if you do not get out, you might be forced to take 
a much greater loss later on. That is the time you 
should protect yourself by selling your stock before 
the loss assumes larger proportions. 

Profits always take care of themselves, but losses 
never do. The speculator has to insure himself 
against considerable losses by taking the first small 
loss. In so doing, he keeps his account in order so 
that at some future time, when he has a construc- 
tive idea, he will be in a position to go into another 
deal, taking on the same amount of stock as he had 
when he was wrong. The speculator has to be his 
own insurance broker, and the only way he can 
continue in business is to guard his capital account 
and never permit himself to lose enough to jeopar- 
dize his operations at some future date when his 
market judgment is correct. While I believe that 
the successful investor or speculator must have 
well-advanced reasons for making commitments on 


either side of the market, I feel he must also be 


13 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


able through some form of a specific guide to deter- 
mine when to make his first commitments. 

Let me repeat, there are definitely certain times 
when a movement really gets under way, and I 
firmly believe that anyone who has the instinct of 
a speculator and has the patience, can devise a 
specific method to be used as a guide which will 
permit him to judge correctly when to make his 
initial commitment. Successful speculation is any- 
thing but a mere guess. To be consistently success- 
ful, an investor or speculator must have rules to 
guide him. Certain guides which I utilize may be 
of no value to anyone else. Why is that so? If they 
are of inestimable value to me, why should they 
not serve you equally well? The answer to that is— 
no guide can be 100% right. If I use a certain 
guide, my own pet one, I know what should be the 
result. If my stock does not act as I anticipated, I 
immediately determine the time is not yet ripe— 
so I close out my commitment. Perhaps a few days 
later my guide indicates I should get in again, so 
back I go, and probably this time it is 100% cor- 
rect. I believe anyone who will take the time and 
trouble to study price movements should in time 


14 


THE CHALLENGE OF SPECULATION 


be able to develop a guide, which will aid him in 
future operations or investments. In this book I 
present some points which I have found valuable 
in my own speculative operations. 

A great many traders keep charts or records of 
averages. They chase them around, up and down, 
and there is no question that these charts or aver- 
ages do point out a definite trend at times. Person- 
ally, charts have never appealed to me. I think they 
are altogether too confusing. Nevertheless, I am 
just as much of a fanatic in keeping records as other 
people are in maintaining charts. They may be 
right, and I may be wrong. 

My preference for records is due to the fact that 
my recording method gives me a clear picture of 
what is happening. But it was not until I began to 
take into consideration the time element that my 
records really became useful in helping me to an- 
ticipate coming movements of importance. I be- 
lieve that by keeping proper records and taking the 
time element into consideration—and I shall ex- 
plain this in detail later—one can with a fair degree 
of accuracy forecast coming movements of impor- 
tance. But it takes patience to do so. 


15 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


Familiarize yourself with a stock, or different 
groups of stocks, and if you figure the time element 
correctly in conjunction with your records, sooner 
or later you will be able to determine when a major 
move is due, If you read your records correctly, you 
will pick the leading stock in any group. You must, 
I repeat, keep your own records. You must put 
down your own figures. Don’t let anyone else do it 
for you. You will be surprised how many new ideas 
you will formulate in so doing, ideas which no one 
else could give to you, because they are your discov- 
ery, your secret, and you should keep them your 
secret, 

I offer in this book some ром'тѕ for investors 
and speculators. One of the primary rules is that 
one should never permit speculative ventures to 
run into investments. Investors often take tremen- 
dous losses for no other reason than that their 
stocks are bought and paid for. 

How often have you heard an investor say: “1 
don't have to worry about fluctuations or margin 
calls. I never speculate. When I buy stocks, I buy 
them for an investment, and if they go down, even- 
tually they will come back." 

16 


THE CHALLENGE OF SPECULATION 


But unhappily for such investors many stocks 
bought at a time when they were deemed good in- 
vestments have later met with drastically changed 
conditions. Hence such so-called “investment 
stocks” frequently become purely speculative, Some 
go out of existence altogether. Тһе original “invest- 
ment” evaporates into thin air along with the capi- 
tal of the investor. This occurrence is due to the 
failure to realize that so-called “investments” may 
be called upon in the future to face a new set of 
conditions which would jeopardize the earning ca- 
pacity of the stock, originally bought for a perma- 
nent investment. Before the investor learns of this 
changed situation, the value of his investment is 
already greatly depreciated. ‘Therefore the investor 
must guard his capital account just as the success- 
ful speculator does in his speculative ventures. If 
this were done, those who like to call themselves 
“investors” would not be forced to become unwill- 
ing speculators of the future—nor would trust fund 
accounts depreciate so much in their value. 

You will recall not so many years ago it was 
considered safer to have your money invested in 
the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad 


Ву 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


than to have it in a bank. On April 28, 1902, New 
Haven was selling at $255 a share. In December of 
1906, Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul sold at 
$199.62. In January of that same year Chicago 
Northwestern sold at $240 a share. On February 9 
of that year Great Northern Railway sold at $348 
a share. All were paying good dividends. 

Look at those “investments” today: On January 
2, 1940, they were quoted at the following prices: 
New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad $o. 50 
per share; Chicago Northwestern at Ме, which 15 
about $0.31 per share; Great Northern Railway at 
$26.62% per share. On January 2, 1940, there was 
no quotation for Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul— 
but on January 5, 1940, it was quoted at $0.25 per 
share. 

It would be simple to run down the list of hun- 
dreds of stocks which, in my time, have been con- 
sidered gilt-edged investments, and which today are 
worth little or nothing, Thus, great investments 
tumble, and with them the fortunes of so-called 
conservative investors in the continuous distribu- 
tion of wealth. 

Speculators in stock markets have lost money. 

18 


THE CHALLENGE OF SPECULATION 


But I believe it is a safe statement that the money 
lost by speculation alone is small compared with 
the gigantic sums lost by so-called investors who 
have let their investments ride. 

From my viewpoint, the investors ате the big 
gamblers. ‘They make a bet, stay with it, and if it 
goes wrong, they lose it all. The speculator might 
buy at the same time. But if he is an intelligent 
speculator, he will recognize—if he keeps records— 
the danger signal warning him all is not well. He 
will, by acting promptly, hold his losses to a mini- 
mum and await a more favorable opportunity to re- 
enter the market. 

When a stock starts sliding downward, no one 
can tell how far it will go. Nor can anyone guess 
the ultimate top on a stock in a broad upward 
movement. A few thoughts should be kept upper- 
most in mind. One is: Never sell a stock, because 
it seems high-priced. You may watch the stock go 
from 10 to 50 and decide that it is selling at too 
high a level. That is the time to determine what 
is to prevent it from starting at 50 and going to 150 
under favorable earning conditions and good cor- 
porate management. Many have lost their capital 


59 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


funds by selling a stock short after a long upward 
movement, when it “seemed too high.” 
Conversely, never buy a stock because it has had 
a big decline from its previous high. The likelihood 
is that the decline is based on a very good reason. 
That stock may still be selling at an extremely high 
ртісе--еуеп if the current level seems low. Try to 
forget its past high range and study it on the basis 
of the formula which combines timing and price. 
It may surprise many to know that in my method 
of trading, when I see by my records that an up- 
ward trend is in progress, I become a buyer as soon 
as a stock makes a new high on its movement, after 
having had a normal reaction. The same applies 
whenever I take the short side. Why? Because I am 
following the trend at the time. My records signal 
me to go ahead! 
I never buy on reactions or go short on rallies. 
One other point: It is foolhardy to make a sec- 
ond trade, if your first trade shows you a loss. 
Never average losses. Let that thought be written 
indelibly upon your mind. 


20 


II. WHEN DOES А STOCK АСТ RIGHT? 


TOCKS, like individuals, have character and 
S personality. Some are high-strung, nervous, and 
jumpy; others are forthright, direct, logical. One 
comes to know and respect individual securities. 
Their action is predictable under varying sets of 
conditions. 

Markets never stand still. They are very dull at 
times, but they are not resting at one price. They 
are either moving up or down a fraction. When a 
stock gets into a definite trend, it works automati- 
cally and consistently along certain lines through- 
out the progress of its move. 

At the beginning of the move you will notice a 
very large volume of sales with gradually advancing 
prices for a few days. Then what I term a “Normal 
Reaction” will occur. On that reaction the sales 


21 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


volume will be much less than on the previous days 
of its advance, Now that little reaction is only пог- 
mal. Never be afraid of the normal movement. But 
be very fearful of abnormal movements. 

In a day or two activity will start again, and the 
volume will increase. If it is a real movement, in a 
short space of time the natural, normal reaction 
will have been recovered, and the stock will be sell- 
ing in new high territory. That movement should 
continue strong for a few days with only minor daily 
reactions. Sooner or later it will reach a point where 
it is due for another normal reaction, When it 
occurs, it should be on the same lines as the first 
teaction, because that is the natural way any stock 
will act when it is in a definite trend. At the first 
part of a movement of this kind the distance above 
the previous high point to the next high point is 
not very great. But as time goes on you will notice 
that it is making much faster headway on the up- 
side. 

Let me illustrate: Take a stock that starts at 50. 
On the first leg of the movement it might gradually 
sell up to 54. A day or two of normal reaction 
might carry it back to 52% or so. Three days later 


22 


WHEN DOES A STOCK ACT RIGHT? 


it is on its way again. In that time it might go up 
to 59 or 60 before the normal reaction would occur. 
But instead of reacting, say, only a point or a point 
and one-half, a natural reaction from that level 
could easily be 3 points. When it resumes its ad- 
vance again in a few days, you will notice that the 
volume of sales at that time is not nearly as large 
as it was at the beginning of the move. The stock 
is becoming harder to buy. That being the case, the 
next points in the movement will be much more 
tapid than before. The stock could easily go from 
the previous high of 60 to 68 or 70 without encoun- 
tering a natural reaction. When that normal re- 
action does occur, it could be more severe. It could 
easily react down to 65 and still have only a normal 
decline. But assuming that the reaction was five 
points or thereabouts, it should not be many days 
before the advance would be resumed, and the 
stock should be selling at a brand new high price. 
And that is where the time element comes in. 

Don’t let the stock go stale on you. After attain- 
ing a goodly profit, you must have patience, but 
don’t let patience create a frame of mind that ig- 
nores the danger signals. 


23 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


The stock starts up again, and it has a тізе of 
six ог seven points in one day, followed the next 
day by perhaps eight to ten points—with great ac- 
tivity—but during the last hour of the day all of a 
sudden it has an abnormal break of seven or eight 
points. The next morning it extends its reaction 
another point or so, and then once more starts to 
advance, closing very strong. But the following day, 
for some reason, it does not carry through. 

That is an immediate danger signal. All during 
the progress of the move it had nothing but natural 
and normal reactions. Then all of a sudden an ab- 
normal reaction occurs—and by "abnormal" I mean 
a reaction in one day of six or more points from an 
ехітете price made іп that same day—something it 
has not had before, and when something happens 
abnormally stock-marketwise, it is flashing you а 
danger signal which must not be ignored. 

You have had patience to stay with the stock all 
during its natural progress. Now have the courage 
and good sense to honor the danger signal and step 
aside, 

I do not say that these danger signals are always 
correct because, as stated before, no rules applying 


24 


WHEN DOES А STOCK ACT RIGHT? 


to stock fluctuations are 100% right. But if you 
pay attention to them consistently, in the long run 
you will profit immensely. 

А speculator of great genius once told me: 
“When I see a danger signal handed to me, I don't 
argue with it. I get out! А few days later, if every- 
thing looks all right, I can always get back in again. 
Thereby I have saved myself a lot of worry and 
money. I figure it out this way. If I were walking 
along a railroad track and saw an express train com- 
ing at me sixty miles an hour, I would not be 
damned fool enough not to get off the track and 
let the train go by. After it had passed, I could 
always get back on the track again, if І desired." 
I have always remembered that as a graphic bit of 
speculative wisdom. 

Every judicious speculator is on the alert for 
danger signals. Curiously, the trouble with most 
speculators is that something inside of them keeps 
them from mustering enough courage to close out 
their commitment when they should. They hesitate 
and during that period of hesitation they watch 
the market go many points against them. Then 
they say: "On the next rally I'll get out!" When 


25 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


the next rally comes, as it will eventually, they for- 
get what they intended to do, because in their 
opinion the market is acting fine again. However, 
that rally was only a temporary swing which soon 
plays out, and then the market starts to go down 
in earnest. And they are in it—due to their hesita- 
tion. If they had been using a guide, it would have 
told them what to do, not only saving them a lot 
of money but eliminating their worries. 

Again let me say, the human side of every person 
is the greatest enemy of the average investor or 
speculator. Why shouldn’t a stock rally after it 
starts down from a big advance? Of course it will 
rally from some level. But why hope it is going to 
rally at just the time you want it to rally? Chances 
are it won't, and if it does, the vacillating type of 
speculator may not take advantage of it. 

What I am trying to make clear to that part of 
the public which desires to regard speculation as a 
serious business, and I wish deliberately to reiterate 
it, is that wishful thinking must be banished; that 
one cannot be successful by speculating evety day 
or every week; that there are only a few times a 
year, possibly four or five, when you should allow 

26 


WHEN DOES А STOCK ACT RIGHT? 


yourself to make any commitment at all. In the 
interims you are letting the market shape itself for 
the next big movement. 

If you have timed the movement correctly, your 
first commitment will show you a profit at the start. 
From then on, all that is required of you is to be 
alert, watching for the appearance of the danger 
signal to tell you to step aside and convert paper 
profits into real money. 

Remember this: When you are doing nothing, 
those speculators who feel they must trade day in 
and day out, are laying the foundation for your 
next venture. You will reap benefits from their mis- 
takes. 

Speculation is far too exciting. Most people who 
speculate hound the brokerage offices or receive 
frequent telephone calls, and after the business day 
they talk markets with friends at all gatherings. 
The ticker or translux is always on their minds. 
They are so engrossed with the minor ups and 
downs that they miss the big movements. Almost 
invariably the vast majority have commitments on 
the wrong side when the broad trend swings under 
way. The speculator who insists on trying to profit 


27 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


from daily minor movements will never be in a 
position to take advantage of the next important 
change marketwise when it occurs. 

Such weaknesses can be corrected by keeping 
and studying records of stock price movements and 
how they occur, and by taking the time element 
carefully into account. 

Many years ago І heard of a remarkably success- 
ful speculator who lived in the California moun- 
tains and received quotations three days old. Two 
or three times a year he would call on his San 
Francisco broker and begin writing out orders to 
buy or sell, depending upon his market position. 
A friend of mine, who spent time in the broker’s 
office, became curious and made inquiries. His 
astonishment mounted when he learned of the 
man’s extreme detachment from market facilities, 
his rare visits, and, on occasions, his tremendous 
volume of trade. Finally he was introduced, and in 
the course of conversation inquired of this man 
from the mountains how he could keep track of 
the stock market at such an isolated distance. 

“Well,” he replied, “I make speculation a busi- 
ness. I would be a failure if I were in the confusion 


28 


WHEN DOES А STOCK ACT RIGHT? 


of things and let myself be distracted by minor 
changes. I like to be away where I can think. You 
see, I keep a record of what has happened, after it 
has happened, and it gives me a rather clear picture 
of what markets are doing. Real movements do not 
end the day they start. It takes time to complete 
the end of a genuine movement. By being up in 
the mountains I am in a position to give these 
movements all the time they need. But a day comes 
when I get some prices out of the paper and put 
them down in my records. I notice the prices I 
record are not conforming to the same pattern of 
movements that has been apparent for some time. 
Right then I make up my mind. I go to town and 
get busy.” 

That happened many years ago. Consistently, the 
man from the mountains, over a long period of 
time, drew funds abundantly from the stock mar- 
ket. He was something of an inspiration to me. I 
went to work harder than ever trying to blend the 
time element with all the other data I had com- 
piled. By constant effort I was able to bring my 
records into a co-ordination that aided me to a sur- 
prising degree in anticipating coming movements. 


29 


HI. FOLLOW THE LEADERS 


HERE is always the temptation in the stock 

market, after a period of success, to become 
careless or excessively ambitious. Then it requires 
sound common sense and clear thinking to keep 
what you have. But it is not necessary to lose your 
money, once you have acquired it, if you will hold 
fast to sound principles. 

We know that prices move up and down. They 
always have and they always will. My theory is that 
behind these major movements is an irresistible 
force. That is all one needs to know. It is not well 
to be too curious about all the reasons behind price 
movements. You risk the danger of clouding your 
mind with non-essentials. Just recognize that the 
movement is there and take advantage of it by 
steering your speculative ship along with the tide. 


39 


FOLLOW THE LEADERS 


Do not argue with the condition, and most of all, 
do not try to combat it. 

Remember too that it is dangerous to start 
spreading out all over the market. By this I mean, 
do not have an interest in too many stocks at one 
time. It is much easier to watch a few than many. 
I made that mistake years ago and it cost me 
money. 

Another mistake I made was to permit myself to 
turn completely bearish or bullish on the whole 
market, because one stock in some particular group 
had plainly reversed its course from the general 
market trend. Before making a new commitment, 
I should have been patient and awaited the time, 
when some stock in another group had indicated 
to me that its decline or advance had ended. In 
time, other stocks would clearly give the same in- 
dication. Those are the cues I should have waited 
for. 

But instead of doing so, I felt the costly urge of 
getting busy in the whole market. Thus I permitted 
the hankering for activity to replace common sense 
and judgment. Of course I made money on my 
trades in the first and second groups. But I chipped 


31 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


away a substantial part of it by entering other 
groups before the zero hour had arrived. 

Back in the wild bull markets of the late twen- 
tics I saw clearly that the advance in the copper 
stocks had come to an end. A short time later the 
advance in the motor group reached its zenith. Be- 
cause the bull market in those two groups had 
terminated, I soon arrived at the faulty conclusion 
that I could safely sell everything. I should hate to 
tell you the amount of money I lost by acting upon 
that premise. 

While I was piling up huge paper profits on my 
copper and motor deals, I lost even more in the 
next six months trying to find the top of the utility 
group. Eventually this and other groups reached 
their peaks. By that time Anaconda was selling 50 
points below its previous high and the motor stocks 
in about the same ratio. 

What I wish to impress upon you is the fact that 
when you clearly see a move coming in a particular 
group, act upon it. But do not let yourself act in 
the same way in some other group, until you plainly 
see signs that the second group is in a position to 
follow suit. Have patience and wait. In time you 


32 


FOLLOW THE LEADERS 


will get the same tip-off in other groups that you 
received in the first group. Just don’t spread out 
over the market. 

Confine your studies of movements to the promi- 
nent stocks of the day. If you cannot make money 
out of the leading active issues, you are not going 
to make money out of the stock market as a whole. 

Just as styles in women’s gowns and hats and 
costume jewelry are forever changing with time, the 
old leaders of the stock market are dropped and 
new ones rise up to take their places. Years ago the 
chief leaders were the railroads, American Sugar, 
and Tobacco. Then came the steels, and American 
Sugar and Tobacco were nudged into the back- 
ground. Then came the motors, and so on up to 
the present time. Today we have only four groups 
in the position of dominating the market: steels, 
motors, aircraft stocks, and mail orders. As they go, 
so goes the whole market. In the course of time 
new leaders will come to the front; some of the old 
leaders will be dropped. It will always be that way 
as long as there is a stock market. 

Definitely it is not safe to try to keep account of 
too many stocks at one time. You will become en- 


33 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


tangled and confused. Try to analyze compara- 
tively few groups. You will find it is much easier 
to obtain a true picture that way than if you tried 
to dissect the whole market. If you analyze cor- 
rectly the course of two stocks in the four prorni- 
nent groups, you need not worry about what the 
rest are going to do. It becomes the old story of 
"follow the leader." Keep mentally flexible. Re- 
member the leaders of today may not be the leaders 
two years from now. 

Today, in my records I keep four individual 
groups. That does not mean I am trading in all of 
the groups at the same time. But I have a genuine 
purpose in mind. 

When I first became interested in the move- 
ment of prices long, long ago, I decided to test my 
ability to anticipate correctly forthcoming move- 
ments. І recorded fictitious trades in a little book 
which was always with me. In the course of time, 
I made ту first actual trade. I never will forget 
that trade. I had half-interest in a purchase of five 
shares of Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railway 
Stock, bought with a friend of mine, and my share 


34 


FOLLOW THE LEADERS 


of the profit amounted to $3.12. From that time on 
I became a speculator on my own. 

Under conditions as they currently exist, I do 
not believe that a speculator of the old type who 
traded in huge volume has much chance of success. 
When I say a speculator of the old type, I am 
thinking of the days when markets were very broad 
and liquid and when a speculator might take a 
position with 5,000 or 10,000 shares of a stock and 
move in and out without greatly influencing the 
price. 

After taking his initial position, if the stock acted 
right, the speculator could safely add to his line 
from that time forward. In former times, if his 
judgment proved faulty, he could move out of his 
position easily without taking too serious a loss. 
But today, if his first position proved untenable, he 
would suffer a devastating loss in changing about 
because of the comparative narrowness of the mar- 
ket. 

On the other hand, as I have implied previ- 
ously, the speculator of today who has the patience 
and judgment to wait the proper time for acting 
has, in my opinion, a better chance of cashing in 


35 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


good profits eventually, because the current market 
does not lend itself to so many artificial movements, 
movements that far too frequently in the old days 
jarred all scientific calculations out of kilter. 

It is obvious, therefore, that in light of conditions 
which exist today, no speculator who is intelligent 
will permit himself to operate on that scale which 
was more or less a commonplace some years ago. 
He will study a limited number of groups and of 
leaders in those groups. He will learn to look before 
he leaps. For a new age of markets has been ushered 
in—an age that offers safer opportunities for the 
reasonable, studious, competent investor and specu- 
lator. 


36 


IV. MONEY ІМ THE HAND 


\ \ / HEN you are handling surplus income do 
not delegate the task to anyone. 


Whether you are dealing in millions or in thou- 
sands the same principal lesson applies. It is your 
money. It will remain with you just so long as you 
guard it. Faulty speculation is one of the most 
certain ways of losing it. 

Blunders by incompetent speculators cover a 
wide scale. I have warned against averaging losses. 
That is a most common practice. Creat numbers 
of people will buy a stock, let us say at 5o, and two 
or three days later if they can buy it at 47 they are 
seized with the urge to average down by buying 
another hundred shares, making a price of 48/2 on 
all. Having bought at 5o and being concerned over 
a three-point loss on a hundred shares, what rhyme 


37 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


or reason is there in adding another hundred 
shares and having the double worry when the price 
hits 44? At that point there would be a $600 loss 
on the first hundred shares and a $300 loss on the 
second hundred shares. 

If one is to apply such an unsound principle, he 
should keep on averaging by buying two hundred 
shares at 44, then four hundred at 41, eight hundred 
at 38, sixteen hundred at 35, thirty-two hundred at 
32, sixty-four hundred at 29 and so on. How many 
speculators could stand such pressure? Yet if the 
policy is sound it should not be abandoned. Of 
course abnormal moves such as the one indicated 
do not happen often. But it is just such abnormal 
moves against which the speculator must guard to 
avoid disaster. 

So, at the risk of repetition and preaching, let me 
urge you to avoid averaging down. 

I know but one sure tip from a broker. It is your 
margin call. When it reaches you, close your ac- 
count. You are on the wrong side of the market. 
Why send good money after bad? Keep that good 
money for another day. Risk it on something more 
attractive than an obviously losing deal. 


38 


MONEY ІМ THE HAND 


A successful businessman extends credit to vari- 
ous customers but would dislike to sell his entire 
output to one customer. The larger the number of 
customers the more widely the risk is spread. Just 
so, a person engaged in the business of speculation 
should risk only a limited amount of capital on any 
one venture. Cash to the speculator is as merchan- 
dise on the shelves of the merchant. 

One major mistake of all speculators is the urge 
to enrich themselves in too short a time. Instead of 
taking two or three years to make 500% on their 
capital, they try to do it in two or three months. 
Now and then they succeed. But do such daring 
traders keep it? They do not. Why? Because it is 
unhealthy money, rolling in rapidly, and stopping 
for but a short visit. The speculator in such in- 
stances loses his sense of balance. He says: “If I 
can make 500% on my capital in two months, 
think what I will do in the next two! I will make 
a fortune." 

Such speculators are never satisfied. They con- 
tinue to shoot the works until somewhere a cog 
slips, something happens—something drastic, un- 
foreseen, and devastating. At length comes that 


39 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


final margin call from the broker, the call that can- 
not be met, and this type of plunger goes out like 
a lamp. He may plead with the broker for a little 
more time, or if he is not too unfortunate, he may 
have saved a nest-egg permitting a modest new 
start. 

Businessmen opening a shop or a store would 
not expect to make over 25% on their investment 
the first year. But to people who enter the specula- 
tive field 25% is nothing. They are looking for 
100%, And their calculations are faulty; they fail 
to make speculation a business and run it on busi- 
ness principles. 

Here is another little point that might well be 
remembered. А speculator should make it a rule 
each time he closes out a successful deal to take 
one-half of his profits and lock this sum up in a 
safe deposit box. The only money that is ever taken 
out of Wall Street by speculators is the money they 
draw out of their accounts after closing a successful 
deal. 

I recall one day in Palm Beach. I left New York 
with a fairly large short position open. A few days 
after my arrival in Palm Beach the market had a 


40 


MONEY ІМ THE HAND 


severe break. That was an opportunity to cash 
“paper profits” into real money—and I did. 

After the market closed I gave a message to the 
telegraph operator to tell the New York office to 
send immediately to my bank one million dollars 
to be deposited to my credit. The telegraph opera- 
tor almost passed out. After sending the message, 
he asked if he might keep that slip. I inquired why. 
He said he had been an operator for twenty years 
and that was the first message he ever sent asking 
a broker to deposit in a bank money for the ac- 
count of a customer. He went on: 

“Thousands and thousands of messages have 
gone over the wire from brokers demanding mar- 
gins from customers. But never before one like 
yours. I want to show it to the boys.” 

The only time the average speculator can draw 
money from his brokerage account is when he has 
no position open or when he has an excessive 
equity. He won’t draw it out when the markets are 
going against him because he needs all his capital 
for margin. He won't draw it out after closing a 
successful deal because he says to himself: 

"Next time I'll make twice as much." 


41 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


Consequently most speculators rarely see the 
money. To them the money is nothing real, noth- 
ing tangible. For years, after a successful deal was 
closed, I made it a habit to draw out cash. I used 
to draw it out at the rate of $200,000 or $300,000 
a clip. It is a good policy. It has a psychological 
value. Make it a policy to do that. Count the 
money over. I did. I knew I had something in my 
hand. I felt it. It was real. 

Money in a broker’s account or in a bank account 
is not the same as if you feel it in your own fingers 
once in a while. Then it means something. There 
is a sense of possession that makes you just a little 
bit less inclined to take headstrong chances of los- 
ing your gains. So have a look at your real money 
once in a while, particularly between your market 
deals. 

There is too much looseness in these matters on 
the part of the average speculator. 

When a speculator is fortunate enough to double 
his original capital he should at once draw out one- 
half of his profit to be set aside for reserve. This 
policy has been tremendously helpful to me on 
many occasions. ] only regret that I have not ob- 


42 


MONEY ІМ THE HAND 


served it throughout my career. In some places it 
would have smoothed the path. 

I never have been able to make a dollar outside 
of Wall Street. But I have lost many millions of 
dollars, which I had taken from Wall Street, “іп- 
vesting” in other ventures. I have in mind real 
estate in the Florida boom, oil wells, airplane man- 
ufacturing, and the perfecting and marketing of 
products based on new inventions. Always I lost 
every cent. 

In one of these outside ventures which had 
whipped up my enthusiasm I sought to interest a 
friend of mine to the extent of $50,000. He listened 
to my story very attentively. When I had finished 
he said: "Livermore, you will never make a success 
in any business outside of your own. Now if you 
want $50,000 with which to speculate it is yours 
for the asking. But please speculate and stay away 
from business." 

Next morning, to my surprise, the mail brought 
a check for that amount which I did not need. 

The lesson here again is that speculation itself is 
a business and should be so viewed by all. Do not 
permit yourself to be influenced by excitement, 


43 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


flattery or temptation. Keep in mind that brokers 
sometimes innocently become the undoing of many 
speculators. Brokers are in the business to make 
commissions. They cannot make commissions un- 
less customers trade. The more trade, the more 
commissions. The speculator wants to trade and the 
broker not only is willing but too often encourages 
over-trading. The uninformed speculator regards 
the broker as his friend and is soon over-trading. 

Now if the speculator were smart enough to 
know at just which time he should over-trade, the 
practice would be justified. He may know at times 
when he could or should over-trade. But once ac- 
quiring the habit, very few speculators are smart 
enough to stop. They are carried away, and they 
lose that peculiar sense of balance so essential to 
success. They never think of the day when they 
will be wrong. But that day arrives. The easy money 
takes wing, and another speculator is broke. 

Never make any trade unless you know you can 
do so with financial safety. 


М. THE PIVOTAL POINT 


HENEVER I have had the patience to wait 

for the market to arrive at what I call a 
“Pivotal Point” before I started to trade, I have 
always made money in my operations. 

Why? 

Because I then commenced my play just at the 
psychological time at the beginning of a move. I 
never had a loss to worry about for the simple rea- 
son that I acted promptly and started to accumu- 
late my line right at the time my guide told me to 
do so. All I had to do thereafter was just sit tight 
and let the market run its course, knowing if I did 
so, the action of the market itself would give me 
in due time the signal to take my profits. And 
whenever I had the nerve and the patience to wait 
for the signal, it invariably did just that. It has 


45 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


always been my experience that I never benefited 
much from a move if I did not get in at somewhere 
near the beginning of that move. And the reason is 
that I missed the backlog of profit which is very 
necessary to provide the courage and patience to sit 
through a move until the end comes—and to stay 
through any minor reactions or rallies which were 
bound to occur from time to time before the move- 
ment had completed its course. 

Just as markets in time will give you a positive 
tip when to get in—if you have patience to wait— 
they will just as surely give you a tip-off when to 
get out. “Rome was not built in a day,” and no real 
movement of importance ends in one day or in one 
week. It takes time for it to run its logical course. 
It is significant that a large part of a market move- 
ment occurs in the last forty-eight hours of a play, 
and that is the most important time to be in it. 

For example: Take a stock which has been in a 
Downward Trend for quite some time and reaches 
a low point of 40. Then it has a quick rally in a 
few days to 45, then it backs and fills for a week in 
a range of a few points, and then it starts to extend 
its rally until it reaches 40/2. The market becomes 


46 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 


dull and inactive for a few days. Then one day it 
becomes active again and goes down 3 or 4 points, 
and keeps on going down until it reaches a price 
near its Pivotal Point of 40. Right here is the time 
the market should be watched carefully, because if 
the stock is really going to resume its Downward 
Trend in earnest, it should sell below its Pivotal 
Point of 40 by three points or more before it has 
another rally of importance. If it fails to pierce 40 
it is an indication to buy as soon as it rallies 3 
points from the low price made on that reaction. 
If the до point has been pierced but not by the 
proper extent of 3 points, then it should be bought 
as soon as it advances to 43. 

If either one of these two things happen, you 
will find, in the majority of cases, that it marks the 
beginning of a new trend, and if the trend is going 
to be confirmed in a positive manner, it will con- 
tinue to advance and reach a price over the Pivotal 
Point of 49%—by 3 points or more. 

I do not use the words “bullish” or “bearish” in 
defining trends of the market, because I think so 
many people, when they hear the words “bullish” 
or “bearish” spoken of marketwise immediately 


47 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


think that is the course the market is going to take 
for a very long time. 

Well-defined trends of that kind do not occur 
very oftcn—only once in about four or five years— 
but during that time there are many well-defined 
trends which last for a comparatively short time. I 
consequently use the words “Upward Trend” and 
“Downward Trend,” because they fully express 
what is going on at that specific time. Moreover, if 
you make a purchase because you think the market 
is going into an Upward Trend, and then a few 
weeks later come to the conclusion the market is 
heading into a Downward Trend, you will find it 
much easier to accept the reversal in trend than if 
you had a confirmed opinion that the market was 
definitely in a “bullish” or “bearish” stage. 

The Livermore Method of recording prices іп 
conjunction with the time element is the result of 
over thirty years of study of principles which would 
serve me in forming a basic guide for the next im- 
portant movement. 

After making my first record, I found it did not 
help me to any great extent. Weeks later I had a 
new tbought which aroused me to fresh endcavors, 


48 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 


only to find out that, while it was an improvement 
over the first one, it still did not give me the desired 
information. Successively new thoughts would 
come to mind, and I would make a set of new 
records, Gradually, after making many of these, I 
began to develop ideas I did not have before, and 
each succeeding record I made began to shape itself 
into better form. But from the time I started to 
merge the time element with price movements, my 
records began to talk to me! 

Each record thereafter I put together in a differ- 
cnt way, and these eventually enabled me to ascer- 
tain Pivotal Points and in turn demonstrate how to 
use them profitably marketwise. I have changed my 
calculations since then a number of times, but these 
records today аге set up in such a way that they can 
talk to you also—if you but let them. 

When a speculator can determine the Pivotal 
Point of a stock and interpret the action at that 
point, he may make a commitment with the posi- 
tive assurance of being right from the start. 

Many years ago I began profiting from the sim- 
plest type of Pivotal Point trades. Frequently I had 
observed that when a stock sold at 50, 100, 200 and 


49 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


even 300, a fast and straight movement almost 
invariably occurred after such points were passcd. 

My first attempt to profit on these Pivotal Points 
was іп the old Anaconda stock. The instant it sold 
at 100, I placed an order to buy 4,000 shares, The 
order was not completed until the stock crossed 
105 a few minutes later. That day it sold up about 
ten points more and the next day had another re- 
markable bulge. With only a few normal reactions 
of scven or eight points the advance continued to 
well over 150 in a short period of time. At no timc 
was the Pivotal Point of 100 in danger. 

From then on I rarely missed a big play where 
therc was a Pivotal Point on which to work. When 
Anaconda sold at 200, I repeated my successful 
play and did the same thing again when it sold at 
300. But on that occasion it did not carry through 
to the proper extent. It sold only to 302%. Plainly 
it was flashing the danger signal. So I sold out my 
8,000 shares, being fortunate enough to receive 300 
a share for 5,000 shares and 29974 for 1,500 shares. 
The 6,500 shares were sold in less than two minutes. 
But it took twenty-five minutes more to sell the 
remaining 1,500 shares in 100 and 200 lots down to 


50 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 


298%4, where the stock closcd. I felt confident 
that if the stock broke below зоо, it would have а 
swift downward move. Next morning there was cx- 
citement. Anaconda was way down in London, 
opened in New York substantially lower, and 
within a few days was sclling at 225. 

Bear in mind when using Pivotal Points in antici- 
pating market movements, that if the stock does 
not perform as it should, after crossing the Pivotal 
Point, this is a danger signal which must be heeded. 

As shown in the above incident, the action of 
Anaconda, after crossing 300, was entirely different 
than its action above 100 and 200, respectively. On 
those occasions therc was a very fast advance of at 
lcast 10 to 15 points right after the Pivotal 
Point had becn crossed. But this time, instcad of 
the stock bcing hard to buy, the markct was bcing 
supplied with quantities of it—to such an extent, 
the stock simply could not continue its advance. 
Therefore the action of the stock right above 300 
clearly showed it had become a dangerous stock to 
own. It clearly showed that what usually happens 
when a stock crosses its Pivotal Point was not go- 
ing to be the case this time. 


51 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On another occasion I recall waiting three weeks 
before starting to buy Bethlchcm біссі. On April 7, 
1915, it had rcached its highest price on record: 
8774. Having observed that stocks passing a Pivotal 
Point gained rapidly, and bcing confident that 
Bethlehem Stcel would go through 100, on April 8 
I placed my first order to buy and accumulated my 
line from 99 up to 9974. The same day the stock 
sold up to a high of 117. It ncvcr halted in its up- 
ward flight except for minor reactions until April 
13, or five days later, when it sold at a high of 155, 
a breath-taking rise. This again illustrates thc rc- 
wards which go to the person who has thc раНспсс 
to wait for and take advantage of the Pivotal 
Points. 

But I was not through with Bethlehem. I rc- 
peated the operation at the 200 point, at the 300 
point, and again at the dizzy peak of 400. Nor had 
I finished, for I had anticipated what would happen 
in a bear market, when the stock broke the Pivotal 
Points on the way down. I Icarned the main thing 
was to watch the follow-through. I found it was an 


easy mattcr to turn around and gct out of a posi- 


52 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 
tion, when vitality was lacking aftcr a stock crossed 
the linc. 

Incidentally, every time I lost patience and failed 
to await the Pivotal Points and fiddled around for 
some casy profits in thc meantime, I would losc 
money. 

Since those days thcre have been various split- 
ups in sharcs of high-priced stocks and, accordingly, 
opportunitics such as those I have just reviewed do 
not occur so often. Nevertheless, there arc other 
ways by which one can dcterminc Pivotal Points. 
Гог instancc, Ісі us say that a new stock has Ьссп 
listcd in the last two or thrcc ycars and its high was 
20, or any other figure, and that such a price was 
madc two or threc years ago. If somcthing favorable 
happens in connection with the company, and thc 
stock starts upward, usually it is a safc play to buy 
thc minute it touches a brand-new high. 

A stock may be brought out at 50, бо or 70 а 
share, scll off 20 points or so, and then hold bc- 
twcen the high and low for a ycar or two. Then if 
it ever sells below the previous low, that stock is 
likely to bc in for a tremendous drop. Why? Bc- 


53 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


cause something must have gone wrong with the 
affairs of the company. 

By keeping stock price records and taking into 
consideration the time element, you will be able 
to find many Pivotal Points on which to make a 
commitment for a fast movement. But to educate 
yoursclf to trade on these points requires patience. 
You must devote time to the study of records, 
made and entered in the record-book only by your- 
self, and in making notes at which prices the Piv- 
otal Points will be reached. 

Fascinating almost beyond belief, the study of 
Pivotal Points is, you will find, a golden field for 
personal rescarch. You will derive from successful 
trades based on your own judgment a singular 
pleasure and satisfaction. You will discover that 
profits made in this way are immensely more grati- 
fying than any which could possibly come from the 
tips or guidance of someone else. If you make your 
own discovery, trade your own way, exereise pa- 
tience, watch for the danger signals, you will de- 
velop a proper trend of thinking. 

In the last chapters of this book I explain in 
detail my own method of determining the more 


54 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 


complex Pivotal Points in conjunction with the 
Livermore Markct Method. 


Fcw pcople ever make moncy by trading on the 
occasional tips or recommendations of others. 
Many beg for information and then don't know 
how to use it. 

At a dinner party one night a lady Кері pestcring 
me beyond endurance for some market advice. In 
one of those weak moments I told her to buy some 
Cerro de Pasco which that day had crossed a Piv- 
otal Point. From the next morning’s opening the 
stock advanced 15 points during the next week 
with only trifling reactions. Then the action of the 
stock gave forth a danger signal. I recalled the 
lady's inquiry and hastencd to have Mrs. Livermore 
telephone her to scll. Fancy my surprise to learn 
that she had not yct bouglit the stock as she first 
wanted to see whether my information was corrcct. 
So wags the world of markct tips. 

Commoditics frequently offer attractive Pivotal 
Points, Cocoa is traded in on the New York Cocoa 
Exchange. During most years the movements іп 
this commodity do not offer many speculative in- 


55 


HOW ТО ‘TRADE IN STOCKS 


ducements. Nevertheless, in making speculation a 
business, one automatically keeps an eye on all 
markets for the big opportunities. 

During the year 1934 the high price of the De- 
cember option in Cocoa was made in February at 
6.25, the low was madc in Octobcr at 4.28. In 1935 
the high price was made in February at 5.74, the 
low in June at 4.54. The low pricc in 1936 was 
made in March at 5.13. But in August of that ycar 
for some reason the Cocoa market became а very 
different market. Great activity developed. When 
Cocoa sold that mouth at a price of 6.88, it was 
far beyond the highest price of the previous two 
years and above its last two Pivotal Points. 

In September it sold at a high of 7.51; in Octo- 
ber the high was 8.70; in November it was 10.80; 
in December 11.40; and in January 1937 it made an 
extreme high of 12.86, having recorded а пс of 
боо points in a period of five months with only a 
few minor normal reactions. 

Obviously there was a very good reason for this 
rapid rise, as only normal movements occur year in 
and year out. The reason was a severe shortage 
in the supply of Cocoa. Those closely watching 


56 


THE PIVOTAL POINT 


Pivotal Points found a splendid opportunity in the 
Cocoa market. 

It is when you set down prices in your record 
book and observe the patterns that the prices begin 
to talk to you. All of a sudden you realize that the 
picture you are making is acquiring a certain form. 
It is striving to make clear a situation that is build- 
ing up. It suggests that you go back over your rec- 
ords and see what the last movement of importance 
was under a similar set of conditions. It is telling 
you that by careful analysis and good judgment you 
will be able to form an opinion. The price pattern 
reminds you that every moveinent of importance is 
but a repetition of similar price movements, that 
just as soon as you familiarize yourself with the 
actions of the past, you will be able to anticipate 
and act correctly and profitably upon forthcoming 
movements, 

I want to emphasize the fact that I do not con- 
sider these records perfection, except as they serve 
me. I do know a basis is there for anticipating fu- 
ture movements and if anyone will study these rec- 
ords, keeping them themselves, they cannot fail to 
profit by it in their operations. 


57 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


It would not surprise me if the persons who in 
the future follow my method of keeping these rec- 
ords get even more out of them than I have. This 
statement is based on the premise that, whereas I 
arrived at my conclusions somc time ago, as a result 
of my record analysis, thosc beginning to apply this 
method may very rcadily discover new points of 
value that I have missed. I would further clarify 
this by stating that I have not looked for any fur- 
ther points, because, applying it as I have for some 
time past, it has entirely served my personal pur- 
pose. Somconc else, however, may develop from 
this basic method new idcas which, when applicd, 
will enhance the valuc of my basic method for thcir 
purposc. 

If they are able to do so, you may rest assured 
that I will not bc jcalous of their succcss! 


58 


VI. THE MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


T is my purpose in these chaptcrs to lay down 
| some general trading principles. Later оп there 
will be specific cxplanation of my formula for com- 
bining time element and price. 

In consideration of these general trading princi- 
ples it should be said that too many speculators buy 
ot scll impulsively, acquiring their cntire line at 
almost one price. That is wrong and dangerous. 

Let us suppose that you want to buy 500 sharcs 
of a stock. Start by buying 100 sharcs. Then if the 
market advances buy another 100 sharcs and so оп. 
But cach succeeding purchase must be at a higher 
price than the prcvious onc. 

That same rule should be applicd in selling short. 
Ncvcr make an additional salc unless it is at a lower 
price than the prcvious sale. By following this rule 


59 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


you will come nearer being on the riglit side than 
by any other method with which I am familiar. The 
reason for this proccdurc is that your trades have at 
all times shown you a profit. The fact that your 
trades do show you a profit is proof you arc right. 

Under my trading practice you first would мас 
up the situation in regard to a particular stock. 
Next it is important to determine at what price you 
should allow yourself to enter the markct. Study 
your book of price records, study carcfully the 
movements of the past few weeks. When your 
chosen stock reaches the point you had prcviously 
decided it should reach if the move is going to 
start in earnest, that is the time to make your first 
commitment. 

Having made that commitment, decide definitely 
the amount of moncy you are willing to risk should 
your calculations be wrong. You may make onc or 
two commitments on this theory and lose. But by 
being consistent and never failing to re-enter the 
market again whenever your Pivotal Point is 
reached, you cannot help but be in when the real 
move does occur. You simply cannot be out of it. 

60 


THE MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


But careful timing is csscntial . . . impatience 
costly. 

Let me tcll you how I once missed a million 
dollar profit through impatience and careless tim- 
ing. I almost want to turn my face away in em- 
barrassment when I tell this. 

Many ycars ago I became strongly bullish on Cot- 
ton. I had formed a definite opinion that Cotton 
was in for a big risc. But as frequently happens 
the market itself was not ready to start. No sooner 
Пад T reached my conclusion, however, than I had 
to poke my nose into Cotton, 

My initial play was for 20,000 bales, purchased 
at the market. This order ran the dull market up 
fifteen points. Then, after my last 100 bales had 
Беси bought, the market proceeded to slip back in 
twenty-four hours to the price at which it had becn 
sclling when I started buying. There it slept for a 
number of days. Finally, in disgust, I sold out, tak- 
ing a loss of around $30,000, including commis- 
sions. Naturally my last 100 bales were sold at the 
lowest price of the reaction. 

А few days later the market appealed to me 
again. I could not dismiss it from my mind, nor 


61 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


could I revise my original belief that it was in for 
a big move. So I re-bought my 20,000 bales. The 
same thing happened. Up jumped the markct оп 
my buying order and, after that, right back down 
it came with a thud. Waiting irked me, so once 
morc I sold my holdings, the last lot at the lowcst 
price again. 

This costly opcration I repeatcd five times in six 
weeks, losing on cach operation betwecn $25,000 
to $30,000. I became disgusted with myself. Here 
I had chipped away almost $200,000 with not even 
a semblancc of satisfaction. So I gave my manager 
an order to have the Cotton ticker removed before 
my arrival next morning. I did not want to be 
tempted to look at the Cotton market any morc. It 
was too depressing, a mood not conducive to the 
clear thinking which is required at all timcs in the 
field of speculation. 

And what happened? Two days after I had the 
ticker removed aud had lost all interest in Cotton, 
the market started up, and it never stopped until 
it had risen 500 points. In that remarkable rise it 
had but one reaction as great as 40 points. 

I had thus lost one of the most attractive and 


62 


THE MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


soundcst plays I had evcr figured out. There were 
two basic reasons. First, I lacked the patience to 
wait until the psychological time had arrived, price- 
wise, to begin my operation. I had known that if 
Cotton evcr sold up to 1275 cents a pound it would 
bc on its way to much higher prices. But no, I did 
not havc the will power to wait. I thought I must 
make a few extra dollars quickly, before Cotton 
rcached the buying point, and I acted before the 
markct was ripe. Not only did I lose around $20o,- 
ooo in actual moncy, but a profit of $1,000,000. 
Гог my original plan, well fixed in mind, contem- 
plated the accumulation of 100,000 bales after the 
Pivotal Point had been passed. I could not have 
missed making a profit of 200 points or morc оп 
that move. 

Sccondly, to allow mysclf to become angry and 
disgusted with the Cotton market just because I 
had used bad judgment was not consistent with 
good spcculative proccdurc. My loss was due wholly 
to lack of patience in awaiting the proper time to 
back up a prcconceived opinion and plan. 

I have long since lcarncd, as ай should learn, not 
to make excuscs when wrong. Just admit it and 


63 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


try to profit by it. We all know when wc are wrong. 
The market will tell thc speculator when he is 
wrong, because he is losing money. When he first 
realizes he is wrong is the timc to clear out, take 
his losses, try to kccp smiling, study the record to 
determine the cause of his error, and await thc next 
big opportunity. It is thc net result over a period 
of time in which hc is interested. 

This sense of knowing when you arc wrong even 
before the market tells you becomes, in time, rather 
highly devcloped. It is a subconscious tip-off. It is 
a signal from within that is based on knowledge of 
past market performances, Sometimes it is an ad- 
vance agent of the trading formula. Let me explain 
more fully. 

During the big Bull Market in the late twentics, 
there werc times when I owned fairly large amounts 
of different stocks, which I held for a considerable 
period of timc. During this period I never felt un- 
casy over my position whenever Natural Reactions 
occurred from timc to timc. 

But sooner or later there would bc a time when, 
after the market closed, I would become restive. 
‘That night I would find sound Ясер difficult. 


64 


THE MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


Somcthing would jog me into consciousness and 1 
would awaken and begin thinking about the mar- 
ket. Next morning I would be afraid, almost, to 
look at the newspapers. Something sinister would 
scem impending. But perhaps I would find every- 
thing rosy and my strange fecling apparently un- 
justified. Тһе market might open higher. Its action 
would be perfect. It would be right at the peak of 
its movement. One could almost laugh at his rcst- 
less night. But I have learned to suppress such 
laughter. 

For next day the story would be strikingly diffcr- 
cut. No disastrous news, but simply onc of thosc 
sudden market turning points after a prolonged 
movement in one direction. On that day I would be 
gcnuincly disturbed. I would be faced with the rapid 
liquidation of a large linc. The day before, I could 
have liquidated my entire position within two points 
of the extreme movement. But today, what a vast 
difference. 

[ believe many operators have had similar expcri- 
enecs with that curious inner mind which fre- 
quently flashes the danger signal when everything 
marketwise is aglow with hope. It is just one of 

65 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


those peculiar quirks that devclops from long study 
and association with thc markct. 

Frankly, I am always suspicious of the inner 
mind tip-off and usually prefer to apply the cold 
scientific formula, But the fact remains that on 
many occasions I have benefited to а high degree 
by giving attention to a fecling of great uncasincss 
at a time when I sccmed to be sailing smooth scas. 

This curious sidelight on trading is intercsting 
because the feeling of danger ahcad scems to be 
pronounced only among those sensitive to market 
action, those whosc thoughts have followed a scien- 
tific pattem in secking to determine price movc- 
ments. To the rank and file of persons who specu- 
late the bullish or bearish feeling is simply based 
on somcthing ovcrhcard or some published com- 
ment. 

Bear in mind that of the millions who speculate 
in all markets only a few devote thcir entire time 
to speculation. With an overwhelming majority it 
is only a hit-and-miss affair, and a costly one. Even 
among intclligent busincss and professional men 
and retired men it is a sidcline to which they give 
small attention. Most of them would not be trad- 

66 


ТПЕ MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


ing in stocks if at some time a good tip had not 
Респ passcd along by a broker or customers’ man. 

Now and then somconc begins trading because 
Пс has a hot inside tip from a friend in the inner 
councils of a large corporation. Let me here relate 
a hypothetical case. 

You тесі your corporation friend at luncheon or 
at a dinner party. You talk gencral business for a 
time. Then you ask about Great Shakes Corpora- 
tion. Well, business is fine. It is just turning the 
corner and the futurc outlook is brilliant. Yes, the 
stock is attractive at this timc. 

“А very good buy, indccd," he will say and pcr- 
haps in all sincerity. “Our carnings arc going to be 
exccllent, in fact better than for a numbcr of ycars 
past. Of coursc you recall, Jim, what thc stock sold 
for the last timc wc had a boom." 

You arc enthuscd and lose littlc timc in acquir- 
ing shares. 

Each statement shows better busincss than dur- 
ing tlic last quarter. Extra dividends arc declared. 
‘The stock moves up and up. And you drift into 
pleasant paper profit dreams. But in the course of 
timc the company’s business begins slipping dread- 


67 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


fully. You arc not appriscd of the fact. You only 
know the price of the stock has tobogganed. You 
hasten to call your fricnd. 

“Yes,” he will say, “the stock has had quite a 
break. But it sccms to be only temporary. Volume 
of business is down somewhat. Having learned that 
fact the bcars are attacking the stock. It's mostly 
short selling." 

IIe may follow along with a lot of other plati- 
tudes, concealing the truc reason. For he and his 
associates doubtlcss own a lot of the stock and have 
been selling as much and as rapidly as the market 
would take it since those first definite signs of a 
serious slump in thcir business appcarcd. To tell 
you the truth would simply invitc your compctition 
and perhaps the competition of your mutual friends 
in his selling campaign. It becomes almost a casc of 
self-preservation. 

So it is plain to see why your friend, thc indus- 
trialist on the inside, can casily tell you when to 
buy. But he cannot and will not tell you when 
to sell. That would be equivalent almost to treason 
to his associates. 

I urge you always to Ксер a little notcbook with 


68 


THE MILLION DOLLAR BLUNDER 


you. Jot down interesting market information; 
thoughts that may bc helpful in the future; ideas 
that may be re-read from time to time; little per- 
sonal observations you have made on price move- 
ments. On the first page of this little book I suggest 
you writc—no, bettcr print—it in ink: 


“Beware of inside information ... 
all inside information.” 


It cannot be said too often that in speculation 
and investment, success comcs only to those who 
work for it. No onc is going to hand you a lot of 
casy money. It is like the story of the penniless 
tramp. His hungcr gave him the audacity to enter 
a restaurant and order “a big, luscious, thick, juicy 
steak,” and, he added to the colored майст, “tell 
your boss to makc it snappy.” In a moment the 
waiter ambled back and whined: “De boss say if hc 
had dat stcak here he'd cat it hissclf." 

And if there was any casy money lying around, 
no one would be forcing it into your pockct. 


69 


VII. THE THREE MILLION DOLLAR 
PROFIT 


N the preccding chaptcr, I related how by not 

excrcising patience I missed being in on a play 
that would have netted a handsome profit. Now 
I shall describe an instance where I bided my time 
and the result of waiting for the psychological mo- 
ment. 

In the summer of 1924, Wheat had reached a 
price that I term a Pivotal Point, so I stepped іп 
with an initial buy order for five million bushels. 
At that time the Wheat market was an extremely 
large onc, so that the cxecution of an order of this 
size had по appreciable effect on the price. Let me 
here indicate that a similar order given in a single 
stock would have been thc equivalent of 50,000 
shares. 


79 


THE THREE MILLION DOLLAR PROFIT 


Immediately after the cxecution of this order the 
market became dull for a few days, but it never 
declined below the Pivotal Point. The markct then 
started up again and went a few cents higher than 
on the previous move, from which point it had a 
Natural Reaction and remaincd dull for a few days 
after which it resumed its advance. 

As soon as it pierced the next Pivotal Point, I 
gave an order to buy another five million bushcls. 
This was exccutcd at an average price of 1% cents 
above the Pivotal Point, which clearly indicated to 
тіс that the market was working itsclf into a strong 
position. Why? Because it was much more difficult 
to accumulate the second five million bushels than 
the first. 

Tlic ensuing day, instcad of the market reacting 
as it had after the first order, it advanced 3 cents, 
which is cxactly what it should have done if my 
analysis of the market was correct. l'rom then on 
there developed what might be termed a real 
Bull Market. By that I mean an extensive move- 
ment had begun which I calculated would extend 
over а period of several months. I did not, however, 
fully realize the full possibilities which lay ahcad. 


71 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


Then, when І had a 25 cents per bushel profit, 
I cashed in—and sat back and saw the markct 
advance 20 cents more within a few days. 

Right then I realized I had madc а grcat mis- 
take. Why had I becn afraid of losing some- 
thing I never really had? I was altogether too anx- 
ious to convert a papcr profit into actual cash, 
when I should have been patient and had thc cour- 
age to play thc dcal out to thc end. I knew that 
in due time, when the upward trend had reached 
its Pivotal Point, I would be given a danger signal 
in ample time. 

I therefore decided to re-enter the markct and 
went back at an average of 25 cents higher than 
that at which I had sold my first commitment. At 
first I had only the courage to make ouc commit- 
ment, which represented 5056 of what I had origi- 
nally sold out. However, from there on I stayed 
with it until the danger signal gave warning. 

On January 28, 1925, Мау Whcat sold at the 
high price of $2.05% per bushel. On February 11 
it had reacted to $1.77%. 

During all this phenomenal advancc іп Wheat, 
there was another commodity, Rye, which had had 


72 


THE TIIREE MILLION DOLLAR PROFIT 


an even morc spectacular advance than Whcat. 
However, thc Rye market is a very small onc 
compared to Wheat, so that thc cxecution of a 
comparatively small order to buy would create a 
decidedly rapid advance. 

During the above-described opcrations, I fre- 
quently had a large personal commitment in the 
market, and there were others who had cqually as 
large commitments. One other operator was re- 
puted to have accumulated a line of several million 
bushels of futures, in addition to many millions of 
bushels of cash whcat, and in order to help his 
position in Wheat to have also accumulated large 
amounts of cash Кус. Пе was also reputed to have 
used the Rye markct at times when Whcat began to 
waver by placing orders to buy Ryc. 

As stated, thc Rye market being small and nar- 
row in comparison, the cxccution of any sizcable 
buying ordcr immediatcly caused a rapid advance, 
and its reflcction on Wheat prices was neccssarily 
very marked. Whenever this method was uscd the 
public would rush іп to buy Wheat, with thc result 


that that commodity sold into new high terntory. 


73 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


This procedure went оп successfully until the 
major movement reached its end. During the time 
Wheat was having its rcaction Rye reacted in a 
corresponding way, declining from its high price 
made on January 28, 1925, of 51.8214 cents, to a 
price of $1.54, being a reaction of 28% cents 
against a reaction of 28% ccnts in Whcat. On 
March 2, Мау Whcat had recovercd to within 3% 
cents of its prcvious high, selling at $2.02, but Rye 
did not recover its decline in the same vigorous way 
as Wheat had, only being able to make a price of 
%1.70%, which was 12% points bclow its previous 
high price. 

Watching the market closcly, as I was at that 
time, I was struck forcibly by the fact that somc- 
thing was wrong, since, during all the big Bull 
Market, Rye had inevitably preceded the advance 
in Wheat. Now, instead of becoming a leader of 
the Grain Pit in its advance, it was lagging. Whcat 
had already recovered most of its entire abnormal 
reaction, whereas Rye failed to do so by about 12 
cents per bushel. This action was something cn- 
tirely new. 

So I set to work analyzing, with a view to ascer- 


71 


THE THREE MILLION DOLLAR PROVIT 


taining the reason why Rye was not participating 
in the recovery proportionatcly to Wheat. The rea- 
son soon became evident. The public had a great 
interest in the Whcat markct but none іп Кус. 
If that was a onc-man market, why, all of a sud- 
den, was he neglecting it? I concluded that he 
cither had no more intcrest in Ryc and was out, or 
was so heavily involved in both markets that he was 
no longer in a position to make further commit- 
ments. 

I decided then and there that it made no differ- 
ence whether he was in or out of Rye—that cventu- 
ally the result would bc the same marketwisc, so I 
put my theory to test. 

The last quotation on Кус was $1.69%4 bid, and 
having determined to find out the real position in 
Кус, I gave an order to sell 200,000 bushels “at the 
market." When I placed that order Wheat was 
quoted at $2.02. Before the order was cxecuted Rye 
had sold off 3 cents per bushel, and two minutcs 
after the order was filled it was back at $1.6834. 

I discovered by the cxecution of that order that 
there were not many orders under the market. 
IIowever, I was not yct certain what might devclop 


75 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


aftcr, so I gave an ordcr to sell another 200,000 
bushels, with the same rcesult—down it went 3 cents 
before the order was exccutcd, but after the execu- 
tion it only rallied 1 cent against the 2 cents pre- 
viously. 

I still entertained some doubt as to the correct- 
ness of my analysis of the position of the markct, 
so I gave a third order to sell 200,000 bushels, with 
the same result—the market again went down, but 
this time thcre was no rally. It kept on going down 
on its own momentum. 

That was the tip-off for which I was watching 
and waiting. If someone held а big position in 
the Wheat market and did not for some reason 
or other protect the Кус market (and what his rca- 
son was did not conccrn mc), I felt confident that 
he would not or could not support the Wheat mar- 
ket. So I immediately gave an order to sell 5,000,000 
bushels of May Wheat “at the market.” It was sold 
from $2.01 to $1.99. That night it closed around 
$1.97 and Rye at $1.65. I was glad the last part of 
my order was completed below $2.00 because the 
$2.00 price was a Pivotal Point, and the market һау- 
ing broken through that Pivotal Point, I felt sure 


76 


THE THREE MILLION DOLLAR PROFIT 


of my position, Naturally I never had any worries 
about that trade. 

A few days later I bought my Rye in, which I 
had sold only as a testing operation to ascertain 
the position of the Whcat market, and chalked up 
a profit of $250,000.00 on the transaction. 

In the meantime, I Кере on selling Wheat until 
I had accumulated a short line of fifteen million 
bushels. March 16, May Wheat closed at $1.64, 
and the next morning Liverpool was 3 cents lower 
than due, which on a parity basis should cause our 
market to open around $1.61. 

Then I did something that experience taught mc 
I should not do, namely, give an order at a specified 
price before the market opened. But temptation 
submerged my better judgment and I gave an order 
to buy fivc million bushels at $1.61, which was 3% 
cents below the previous night's close. The opening 
showed a price range of $1.61 to $1.54. Thereupon 
I said to myself: “It scrvcs you right for breaking a 
rule you know you should not have broken." But 
again it was a case of human instinct overcoming 
innate judgment. І would have bet anything that 
my order would bc exccuted at the stipulatcd price 


77 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


of $1.61, which was the high of the opening price 
range. 

Accordingly, when I saw the price of $1.54, I 
gave another ordcr to buy five million bushels. Im- 
mediately thereafter I reccivcd a report: “Bought 
five million bushels May Wheat at $1.53.” 

Again I entered my order for another five million 
bushels. In less than one minute the report came: 
"Bought five million bushcls at $1.53,” which I 
naturally assumed was the price at which my third 
order had been filled. I then askcd for a report on 
my first order. The following was handcd to mc: 


“The first five million bushcls reported to 
you filled your first order. 
“The sccond five million bushels reported 
covered your sccond огаст. 
“Flere is the report on your third ordcr: 
“3% million bushels at 153 
E в "oU 1634 
“500,000 “ 7 тез 


The low price that day was $1.51 and next day 
Wheat was back to $1.64. That was the first time 
in my expcricnce І had сусг received an cxecution 

78 


THE THREE MILLION DOLLAR PROFIT 


on a limited order of that nature. I had given an 
order to buy five million bushels at $1.61—the mar- 
ket opened at my bid price of $1.61 to 7 cents 
lower, $1.54, which represented a difference of 
$350,000.00. 

A short timc later I had occasion to be in Chi- 
cago, and asked thc man who was in charge of plac- 
ing my orders how it happened that I rcceived such 
excellent execution of my first limited отдсг. Не 
informed mc that he happened to know there was 
an order in the market to scll thirty-five million 
bushels “at the market.” That being the case, he 
rcalized that no matter how low the market might 
open there would be plenty of Wheat for sale at 
the lowcr opening price after thc opcning, so he 
merely waited until the opening range and then put 
in my order “at the market.” 

He stated that had it not been for my orders 
reaching the Pit as thcy did, the market would 
have had a tremendous break from the opening 
level. 

The final nct result of these transactions showed 
a profit of over $3,000,000.00. 

This illustrates the value of having a short interest 


79 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


in speculative markcts because the short interests 
become willing buyers, and those willing buyers act 
as a much-needed stabilizer in times of panic. 

Today operations of this kind are not possible, as 
the Commodities Exchange Administration limits 
the size of any one individual’s position in the grain 
market to two million bushels, and while there has 
been no limit placed on the size of anyone’s com- 
mitment in the stock market, it is equally impos- 
sible for any one operator to establish a sizcable 
short position undcr the existing rules in respect to 
selling short. 

I therefore believe the day of the old speculator 
has gone. His place will be taken in the future by 
the semi-investor, who, while not able to make such 
large sums in the markct quickly, will be able to 
make more money over a given pcriod and be able 
to keep it. I hold the firm belicf that the future 
successful semi-investor will only operate at thc 
psychological time and will eventually realize a 
much larger percentage out of every minor or major 
movement than the purely speculative-mindcd op- 
erator ever did. 


80 


УШ. THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY 


Ми years of my Ше had bccn devoted to 

speculation before it dawned upon me that 
nothing new was happening in the stock market, 
that price movements were simply being rcpcated, 
that while thcre was variation in different stocks the 
general price pattern was the same. 

The urge fell upon me, as I have said, to keep 
price records that might be a guide to price movc- 
ments. This I undertook with some zest. Then I 
bcgan striving to find a point to start from in hclp- 
ing me to anticipate future movements. That was 
no casy task. 

Now I can look back on those initial cfforts and 
understand why thcy were not immediately fruitful. 
Having then a purely speculative mind, I was trying 
to devise a policy for trading in and out of the 


81 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


market all the timc, catching the small intermedi- 
ate moves. This was wrong, and in time I clearly 
recognized the fact. 

I continued keeping iny records, confident that 
they had a genuine value which only awaited my 
discovery. At length the sccret unfolded. The rec- 
ords told me plainly that they would do nothing 
for me in the way of intermediate movements. But 
if I would but usc my eyes, I would scc the forma- 
tion of patterns that would foretcll major move- 
ments. 

Right then I determined to eliminate all the 
minor movements. 

By continucd close study of the many records 1 
had kept the realization struck me that the time 
element was vital in forming a correct opinion as 
to the approach of the really important movements. 
With renewed vigor I concentrated on that featurc. 
What I wanted to discover was a method of recog- 
nizing what constituted the minor swings. I re- 
alized a market in a definite trend still had numer- 
ous intermediate oscillations. They had been con- 
fusing. They were no longer to be my conccrn. 

I wanted to find out what constituted the begin- 


82 


THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY 


ning of a Natural Reaction or a Natural Rally. So 
I began checking the distances of price movements. 
First I based my calculation on one point. That was 
no good. Then two points, and so on, until finally 
I arrived at a point that rcprcsentcd what I thought 
should constitute the beginning of a Natural Rc- 
action or Natural Rally. 

To simplify the picture I had printed a special 
sheet of paper, ruled in distinctive columns, and so 
arranged as to give mc what I term my Мар for 
Anticipating Future Movements. For each stock I 
use six columns. Priccs arc recorded in the columns 
as they occur. Each column has its hcading. 

First column is headcd Secondary Rally. 

Second is һса4са Natural Rally. 

Third is hcaded Upward Trend. 

Fourth is headed Downward Trend. 

Fifth is hcaded Natural Reaction. 

Sixth is hcaded Secondary Reaction. 

When figures arc recorded in the Upward Trend 
column су arc entered in black ink. In the next 
two columns to the сЕ I insert the figures in pen- 
cil. When figurcs arc rccorded in thc Downward 
Trend column thcy arc centered іп red ink, and in 


83 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


the next two columns to the nght, the entrics are 
also made in pencil. 

Thus when recording the prices either in the Up- 
ward Trend column or in the Downward Trend 
column I am impressed with the actual trend at 
the time. Thosc figures in distinctive ink talk to 
me. The red ink or the black ink, used persistently, 
tells a story that is unmistakable. 

When the pencil remains in use I realize I am 
simply noting the natural oscillations. (In the re- 
production of my records later on, bear in mind 
that the prices entered in light blue ink are thosc 
for which I usc a pencil on my shects.) 

I decided a stock sclling around $30.00 or higher 
would have to rally or rcact from an extreme point 
to the extent of approximately six points beforc I 
could recognizc that a Natural Rally or Natural 
Reaction was in thc making. This rally or reaction 
does not indicatc that the trend of the market has 
changed its course. It simply indicatcs that the 
market is experiencing a natural movcment. Тһе 
trend is cxactly the same as it was bcfore the rally 
or reaction occurred. 

I would herc explain that I do not take the ac- 


84 


THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY 


tion of a single stock as an indication that the trend 
has been positively changed for that group. Instead 
I take the combined action of two stocks in any 
group before I recognize the trend has definitely 
changed, hence the Key Price. By combining the 
ptices and movements in these two stocks I arrive 
at what I call my Key Price. I find that an individ- 
ual stock sometimes has a movement big enough to 
put it in my Upward Trend column or my Down- 
ward Trend column. But there is danger of being 
caught in a false movement by depending upon 
only one stock. The movement of the two stocks 
combined gives reasonable assurance. Thus, a posi- 
tive change of the trend must be confirmed by the 
action of the Key Price. 

Let me illustrate this Key Price method. Strictly 
adhering to the six-point movement to be used as 
a basis, you will note in my subsequent records that 
at times I record a price in U. S. Steel if it only 
has had a move, let us say, of 5% points because 
you will find a corresponding movement in Beth- 
lehem Steel, say, of 7 points. Taken together the 
price movements of the two stocks constitute the 

85 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


Key Price. This Key Price, then, totals twelve 
points or better, the proper distance required. 

When a recording point has been reachcd—that 
is, a move of six points avcrage by cach of the two 
stocks—I continue to sct down in that same col- 
umn the extreme price made any day, whenever it 
is higher than the last price recorded in the Upward 
Trend column or is lower than the last price re- 
corded in the Downward Trend column, This goes 
on until a reverse movement starts. This later move- 
ment in the other direction will, of coursc, be based 
on the same six points avcrage, or twelve points for 
the Key Price. 

You will notice that from then on I never deviate 
from those points. I make no exceptions. Nor do I 
make excuses, if the results are not cxactly as 1 
anticipated. Remembcr, these prices I set forth in 
my records are not my prices. These points have 
been determined by actual prices registered in the 
day’s trading. 

It would be presumptuous for me to say I had 
arrived at the exact point from which my record 
of prices should start. It would also be misleading 
and insincere. I can only say that after years of 

86 


THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY 


checking and observation I fcel I have arrived some- 
where near a point that can be uscd as a basis for 
keeping records. From these records onc can visu- 
alize a map uscful in determining the approach of 
important pricc movemcnts. 

Someonc has said that success rides upon the 
hour of decision. 

Certainly success with this plan depends upon 
courage to act and act promptly when your records 
tell you to do so. ‘There is no place for vacillation. 
You must train your mind along thosc lines. If you 
are going to wait upon someone else for cxplana- 
tions or rcasons or rcassurances, thc time for action 
will have cscaped. 

To give an illustration: After the rapid advance 
all stocks had following the declaration of war in 
Europe, a Natural Rcaction occurred in the whole 
market. Then all the stocks in the four prominent 
groups recovercd their reaction and all sold at new 
high prices—with thc exception of the stocks in the 
Stcel group. Anyone keeping records according to 
my method would have had their attention drawn 
very forcefully to the action of the Stcel stocks. 
Now thcre must have been a very good reason why 


87 


ПОУУ ТО TRADE ІК STOCKS 


the Stcel stocks refused to continue thcir advance 
along with the other groups. There was a good 
reason! But at the time I did not know it, and I 
doubt very much that anyone could have given a 
valid explanation for it. However, anyone who had 
becn recording prices would have realized by the 
action of the Steel stocks that the upward move- 
ment in the Steel group had ended. It was not until 
the middle of January 1940, four months later, that 
the public was given the facts and the action of the 
Steel stocks was explained. An announcement was 
made that during that time the English Govern- 
ment had disposed of ovcr 100,000 shares of U. S. 
Steel, and in addition Canada had sold 20,000 
shares. When that announcement was made the 
price of U. S. Steel was 26 points lower than its 
high price attained in Septembcr 1939 and Beth- 
lehem Steel was 29 points lower, whereas the prices 
of the other three prominent groups were off only 
2% to 12% points from the high prices that were 
made at the same time the Stecls made their highs. 
This incident proves the folly of trying to find out 
“a good reason” why you should buy or sell a given 
stock. If you wait until you have the reason given 
88 


THE LIVERMORE MARKET KEY 


you, you will have missed the opportunity of hav- 
ing acted at the proper time! The only reason an 
investor or spcculator should cver want to have 
pointed out to him is the action of the market it- 
self. Whenever the markct docs not act right or in 
the way it should—that is reason enough for you to 
change your opinion and change it immediatcly. 
Remember: there is always a reason for a stock act- 
ing the way it does. But also remember: the chances 
are that you will not become acquainted with that 
reason until some time in the future, when it is too 
late to act on it profitably. 

I repeat that thc formula does not provide points 
whereby you can make additional trades, with as- 
surance, on intermcdiate fluctuations which occur 
during a major move. The intent is to catch the 
major moves, to indicate the beginning and the end 
of movements of importancc. And for such pur- 
pose you will find the formula of singular value if 
faithfully pursued. It should, perhaps, also bc re- 
peated that this formula is designed for active stocks 
sclling above an approximate price of 3o. While thc 
same basic principles are of course operative in 
anticipating the market action of all stocks, certain 


89 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


adjustments in the formula must be made in con- 
sidering the very low-priced issucs. 

There is nothing complicated about it. The vari- 
ous phascs will be absorbed quickly and with easy 
understanding by those who arc interested. 

In the next chaptcr is given the cxact reproduc- 
tion of my records, with full explanation of the 
figures which I have entered. 


9o 


IX. EXPLANATORY RULES 


Record ргіссѕ in Upward Trend column іп 
black ink. 


Record prices in Downward Trend column 
in red ink. 


Record prices in the other four columns in 
pencil. 


Draw red lincs under your last recorded 
price in the Upward Trend column the first 
day you start to rccord figures in the Natu- 
tal Reaction column. You begin to do this 
on the first reaction of approximately six 
points from the last price recorded in the 
Upward Trend column. 


(b) Draw red lines under your last rccorded 


price in the Natural Reaction column the 


91 


x 


М 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


first day you start to record figures in the 
Natural Rally column or in the Upward 
Trend column. You begin to do this on the 
first rally of approximately six points from 
the last price recorded ia the Natural Re- 
action column. 


You now have two Pivotal Points to watch, 
and depending on how prices are recorded 
when the market returns to around one of 
those points, you will then be able to form 
an opinion as to whether the positive trend 
is going to be resumed іп earncst—or 
whether the movement has ended. 


Draw black lines under your last recorded 
price in the Downward Trend column the 
first day you start to record figures in the 
Natural Rally column. You begin to do this 
on the first rally of approximately six points 
from the last price recorded in the Down- 
ward Trend column. 


Draw black lines under your last recorded 
price іп the Natural Rally column the first 


92 


6.(а) 


EXPLANATORY RULES 


day you start to record figures in the Natu- 
tal Reaction column or in the Downward 
Trend column. You begin to do this on the 
first reaction of approximately six points 
from the last price recorded in the Natural 
Rally column. 


When recording in the Natural Rally со!- 
umn and a price is reached that is three or 
more points above the last price recorded in 
the Natural Rally column (with black lines 
underneath), then that price should be en- 
tered in black ink in the Upward Trend 
column. 


When recording іп the Natural Reaction 
column and a price is reached that is three 
or more points below thc last price recorded 
in the Natural Reaction column (with red 
lines underncath), then that price should 
bc entered in red ink in the Downward 


Trend column. 


When a rcaction occurs to an cxtent of 


approximately six points, after you have 


93 


(b) 


(c) 


HOW TO TRADE IN STOCKS 


been recording prices in the Upward Trend 
column, you thcn start to record those 
prices іп the Natural Reaction column, and 
continue to do so every day thereafter that 
the stock sells at a price which is lower than 
the last recorded price in the Natural Re- 
action column. 


When a rcaction occurs to an extent of 
approximately six points, after you have 
been rccording prices in the Natural Rally 
column, you thcn start to record those 
prices in the Natural Reaction column, and 
continue to do so evcry day thereafter that 
the stock sells at a price which is lower than 
the last recorded price in the Natural Re- 
action column. In casc a price is made 
which is lower than thc last recorded price 
in the Downward Trend column, you 
would then record that price in the Down- 
ward Trend column. 


When a rally occurs to an extent of approxi- 
mately six points, aftcr you havc been re- 
cording prices in the Downward Trend col- 


94 


EXPLANATORY RULES 


umn, you then start to record those priccs 
in the Natural Rally column, and continuc 
to do so every day thereafter that thc stock 
sells at a price which is higher than the last 
recorded price in the Natural Rally column. 


(d) When a rally occurs to an extent of approx- 


imately six points, after you have becn rc- 
cording prices in the Natural Reaction col- 
umn, you then start to record those prices 
in the Natural Rally column, and continuc 
to do so evcry day thereafter that the stock 
sells at a price which is higher than the last 
recorded price in the Natural Rally column. 
In casc a price is made which is higher than 
the last recorded pricc in the Upward Trend 
column, you would then rccord that price in 
thc Upward Trend column. 


When you start to record figures in the 
Natural Reaction column and a price is 
reached that is lower than the last recorded 
figure in the Downward Trend column— 
then that price should be entercd in red ink 
in the Downward Trend column. 


95 


(f) 


IIOW TO TRADE IN STOCKS 


The same rule applies when you are re- 
cording figures in the Natural Rally column 
and a price is rcached that is higher than 
the last price recorded in the Upward Trend 
column—then you would cease recording in 
the Natural Rally column and record that 
price in black ink in the Upward Trend 
column. 


In casc you had been recording in the Nat- 
ural Reaction column and a rally should 
occur of approximatcly six points from the 
last recorded figure in the Natural Reaction 
column—but that price did not cxcecd the 
last price recorded in the Natural Rally col- 
umn—that price should be recorded in the 
Secondary Rally column and should con- 
tinue to be so recorded until a price had 
been made which схсссаса the last figure 
recorded in the Natural Rally column. 
When that occurs, you should commence 
to record ргіссѕ in the Natural Rally col. 


umn once again. 


96 


EXPLANATORY RULES 


(h) In case you have been recording in the Nat- 
ural Rally column and a reaction should 
occur of approximately six points, but thc 
pricc reached on that rcaction was not lowcr 
than the last recorded figure in your Natural 
Reaction column—that price should be cn- 
tered іп your Secondary Reaction column, 
and you should continue to record priccs in 
that column until a price was madc that 
was lower than the last price recorded in the 
Natural Reaction column. When that oc- 
curs, you should commence to rccord ргіссѕ 
in the Natural Reaction column once again. 


The same rules apply when recording the 
Key Price—except that you use twelvc 
points as a basis instcad of six points uscd 
in individual stocks. 


The last price recorded in the Downward 
or Upward Trend columns becomes a Piv- 
otal Point as soon as you begin to record 
prices in the Natural Rally or Natural Rc- 
action columns. After a rally or reaction 
has ended, you start to record again in the 


97 


9. (a) 


(b) 


WOW TO TRADE IN STOCKS 


reverse column, and the extreme price 
made in the previous column then becomes 
another Pivotal Point. 


It is after two Pivotal Points have becn 
reached that these records become of great 
valuc to you in helping you anticipate cor- 
rectly the next inovement of importance. 
These Pivotal Points are drawn to your at- 
tention by having a double linc drawn un- 
dermeath them in cither red ink or black 
ink. Those lincs are drawn for the express 
purpose of keeping those points before you, 
and should be watched very carefully when- 
ever prices are made and recorded near or 
at one of those points. Your decision to act 
will then depend on how prices are recorded 
from then on. 


When you scc black lines drawn below the 
last recorded red-ink figure in the Down- 
ward Trend coluunn—you may be given a 
signal to buy near that point. 


When black lines are drawn below a price 
recorded in the Natural Rally column, and 


98 


(с 


10.(а 


(b 


) 


— 


~ 


EXPLANATORY RULES 


if the stock on its next rally reaches a point 
near that Pivotal Point price, that is the 
timc you are going to find out whcthcr the 
market is strong enough definitely to 
change its course into the Upward Trend 
column. 


The reverse holds true when you see red 
lines drawn under the last price recorded in 
the Upward Trend column, and when red 
lincs аге drawn bclow the last price rc- 


corded in the Natural Reaction column. 


This whole method is designed to cnable 
onc to see clearly whetlicr a stock is acting 
the way it ought to, after its first Natural 
Rally or Reaction has occurred. 1f the move- 
ment is going to be resumcd in a positive 
manner—cither up or down—it will carry 
through its previous Pivotal Point—in indi- 
vidual stocks by three points, or, in the Key 
Price by six points. 


ЈЕ the stock fails to do this—and in a re- 
action sclls three points or more below tlic 


99 


м 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


last Pivotal Point (recorded in the Upward 
Trend column with red lines drawn under- 
neath), it would indicate that the Upward 
Trend in the stock is over. 


Applying the rule to the Downward Trend: 
Whenever, after a Natural Rally has ended, 
new prices are being recorded in the Down- 
ward Trend column, these new prices must 
extend three or more points below the last 
Pivotal Point (with black lines under- 
neath), if the Downward Trend is to be 


positively resumed. 


If the stock fails to do this, and on a rally 
sells three or more points above the last 
Pivotal Point (recorded in the Downward 
Trend column with black lines drawn un- 
derneath), it would indicate that the 
Downward Trend in the stock is over. 


(c) When recording in the Natural Rally col- 


umn, if the rally ends a short distance be- 
low the last Pivotal Point in the Upward 
Trend column (with red lines underneath), 


100 


EXPLANATORY RULES 


and the stock reacts three or more points 
from that price, it is a danger signal, which 
would indicate the Upward Trend in that 
stock is over. 


(f) When recording in the Natural Reaction 
column, if the reaction ends a short distance 
above the last Pivotal Point in the Down- 
ward Trend column (with black lines un- 
derneath), and the stock rallies three or 
more points from that price, it is a danger 
signal, which would indicate the Downward 
Trend in that stock is over. 


101 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On April 2nd prices began to be recorded in Natural Rally column. Refer to 
Explanatory Rule 6-B. Draw black line under last price in Downward Trend 
column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 4-C. 


On April 28th, prices began to be recorded in Natural Reaction column. Refer 
to Explanatory Rule 4-D. 


102 


Z |4 
© 
IE 
о 


АТУУ 
Амано? 
UOS 
АЧУОМОЈ35 
мошузн 
луун 
NON 
NOM VN 
анзш. 
ОЧУАМАО 
Е 
аулап 


ОА | TTT Л LL Л 
s | ЕД ОДИ IER S а! 

894 FA | | || PRSE LL | | LLL EIE LLLI LEE 
Әлі E ИНША! 


103 


dE EE 
ТТНТ. 
а а не 
Ае 
ТЕ icu M 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


All of these prices recorded are brought forth from the preceding page in order 
to keep the Pivotal Points always before you. 


During the period from May 5th to May 215% inclusive, no prices were 
recorded because no prices were made lower than the last price recorded in 
the Natural Reaction column. Nor was there sufficient rally to be recorded. 


On May 27th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in red because it was 
a lower price than the previous price recorded in the Downward Trend column. 
Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-C. 


On June 2nd, Bethlehem Steel became a buy at 43. Refer to Explanatory Rule 
10-C and D. On the same day U. S. Steel became a buy at 4234. Refer to 
Explanatory Rule 10-F. 


On June 10th, a price was recorded іп the Secondary Rally column of Beth- 
lehem Steel. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-E. 


104 


CHART TWO 


2584 || | И О ПИ АДАД 

га A азаа а 
лы | | И ИІ UL LUE LU 
а ТИП 
аа EEUU ERU ERE 


ара: e 0ПВВЕВЕТаНИИИ! 


4g LLL HEB HELL HELLE Ц 


НЕШ ИШЕНБЕ ии ЕБЕ aaa is GL Tg anei 


105 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On June zoth, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Secondary Rally 
column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-G. 


On June 24th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
black ink in the Upward Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 5-А. 


On July 11th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in the 
Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rules 6-А and 4-A. 


On July 19th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in the 
Upward Trend column in black ink because those prices were higher than the 
last prices that were recorded in those columns. Refer to Explanatory Rule 4-B. 


106 


МОШУЗУ 
АЧУОМОЈ35 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


On August 12th, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Secondary Re- 

action column because the price was not lower than the last price previously 

recorded in the Natural Reaction column. On the same day the price of 

Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Natural Reaction column because that 

price was lower than the last price previously recorded in the Natural Reaction 
column. 


On August 24th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-D. 


On August 29th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded іп 
the Secondary Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-H. 


108 


аяғы TT TTT TTT TTT ААА 
Eme SEC ДИ О ЛЕВИ И И АДИ | 
„о | У И АДАД 
=> ТЕ ШИШИШИ 
eae ЕО а ИЦ 


ЕЕЕ НЕЕЦ: 5 
E TTC ӨЛІП 
ашы ОООО 
а Т Т ООО О 


БІТТІ ШЕНІ 


EX: ПЕ ИЕЗИ ТИИТ 
ame || | 1 00000 0 а ЦИ 


сан тн 
ШЕНІНЕН іы 


CHART FOUR 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On September 14th, the price of ТУ. 5. Steel was recorded in the Downward 
Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 5-B. On the same day a price was 
recorded in the Natural Reaction column of Bethlehem Steel. That price was 
still being recorded in the Natural Reaction column because it had not reached 
a price that was 3 points lower than its previous price with red lines drawn. 
On September 2oth, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-C for U. S. Steel 
and 6-D for Bethlehem Steel. 
On September z4th, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Downward 
Trend column in red ink, being a new price in that column. 


On September 29th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Secondary Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-G. 


On October 5th, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Upward Trend 
column in black ink. Refer to Explanatory Rule 5-A. 


On October 8th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Upward 
Trend column in black ink. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-D. 


110 


CHART FIVE 


CE 

T 
Shai 
БЕІН... 


| 
ШЕ: 
“ 


ШИШИШИ ДЕЕ 
ТЕТТЕ 
жь а а DAO OA AONA AAAAN ONN 
w e а аш 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On November 18th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-A. 


112 


аа ОООО 
me || | ПО ЛІІІ 
на ДД А АИ ИД 
em ||| ЕТЕНЕ ШЕШЕН 
m ETE ИО О О А А ИО 
„ава ||| | | ПО ЛОДИ ELE 
aee e 


; 
н 
à 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On December 14th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-D. 


On December 28th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Upward 
Trend column in black ink, being a price higher than the last price previously 
recorded in that column. 


On January 4th, the next trend of the market was being indicated according 
to the Livermore method. Refer to Explanatory Rules 10-A and В. 


On January 12th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Secondary Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-H. 


114 


ИИНЕНИН! 

шы [LCD Т 
ШИШИШИ: ТИШЛИ! 
ШШ ТЕ ТООТ 
AAAA 
ЕИО ООО 
ma 
& ы И 
; |» АЦА ИО Цеа | 
К ЬШ Т 
аа | ЛОИ ЛИ 
ава || TT 
АД ДА ИДО ДАДА 
жы | ИПА ИДИ ИЛИТИ ТАРИ 
EEL EEE 
ТИП Е ТЕЕ 

ва | А elle aenant ашай aliai 

FFE ae: Би Беја ene Ли 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


On January 23rd, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Downward Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 5-B. 


On January 31st, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded іп 
the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rules 6-C and 4-C. 


116 


ЕЛ || fa | | | || 
КЕЛЕС ШЕ 


i 

Е 
ЕНІ 
ШЕШ 
НЕН 
|| 


ЈЕ: 
9к0235 


тунан 


H 
q 
| 
| 
5 
Е 


CHART EIGHT 


М 
le 
7 
g 
= 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On March 16th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-B. 


On March 3oth, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Downward Trend 
column, being a lower than was previously recorded in the Downward Trend 
column. 

On March 31st, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Downward 
Trend column, being a lower price than was previously recorded in the Down- 
ward Trend column. 


On April 15th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded іп the 
Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-C. 


118 


ы 
Е 
Z 
H 
2 
; 


aw ТЕШЕ 
wem | | Г “е ү 
ЕСТЕ ВЪЛНИ лава ||| 


аа | О АЦО 
sa | ЛА Via ПАДА ДАДА 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On May 17th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded іп the 

Natural Reaction column, and the next day, May 18th, the price of U. S. Steel 

was recorded in the Downward Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-D. 

The next day, May 19th, a red line was drawn under the Downward Trend 

column in Bethlehem Steel, meaning a price was made that was the same as 
the last price recorded in the Downward Trend column. 


On Мау 25, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in the 
Secondary Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-C. 


120 


ӘНІНЕ 


Е: 


: 
ER 
L 
4 
> 
Е 
F 
pI 
| 
4 
йй 
18 
E 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On June 16th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Natural Re- 
action column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-B. 


On June 28th, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Natural Reaction 
column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-B. 
On June 29th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Downward 
Trend column, being a price lower than the last price recorded in the Down- 
ward Trend column. 


On July 13th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Secondary Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-G. 


122 


CHART ELEVEN 


ETT 
ETT TE ДЕДА 
Me AEP: ||| 
ВТЕ 
аа М ЛИЛИН 


ПУЛ ине айр низ 


123 


ІНІН 
аа АДАД TE 


а ИО ОИ 
АДАД ДО а | 
Фа Е ШЕИ 


phe’ Bal. f$ pep up a 
20] 
Nu. 
Wim 
Bm 
ма 
Ен 
ШЕСІ 
ж 
мї 
А 
[i m4 
МЕТ 
Pa 
qum 
pnt 
97 
a 
ПІ 
anti 
ста 
іш 
ne 
ЖЕ 
US 
np 
БЕЛТ 
ЊЕ 
Tani 
ІШЕ 
War 
x 
TRI 
utin 
EX 
Ln 
ГЕН 
|514 
[75] 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On July 21st, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Upward Trend 
column, and the next day, July 22nd, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded 
in the Upward Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 5-A. 


On August 4th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 4-A. 


On August 23rd, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Downward Trend 
column, being lower than the price previously recorded in the Downward 
Trend column. 


124 


ЕН 
mus 
xw d | | 
T TENE: 
| ПИЕ В 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On August 29th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-D. 


On September 2nd, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Upward Trend column, being higher prices than the last prices pre- 
viously recorded in the Upward Trend column. 


On September 14th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rules 6-A and 4-A. 


On September 19th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rules 6-D and 4B. 


On September 28th, prices for U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Secondary Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-H. 


On October 6th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in 
the Secondary Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-С. 


126 


CHART THIRTEEN 


АТТУУ 

ЕСІНЕН ПЕШІНЕН 
Amvy 2 

s ТШЕ а 


am | О АДИ АШ ea 
omen УН es ТП 


АЕ 
Ри 


г- 
N 
-m 


HOW ТО TRADE ІМ STOCKS 


On November 3rd, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Secondary 
Reaction column, being a price lower than the last previous price recorded in 
that column. 


On November gth, a dash was made in the Natural Reaction column of U. S. 

Steel, being the same price that was last recorded in the Natural Reaction 

column, and on the same day a new price was recorded in the Natural Re- 

action column of Bethlehem Steel, being a lower price than the last price 
previously recorded in that column. 


128 


Amvu 
тузпмм 


З а 
~ 


Aviva АЗ 
VIAL VN 5 
А = 
Ania а 
e| Я | ЕСЕ ЕЕ УШЕН ЕРЕ БЕЛГТ: ШЕШ! 


me || еШ e 
жия a LLL ED DL EHE DD HEIDE 


ома 
Ез ОООО 


Я 
Е 
5 
В 
н 
: 


ШОО 
ишш Иша! 


E BPFPRIFFERBR 


po Ша 
dim жады 
ыа 


Е 
5 


E: 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On November 24th, the price of U. S. Steel was recorded in the Downward 

Trend column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-E, and the next day, November 

25th, the price of Bethlehem Steel was recorded in the Downward Trend 
column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-E. 


On December 7th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded 
in the Natural Rally column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-C. 


130 


CHART FIFTEEN 


: si а оре 
5 
х 


= D 


Е ЕПСО 
LEES ОЕ 
ОЛД ДАДА s 


HOW ТО TRADE IN STOCKS 


On January oth, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded in the 
Natural Reaction column. Refer to Explanatory Rule 6-B. 
On January 11th, prices of U. S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel were recorded іп 
the Downward Trend column, being prices lower than the last recorded prices 
in the Downward Trend columns. 


On February 7th, prices are recorded in the Natural Rally column of Bethlehem 
Steel, this being the first day it rallied the required distance of six points. The 
following day U. S. Steel is recorded in addition to Bethlehem Steel and the 
Key Price, the latter having rallied the proper distance to be used in recording. 


132 


m га | ЕОНИ 
09) эшш ||| | | | 188 ИД 
ШЕСІ | | [5 [2] | | 386 | 55 8 || И И (ЦГ 


зе || | | е! | ШИШИП 
ООШ ү 
өы] | | | || ИПТИП HL EL TELE LE] 
ЕЛЕНЕ 
а и а ТИНИН 
есе | | Ne || | 388 8 ОООО 
а em || | | | (6 6- 2 2 А 0000 LEL 01 S 
EE и и 
е: 

| lal | чё а А ДАДА | 
ШИН 


HIS LLL LLL LED LEE LLL LEE ||| 


МОШУЗУ 
АМУаМОЈ25 
[о] 
Ld 
анза. 
К 
QN331 
EHE 
ATIVY 
Ет ИР ЛЕН
