SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_autumn_2008.pdf

I
n an earlier era of American Jewish
life, we knew who our leaders were. It
was possible to identify people such as
Louis Brandeis or Abba Hillel Silver as our
visionaries — people who expressed our
common aspirations, and who helped
guide us into an uncertain future.
 These days, is it possible to identify
even a single leader who commands such
influence?
 One might point weakly to Federation
executives, philanthropists, perhaps a rabbi
or two. But nobody comes close to the
stature of Jewish leaders in previous gener-
ations.
 I wonder why this might be. Partly it’s
due to the increasingly fractious nature of
the Jewish community . Partly it’s a natural
reflection of Jewish assimilation and the
diminishing ties many Jews feel to commu-
nity . It’s also a signifier of our success:
After the barriers to mainstream American
culture were knocked down, we no longer
shared an overarching domestic agenda to
rally around. As a result, our need for uni-
fying leaders declined commensurately .
 And yet, one might argue that in an age
of attenuating connections and rampant
assimilation, we need visionary leadership
more than ever. The difference is that for
today’s community , which lacks a clearly
defined agenda, leadership is more difficult
to identify and to nourish. It is at once
more complicated and more nuanced than
in past periods of American Jewish life.
 To be sure, we aren’t lacking for self-
appointed leaders. This is an era in which
countless people claim to speak for the
American Jewish community and for the
Jewish people in general. It seems that
every month, we hear of a new leadership
conference run by leaders, attended by
leaders and funded by leaders. Our prob-
lem is a lack of genuine Jewish leadership.
We need leaders who are not in it for the
accolades, but who are willing to put in
the time and resources to effect visionary
change. There’s a big difference between
those who are only interested in having
their egos stroked and those who see a
problem and want to make a change.
 What is true leadership? It involves
creativity , ingenuity and a willingness to
challenge the status quo in the interest of
progress towards a larger goal. For our
purposes, we can identify the larger goal as
an end to the decline in Jewish interest, lit-
eracy and commitment, and the beginning
of a renaissance in American Jewish life.
 Birthright Israel is a good example.
When it was established, community lead-
ers in America and Israel were skeptical at
best. They refused to accept a radically dif-
ferent way of inculcating identity . They felt
that trips to Israel were not a priority for
community investment, and that the impact
of the trips would be negligible. Today , you
would be hard-pressed to find a negative
assessment of the program. Birthright Israel
worked because it involved unpopular risk-
taking in the service of the concrete goal of
shoring up Jewish identity and connecting
young adults to Israel. Without the vision
of its early leaders and their willingness to
buck the pessimists and nay-sayers, Birth-
right Israel would never have emerged from
the pipe-dream phase.
 But leadership is not just a matter of
steadfast will. It is also a matter of vision.
In the end, the dearth of genuine Jewish
leadership in America is connected to a
profound lack of vision. When we look
back at the eras of Louis Brandeis or Abba
Hillel Silver, it’s hard to miss the central
facet of their leadership: Zionism. Both
men were connected to an enterprise that
represented a historic opportunity and that
touched on the greatest aspirations of the
Jewish people of their time. These days, it’s
difficult to identify a vision that is as com-
pelling as Zionism was in its early days.
This is understandable, as the effort to
establish a Jewish state has been accom-
plished. And yet, without a revolutionary
new idea that captures the spirit and imag-
ination of the Jewish people, leadership
will continue to be nothing more than an
empty ceremonial position.
 Where, then, are the great new ideas
that might galvanize our community and
bring about a new wave of Jewish leader-
ship? There is no easy answer — the lack
of leadership has only exacerbated the
problem of our lack of ideas. For now , our
best hope is to continue finding new ways
of strengthening Jewish identity and edu-
cating the next generation on the joys of
Jewish living. We must reexamine our syn-
agogues, which in the non-Orthodox
world are mostly empty both physically
and spiritually . We must also revisit Jewish
education in the non-Orthodox world in
America. It’s mostly a shonda, and, even
with a few promising experiments, so little
has impacted it.
 Ultimately , we should insist on
accountability . How , for instance, can the
leaders of the movements allow the cre-
ation of generation after generation of
undereducated, uninvolved Jews? Aren’t
we the People of the Book? The commu-
nity should demand an ombudsman to
monitor the activities of those who run all
Jewish organizations. In my view , the
record of achievement in the Jewish insti-
tutional world is appalling. But perhaps
that is too strong an assessment, because
indeed there is no record — neither finan-
cially nor, more important, substantively .
Self-congratulatory advertisements in Jew-
ish or friendly secular publications do not
count. We need to be assured that our con-
stituents are truly represented in our insti-
tutions. I believe too often they are not.
Until we transform our organizations into
vehicles of rigorous education and celebra-
tion, we will continue to flail about in our
efforts to effect real, tangible change in the
community .
 All of this requires leadership. One
hopes that new leaders will emerge —
people whose boldness of vision is
matched by the ingenuity of their ideas.
Only by investing significantly in Jewish
life today will we be able to nurture the
leaders of tomorrow . This alone is reason
for a rededication to Jewish philanthropy:
we must do all we can to create the condi-
tions for the emergence of new ideas, new
leaders and a revivified future.
■
Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of the Steinhardt
Foundation for Jewish Life.
On Leadership,
Vision and Ideas
by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
Only by investing significantly
in Jewish life today will we
be able to nurture the leaders
of tomorrow.
AUTUMN 2008 3
