SOURCE_URL: https://web.archive.org/web/2012id_/http://www.nytimes.com/1995/10/12/business/top-manager-to-close-shop-on-hedge-funds.html

Top Manager To Close Shop On Hedge Funds - NYTimes.com 

Subscribe Now 

Subscribe 

campaign: nyt2015_bar1_digi_may_holi_4Q4Y6 -- 277178, creative: crs-5640_nyt2015_bar1_digi_may_holi_Reg -- 404774, page: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/business, targetedPage: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/business, position: Bar1 

Log In 

Register Now 

Help 

Home Page 

Today's Paper 

Video 

Most Popular 

Edition: U.S. / Global 

Business Day 

World 

U.S. 

N.Y. / Region 

Business 

Technology 

Science 

Health 

Sports 

Opinion 

Arts 

Style 

Travel 

Jobs 

Real Estate 

Autos 

International 

DealBook 

Markets 

Economy 

Energy 

Media 

Technology 

Personal Tech 

Small Business 

Your Money 

Top Manager To Close Shop On Hedge Funds

By STEPHANIE STROM 

Published: October 12, 1995

Making good on more than a decade of threats, Michael H. Steinhardt, the renowned hedge-fund manager, announced yesterday that he was closing shop and returning to his investors the capital they had entrusted to him. 

Mr. Steinhardt, who is 54, said he was dissolving four hedge funds managed by the Steinhardt Management Company while he still had the health and energy to pursue new challenges. "I've made my investors and myself more money that I ever conceived of as a kid," he said yesterday from behind his desk, distracted occasionally by the flickering financial-quotation screens to his left. "If I don't do this now, I don't know how easily I can do what I want to do later. I don't want to be an armchair philanthropist. I want to be active in my pursuits." 

He plans to increase his commitment to two pet projects: the Democratic Leadership Council and its policy arm, the Progressive Policy Institute, and the search for a way to pass on what he calls "secular Jewish values" through organizations. 

Mr. Steinhardt also collects art and exotic animals, is a partner in a small movie studio, Steinhardt-Baer Productions, and has an avid interest in horticulture. "My weekend home alone is a full-time job," he said. 

Although Mr. Steinhardt has been telling friends for years that he would close his funds and concentrate on other endeavors, his decision to do so took them by surprise. Indeed, Mr. Steinhardt's imminent departure has been a stock rumor in the market for years, as well as the subject of several newspaper and magazine articles. 

"He's sort of been like the boy who cried wolf," said one close friend, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, as is the custom among hedge-fund managers. "He's said he was going to close up so many times in the last 15 years that I just took it for granted that he'd never do it." 

Others suggest that the beating taken by the four Steinhardt funds last year might have increased his determination to exit the business, even though the funds have rebounded this year. 

Until 1994, he had an unblemished 26-year career as a money manager, giving his investors an average annual return of 31 percent. The Steinhardt funds stumbled badly last year, losing 29 percent, largely by loading up on European bonds whose value plummeted. Assets under management shrank to $2.1 billion at the beginning of this year from about $5 billion at the start of 1994. 

Despite the decline, Mr. Steinhardt denies that the funds suffered from significant withdrawals during the 1994 debacle. 

Still, many investors were angered when, in a letter sent to them last November, he reminded that his agreement with them included no "high water mark," meaning that he and his team did not have to recover the funds' losses before earning fees for good performance. He also wrote that he would not leave the money-management business. 

This year's strong returns have not erased the impact of 1994. At the end of 1993, a dollar invested with Mr. Steinhardt in 1967 would have been worth $587.81, compared with $12.77 had it been invested in the Standard & Poor's 500. Now, that dollar would be worth $462.24, compared with $17.06 if invested in the S.& P. 500. 

The four funds being closed by Mr. Steinhardt -- Steinhardt Partners L.P., Institutional Partners L.P., SP International S.A. and Steinhardt Overseas Fund Ltd. -- now have a total of $2.6 billion in assets, up from the $2.1 billion at the beginning of the year. 

He said that depending on the fund, his returns this year have ranged from 20 to 24 percent, a better performance by far than most hedge funds this year. 

"He recovered beautifully from 1994, so no one can say Michael Steinhardt quit because he couldn't cut it," said George P. Van, chairman of Van Hedge Fund Advisors Inc., which tracks the performance of hedge funds. 

Mr. Van said that after fees, the average hedge fund produced a return of 1.8 percent in the first quarter and 5.5 percent in the second quarter. 

While the outlook for hedge funds may be improving, the business of making outsized returns by using high-leverage, esoteric trading strategies and elaborate hedging mechanisms has become more difficult. Earlier this year, Bruce Kovner, the head of the Caxton Corporation, returned $1.3 billion in capital to his investors, and Paul Tudor Jones, another legendary fund manager, closed two offshore funds. Louis Moore Bacon of Moore Capital Management Inc. also scaled back his operations, and other large funds, including those under the management of George Soros, have struggled. 

Mr. Steinhardt was careful yesterday not to close the door on the hedge-fund business. Although most of the funds' assets can be converted to cash for distribution to investors by the end of the year, Mr. Steinhardt and some of his team will continue to manage about $300 million of illiquid investments that they hope to dissolve by the end of next year. 

And he would not rule out a return, noting that his son, who started a hedge fund this year called Independent Partners L.P., recently suggested that they might collaborate in the future. "I'm not sure he was serious, though," Mr. Steinhardt said. 

Mr. Steinhardt said the wounds of 1994 had little to do with his decision to close the four funds. 

"I just felt it was time," he said. 

A professed atheist, Mr. Steinhardt is especially interested in finding a way to perpetuate what he calls the philosophy of Jewish culture for the next generation of American Jews without relying on theology. To that end, he is trying to found a Jewish high school in Manhattan -- an effort that some in the Jewish community refer to as "the school of dreams" -- as well as a Jewish youth center and a residential retreat. 

He says his efforts to pass on "secular Jewish values" may be fruitless. "An Orthodox rabbi told me that three generations without the rituals and rites of Judaism and it's all gone," Mr. Steinhardt said. "He may be right." 

His departure from Wall Street will also give him more time to dance with Martha, the elegant blue crane who, along with zebras, emus, spider monkeys and two dozen other species, live on Mr. Steinhardt's 52-acre estate in Bedford, N.Y. After her mate died, Martha turned her affections to Mr. Steinhardt, frequently courting him with a graceful gavotte. 

Photo: Michael H. Steinhardt, the hedge fund manager, plans to dissolvehis funds and pursue other projects. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)(pg. D4) 

Inside NYTimes.com 

Health » 

Too Hot to Handle 

Arts » 

The Harmony of Liberty 

Opinion » 

Should Beach Privatization Be Allowed? 

Room for Debate asks whether shorefront homeowners should have to open their land to all comers.

Sports » 

A Woman’s Leadership May Steady Murray 

Opinion » 

Menagerie: Streaming Eagles 

U.S. » 

Curlers’ Aim: Sweep to a Win Over the Heat 

Television » 

The Cold War Brews Anew in Prime Time 

Book Review » 

Command Performance 

Opinion » 

Op-Ed: Fooling Mexican Fans 

World » 

Reading, Writing and Allegations 

Opinion » 

Op-Ed: Elite, Separate, Unequal 

New York City’s top public schools must become more diverse.

Business » 

Vice Has Media Giants Salivating
