SOURCE_URL: https://www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/file/512181/dl

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
-----------------------------------X
: 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, :
:
Plaintiff, :
:
- v - :
:
STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT COMPANY, : 94 Civ. 9044 (RPP)
INC.; and CAXTON CORPORATION, :
:
Defendants, :
:
-and- :
:
$12,500,000 THAT IS THE PROPERTY : 
OF STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT :
COMPANY, INC.; :
:
Steinhardt Management :
Company, Inc., :
Real Party in Interest :
:
-and- :
:
$12,500,000 THAT IS THE PROPERTY :
OF CAXTON CORPORATION, :
:
Caxton Corporation, :
Real Party in Interest. :
-----------------------------------X
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
This Settlement Agreement ("Agreement") is made between the
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA ("Plaintiff") and STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT
COMPANY, INC. ("SMC").
1. This Agreement is made to resolve and forever to settle
SMC's liability under the antitrust laws for certain conduct to
be alleged in a Complaint to be filed by the United States
pursuant to this Agreement. Upon the fulfillment of the
conditions set forth in this Agreement, the releases described 
2
herein shall be effective.
2. On the date of execution of this Agreement, 
(a) Plaintiff shall file a civil Complaint alleging a
violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1, by
SMC and others in connection with the acquisition and
trading of certain United States Treasury notes;
(b) Plaintiff shall file a Final Judgment in the form
attached as Exhibit A, that, if entered by the Court, would
resolve and settle the allegations of the Complaint filed
pursuant to subparagraph (a), above;
(c) Plaintiff and SMC shall execute and file a
Stipulation and Order in the form attached as Exhibit B,
stipulating to the entry of a Final Judgment in the form
attached as Exhibit A. 
3. In consideration of the sum of money to be forfeited
by SMC pursuant to the Final Judgment and other of the agreements
set forth herein, upon entry of the Final Judgment in the form
attached as Exhibit A, or in such other form as the Court may
order requiring payment of the civil forfeiture specified in
paragraph 6(a), Plaintiff releases SMC and its present and former
officers, employees, directors and subsidiaries, and any funds or
accounts managed by SMC, from any civil liability or claims
whatsoever or any criminal liability for any federal offense (a)
which was committed prior to the date of this Agreement and arose
out of the purchase, sale, financing or trading of the two-year
United States Treasury notes issued in April 1991 or the two-year 
3
United States Treasury notes issued in May 1991 (together,
"Specified Notes") or (b) which arose out of any conduct known to
the Department of Justice or the Securities and Exchange
Commission ("SEC") related to any investigation by the Department
of Justice or the SEC into the purchase, sale, financing or
trading of the Specified Notes, or into any efforts to interfere
with, obstruct, mislead or subvert any such investigation;
provided, however, that nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
violations of the federal tax laws, Title 26, United States Code.
4. Plaintiff and SMC recognize that the Court may enter a
Final Judgment only after the parties have complied with the
provisions of the Tunney Act, 15 U.S.C. § 16(b) through (g). The
parties shall use their best efforts to comply with the
procedures of the Tunney Act to ensure that a Final Judgment in
the form attached as Exhibit A is entered by the Court at the
earliest practicable date. If the Court should require
modification to the Final Judgment before entering it, SMC shall
not unreasonably withhold its agreement to such modification.
5. The parties recognize that this Agreement is being made
in conjunction with the Consent and Undertakings of Defendants
Steinhardt Management Company, Inc. that SMC has entered into
with the SEC (the "SEC Consent") in the form attached as Exhibit
C, and that, upon execution of the SEC Consent, the SEC will file
against SMC a civil complaint alleging violations of the
securities laws, under the caption Securities and Exchange 
4
Commission v. Steinhardt Management Company, Inc. and Caxton
Corporation (the "Securities Case"). 
6. Pursuant to this Agreement, the SEC Consent, and the
Final Judgment of Permanent Injunction and Other Relief as to
Defendants Steinhardt Management Company, Inc. in the Securities
Case (the "Securities Case Final Judgment") in the form attached
as Exhibit D, SMC shall, at the times specified in paragraph 12
and as provided in the Securities Case final judgment, pay the
sum of $40 million as follows:
(a) $19 million shall be paid to the United States of
America. Of this amount, $12.5 million shall constitute a
civil forfeiture pursuant to the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15
U.S.C. § 6, and shall be paid to the Department of Justice
Asset Forfeiture Fund; the remaining $6.5 million shall
constitute a civil penalty pursuant to Section 20(d) of the
Securities Act, 15 U.S.C. § 77t(d), and Section 21(d)(3) of
the Exchange Act, 15 U.S.C. § 78u(d)(3), and shall be paid
to the Treasurer of the United States; 
(b) $21 million shall be paid into a disgorgement fund
established by court order in the Securities Case, upon
terms established by the Securities Case Final Judgment, as
entered by the Court. This disgorgement fund shall be
administered and used as set forth in the Securities Case
Final Judgment. 
Under no circumstances shall SMC be entitled to a refund of any
monies paid pursuant to this Agreement; provided that the
foregoing shall not preclude reimbursement of SMC from the 
5
disgorgement fund in accordance with the procedures governing
such fund, in respect of certain third-party claims paid directly
by SMC.
7. Should the Court for any reason not order all or any
part of the amount specified in paragraph 6(a) to be forfeited to
the United States, the difference between the amount ordered
forfeited by the Court in the captioned case and the amount
specified to be forfeited to the United States by paragraph 6(a),
shall be paid to the Treasurer of the United States pursuant to
the Final Judgment in the Securities Case under Section 20(d) of
the Securities Act, 15 U.S.C. § 77t(d), and Section 21(d)(3) of
the Exchange Act, 15 U.S.C. § 78u(d)(3) ("Additional Civil
Penalty"). Upon the payment of the Additional Civil Penalty, the
releases described in paragraph 3 shall be effective.
8. SMC understands that the United States has not waived
the right of any federal agency, with respect to SMC or any other
person: (a) to revoke or suspend any license, certificate,
registration or other form of permission issued by such agency;
(b) to impose any penalty or to take any form of punitive or
disciplinary action; or (c) to debar, suspend, disqualify, or
otherwise restrict or prohibit certain transactions or other
dealings with the United States or with any of its agencies or
departments. 
9. SMC hereby waives any right it might have as a result
of this Agreement or any settlement arrangements contemplated
hereby under the United States Supreme Court's decision in United 
6
States v. Halper, 490 U.S. 435 (1989), or in respect of the
subject matter of that case or under any other existing or future
decision relating to that subject matter.
10. SMC neither admits nor denies any of the factual
allegations pertaining to the matters described in the Complaint
to be filed pursuant to paragraph 2, nor does SMC either admit or
deny any legal liability arising therefrom. Nothing in this
Agreement or in the Final Judgment or any Order contemplated
hereby shall constitute a finding of fact or conclusion of law or
otherwise provide any basis for establishing such liability.
11. SMC shall pay the civil penalty imposed by the Court in
the Securities Case and contribute the funds to establish the
disgorgement fund as specified in the Securities Case Final
Judgment (collectively, the "Initial Payment"). Pursuant to this
Agreement and the Tunney Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 16(b) through (g), the
forfeiture provided for in the Final Judgment shall not be paid
until five (5) business days after SMC receives notice of entry
of the Final Judgment, or such other order as represents a final
disposition of the captioned case. At that time, in addition to
the $12.5 million payment specified in the Final Judgment
("Deferred Payment"), SMC shall forfeit an "Additional Amount,"
as defined below. The term "Additional Amount" shall mean an
amount representing interest on the Deferred Payment, computed on
the basis of a 365 day year, at a rate per annum of 5 3/4%, from
and including the date of the Initial Payment, but excluding the
date on which the Deferred Payment is made. To the extent the 
7
Court does not impose any portion of the Deferred Payment or the
Additional Amount, such amounts shall nonetheless be paid to the
United States pursuant to paragraph 7 at the time specified
herein. 
12. This Agreement, and all the terms and provisions
hereof, shall be binding on the parties hereto and their
respective successors and assigns, and shall inure only to the
benefit of the parties hereto, and other persons specifically
released pursuant to paragraph 3, and their respective successors
and assigns, and no other person shall be entitled to any
benefits hereunder.
13. No additional understandings, promises, agreements
and/or conditions have been entered into by the parties hereto
with respect to the matters set forth in this Agreement other
than those set forth herein and none will be entered into unless
in writing and signed by all parties.
14. This Agreement may be executed in multiple
counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original, but all
of which when taken together shall constitute but one agreement.
8
15. This Agreement shall be deemed to have been fully
executed and delivered when both the United States, on the one
hand, and SMC, on the other, have received counterparts hereof
executed on behalf of the other party by each of the signatories
for such other party set forth on the signature pages hereof.
Agreed to:
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
_________________________________ December ___, 1994
John F. Greaney 
Chief, Computers and Finance Section
Antitrust Division
Department of Justice
STEINHARDT MANAGEMENT COMPANY, INC. 
_________________________________ December ___, 1994
Michael Steinhardt
Chairman
Steinhardt Management Company, Inc.
