SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_autumn_2011.pdf

AUTUMN 2011 3
irthright Israel is the phenomenon of 
a generation. It is an inspired idea 
that has succeeded far beyond what 
its munificent founding philanthropists 
envisioned. In a masterfully designed 
young-adult, liminal peer experience, 
hundreds of thousands of young Jews are 
sparked to experience Israel — notably , its 
people and mythical landscapes — in deeply 
meaningful ways.
 Birthright presents the Jewish world with 
unprecedented opportunity . A growing body 
of research shows that the ten-day , immersive 
experience alters the sights of an impressive 
number of its participants. The challenge 
now confronting the community is to amplify 
an illuminated awareness that Birthright trip 
participants — and their peers — acquire 
world views that result in increasing numbers 
of Jewish adults who are palpably committed 
to ongoing Jewish learning and the enduring 
well-being of Israel and the Jewish people.
 We see new evidence that the community 
is increasingly focusing its attention on fos-
tering teen and young-adult Israel engage-
ment. Our operating hypothesis is that the 
most promising path to a Jewish identity 
which includes a lifelong commitment to Am 
Yisrael emerges from a personal connection 
to Israel. In this regard, we conjecture that 
multiple immersive experiences in Israel are 
most likely to engender a person’s belief that 
a relationship to Israel is an essential part of 
that individual’s Jewish identity .
 The growth of MASA Israel Journey holds 
promise for increasing the number of young 
Jews who are committed to Israel. MASA 
reports that in 2011 it will support 6,500 
North American adults to participate in an 
array of long-term, Israel-based programs 
— academic study , internships and Jewish 
service learning. While we do not yet have a 
comprehensive approach to understanding 
and assessing what these experiences 
mean to their participants, previous studies 
(e.g., Steven M. Cohen & Ezra Kopelowitz, 
Journeys to Israel: The Impact of Longer-T erm 
Programs Upon Jewish Engagement & Israel 
Attachment, MASA Israel Journey , 2010) 
indicate that immersion in substantive pro-
grams positively influences one’s connection 
to Israel. Moreover, it appears that a shorter-
term immersive experience followed by one 
of greater duration leads to an even stronger 
association with Israel.
 An obvious critical facet of providing 
young Jews with the motivation to develop 
an awareness of and interest in Israel as ele-
mental to his or her Jewish identity is a con-
tinuous flow of formal and experiential 
educational experiences. On campuses across 
America, Hillel and the Jewish Agency for 
Israel have cooperated to place 50 shlichim as 
resources for Israel engagement. These Israel 
Fellows complement a growing fare of Israeli 
arts and culture programs that are finding 
their way onto the academic calendar. While 
we do not have exact figures on the numbers 
of Jewish students enrolled, nor on the 
effects of the coursework on students, the 
dramatic increase in the number of Jewish 
Studies centers and programs bodes well for 
adults possessing enhanced knowledge of 
Israel. In addition, this year, Hillel Interna-
tional launched the Center for Israel Engage-
ment designed to bring Israel education 
resources directly to campuses by training 
staff, developing standards of excellence for 
Israel programming, and providing support 
for Israel education and engagement on cam-
pus (see next page). 
 Of course, thousands of young Jews 
encounter Birthright Israel after college. 
Birthright Israel NEXT was developed as a 
platform to connect post-college Birthright 
alumni and other Jewish young adults with 
one another. NEXT endeavors to present 
alumni with myriad opportunities to con-
tinue their journeys in ways that are individ-
ually meaningful and relevant.
 On this point, Leonard Saxe and Barry 
Chazan, who have touted the positive effects 
of the Birthright trip since its inception, rec-
ognize that Birthright’s success is conditional: 
“Whether the impact of the program can be 
sustained once participants return to their 
home community is the key issue for the 
future... If Birthright Israel alumni can 
remain knowledgeable supports of Israel — 
not advocates per se, but individuals who 
care about the society because they see them-
selves as part of it and have a stake — the 
program will more than have justified its cre-
ation and the substantial resources necessary 
to maintain it” (Italics ours.) (T en Days of 
Birthright Israel: A Journey in Young Adult 
Identity, Brandeis University Press, 2008).
 We believe Birthright Israel should be 
viewed as the spark to ignite thousands of 
young Jews on their individual Jewish jour-
neys of discovery . For some participants, the 
Birthright Israel experience awakens an inter-
est in deepening their knowledge of Judaism 
and in connecting with their Jewish peers. 
Others are inspired to seek greater knowl-
edge about an engagement with Israel. 
 In looking back upon the eleven years 
since the founding of Birthright Israel, one 
could argue that the pervasive conversation 
about Birthright’s contribution to a veritable 
revival of Jewish engagement among young 
adults has, in turn, precipitated heightened 
awareness of the need for the development of 
a bona fide field of Israel education. 
 Capitalizing on this new reality , a field of 
Israel education has begun to emerge, led by 
the work of the iCenter, the Israel Education 
Resource Center. The iCenter has just 
released standards for K-12 Israel education. 
It is certifying 20 students with Masters 
Degrees from six institutions of higher edu-
cation in Israel education. The iCenter has 
brought fresh funding to the field and is 
becoming an engine fueling the field of Israel 
education. It is creating the impetus for a 
continuum of Israel education experiences 
offered more broadly across the Jewish ado-
lescent and teen landscape that, in turn, 
could spur a more Israel-engaged teen popu-
lation and ultimately lead to a more deeply 
engaged young-adult population.
 Today , organizations working in the Jew-
ish young-adult arena encounter increasingly 
greater numbers of Jews who have partici-
pated in an Israel experience and have been 
deeply affected by it. These organizations 
have an extraordinary opportunity to move 
young Jews along in their journeys of discov-
ery . We believe that multiple enticing options 
for young Jews to experience self-initiated, 
personally relevant Judaism offer the most 
promising path to engagement. Unlike Birth-
right trips, where individual identity is neces-
sarily subordinated to both group and trip 
hegemony (Shaul Kelner, T ours that Bind: 
Diaspora, Pilgrimage, and Israeli Birthright 
T ourism, NYU Press, 2010), individual Jews 
who choose to find meaning with those who 
have shared interests is a sine qua non of 
community building. Ultimately , it is from 
this relational Judaism that Israel engagement 
is most likely to emerge. 
■ 
Charles (Chip) Edelsberg, Ph.D. is the founding 
Executive Director of the Jim Joseph Foundation, an 
$800 million-dollar private foundation whose mission 
is to support education of Jewish youth in the United 
States. JJF is an avid supporter of Birthright Israel 
and Birthright Israel NEXT . Dawne Bear Novicoff is 
a Senior Program Officer at the Jim Joseph Founda-
tion. Prior to this, she served as Director of Israel & 
Overseas Planning and Programming at the Jewish 
Community Federation in San Francisco. The opin-
ions expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors. 
BEYOND BIRTHRIGHT: 
by CHARLES EDELSBERG and DAWNE BEAR NOVICOFF
4 CONTACT
n November 2010, Hillel announced 
the formation of a new Center for 
Israel Engagement to meaningfully 
engage more students with Israel 
and to enhance their understanding 
and connection to the Jewish State. In 
August, we spoke with Sharon Ashley , 
Director of the Center for Israel 
Engagement, to learn more about the 
goals, outlook and direction of the Center .
CONTACT: How does the approach of 
the Center for Israel Engagement differ 
from Hillel’s past approach to Israel 
engagement?
Sharon Ashley: 
Hillel is now looking at 
Israel in a more holistic way . The mandate 
of the Center is education, engagement 
and advocacy . We still believe we need to 
elevate the conversation in the advocacy 
sphere, but there was a realization that not 
all students are interested in straight-up, 
traditional advocacy . So the mandate is to 
bring a fuller, more textured Israel experi-
ence to students and to find new avenues 
of meaning for them to engage with Israel 
in ways that have personal resonance. 
Israel is a dynamic, exciting place, but it’s 
also a messy , noisy place. All of that needs 
to come into the package of what Israel is. 
Israel is a work in progress, and I would 
love students to be engaged with that work 
in progress.
 I will add that I think that education 
and engagement are precursors to advo-
cacy . My goal for the Center for Israel 
Engagement is to weave Israel more natu-
rally into the conversation in Hillel and in 
the wider campus culture. Any time you 
do that, you are positioning Israel in a 
much more positive way , and therefore 
you’re acting as advocates for Israel. It’s a 
softer advocacy perhaps — this doesn’t 
invalidate the need for serious proactive 
initiatives about issues such as delegiti-
mization — but it means we’re thinking 
about Israel all the time and not just 
responding to crises, and not just on Yom 
Ha’atzmaut or on Falafel Night. It means 
that Israel is going to be a more natural 
part of how we experience Jewish life.
How do you plan to innovate beyond 
the traditional sphere of advocacy?
We’re creating two signature programs: 
Focus:Israel, a year-long Israel course that 
will bring the content and texture of Israel 
to 24 Hillel professionals across the coun-
try , and Centers for Excellence, in which 
we’ve selected four campuses, after a 
highly competitive process, to serve as 
campus laboratories for superlative, inno-
vative and creative Israel programming and 
Sharon Ashley is Director of Hillel’ s Center for Israel 
Engagement.
AUTUMN 2011 5
as benchmarks of what staff and students 
should be doing in order to drive Hillel’s 
Israel agenda. And we’re not just talking 
about Israel, but working with Israelis. 
We’ve placed 50 Israel fellows on campus 
who bring a living, breathing Israel to stu-
dents in new and different ways.
 Beyond that, the Talk Israel tent initia-
tive is a new program launching this 
semester. T wenty campuses are putting up 
tents for two days in September to engage 
in civil discussion about the challenges 
Israel faces with the looming Palestinian 
UN vote and the changing Middle East 
landscape — what it means for Israel and 
what it means for students who have 
questions and not answers. It’s a venue 
where we welcome the conversation, 
because the Center for Israel Engagement 
aims to educate not only the serious stu-
dent leaders on Israel, but also students 
who don’t always feel welcome in the con-
versation because they don’t know enough 
or they think differently or they have 
questions. They’re still welcome.
In the recent past, campus discussions 
and debates on these issues have often 
devolved into shouting matches. How 
do you hope to accomplish respectful 
and civil discussion?
There can’t be a bouncer at the door, but 
the rules of the tent are civil dialogue. It’s 
not a Hyde Park moment. It’s not for soap-
box pamphleteering and advocating, but 
for civil conversation. University codes of 
conduct will be posted in the tents. Hillel 
staff knows how to engage students in 
conversation and can ensure that when it 
gets too heated, it tones down, stops or 
veers to another direction. So if someone 
comes and says “I don’t support Israel,” 
he or she is going to have to listen to 
someone who says
