SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_summer_2013.pdf

SUMMER 2013 3
Among food, friendships and family , debat-
ing the news, joking and sharing gleanings 
of Jewish wisdom ancient or modern — at 
these moments, I feel more connected to the 
millennia-long trajectory of the Jewish Peo-
ple than I do anywhere outside of Israel.
 Friday night meals are Judaism’s prime 
example of Peoplehood because they are 
sanctuaries of commonality no matter one’s 
gender, denomination, political views — 
or, for that matter, religion, as nothing for-
bids non-Jews from celebrating with us. 
Whether familial or communal, they are 
the quintessential Jewish experience that 
offers most of the virtues of being Jewish 
without requiring deep knowledge, partic-
ular religious beliefs or even a faith in the 
supernatural. Unfortunately , for too many 
Jews Shabbat has been encrusted with ritu-
als and rules, the sheer wonder of commu-
nal celebration lost or forgotten. It is time 
to return Shabbat to its traditional place of 
celebration: of eating, learning, debating 
and socializing for the purpose of “l’chaim.” 
Just as Shabbat has bound the Jewish peo-
ple together for centuries, so it has the 
potential to revitalize Jewish commitments 
among those for whom Jewish experience 
has lost its interest and edge.
 And we have an unparalleled opportu-
nity: Hundreds of thousands of Birthright 
Israel participants have been returning to 
the Diaspora, craving points of connection 
and seeking to fan the flames of Jewish 
excitement ignited on their trip. In Israel it 
was easy: immersed in the “Birthright Bub-
ble,” they were inundated 24/7 with Jewish 
history , culture and people. But the success 
of Birthright has become its greatest chal-
lenge: How can we recreate such intense 
and concentrated connections to Jewish life 
once participants have returned home? As 
the years go by , the magnitude of their Israel 
experience risks being diminished by the 
mundane exigencies of post-Birthright life.
 After having devoted considerable 
energy to Birthright NEXT in the effort to 
keep Birthright alumni involved Jewishly , I 
have concluded that in this effort there is 
only one sine qua non, and that is Shabbat. 
Various other post-Birthright activities have 
at best a mixed record and have nowhere 
near the resonance that Shabbat can poten-
tially have. Why not use Shabbat meals — 
the weekly bubble of Jewish celebration 
— as the primary connecting point for 
Birthright alumni and their friends?
 I envision a nationwide Shabbat pro-
gram that harnesses the success of Birth-
right Israel to make Shabbat meals a vital 
part of participants’ weeks — and, in turn, 
a crucial element in their Jewish journeys. 
Shabbat meals provide a venue to catch up 
with fellow partici-
pants, make friends, 
experience Jewish 
culture and learn 
something new. They 
offer opportunities 
for continuous Jew-
ish engagement and 
empowerment 
untethered by daunt-
ing commitments. 
Who doesn’t enjoy a 
meal among friends 
old and new? Our 
goal must be to 
make Shabbat a habit in the lives of this 
generation so that they experience the true 
ethos of the Jewish people: The ways in 
which the social, spiritual and sensual 
come together as one.
 But these meals will advance beyond eat-
ing and drinking and into weekly venues for 
sharing and learning. Shabbat meals are a 
perfect context for informal education. 
They’re primarily social experiences, unfet-
tered by the hierarchical burdens of tradi-
tional learning, and focused instead on peer 
engagement. Most of all, they are participant-
powered. As I envision them, the meals will 
not take place in synagogues or JCCs but in 
homes, emphasizing both a DIY ethic and a 
grassroots appeal. Meals will potentially 
branch off into other activities ranging from 
traditional to alternative, depending on the 
respective community , all with an eye 
towards expanding participants’ Jewish hori-
zons. But while the education will be infor-
mal, it will be rigorous. We will carefully 
recruit, train and coach Shabbat ambassadors 
and hosts, educating them at learning retreats 
and providing them with original educational 
materials and activities, so that the meals 
become more than simply sites of satiation. 
We will coordinate and partner with local 
institutions that have track records of engag-
ing young adults. We will help develop com-
puter and mobile apps to disseminate 
educational materials and activities tailored to 
diverse cohorts, and to make it easier for 
Birthright alumni to organize and participate 
in the meals. Finally , we will seek ways of 
bringing elements of the Birthright Israel 
experience, including but not limited to 
encounters with Israeli culture and society , 
into the structure of the meals and activities.
 We should remember that for many 
Birthright alumni, the first experience of a 
meaningful and exhilarating Friday night 
Shabbat dinner took place on their Birth-
right trip. A thoughtful and rigorous Shabbat 
program has the potential to take one of the 
few elements of their Israel experience that is 
portable — Shabbat — and bring it back to 
the Diaspora intact. It helps participants to 
deepen the connections they made with one 
another on their trips, and creates opportu-
nities for new connections based on their 
peers’ respective social networks back home. 
It builds on Birthright’s success, enhancing 
and expanding the ten-day bubble into what 
can turn into a weekly routine for life. This 
is crucial: we are not interested in one-shot 
events, annual Shabbat reunions or last-min-
ute Friday get-togethers. We are interested in 
creating new social habits that become as 
memorable as the Bar or Bat Mitzvah — 
with an emphasis on the fact that while a 
Bar or Bat Mitzvah occurs once in a lifetime, 
Shabbat is a weekly celebration.
 We at Birthright Israel have not done as 
good a job as we might have in attracting a 
majority or even a meaningful minority of 
our alumni. In my view, it is time to focus 
entirely on Friday night Shabbat experi-
ences. Even if we start in pilot cities, the 
vision is to be broad and expand across the 
country . If executed properly , Birthright 
alumni will incorporate these meals into 
their lives so that ultimately they eagerly 
await Friday nights as a special time of Jew-
ish connection, exploration and celebration.
 From the time of our inception as a 
community , Shabbat has been an oasis of 
social, spiritual and sensual sanctity . It is 
time to return Shabbat to its role as a uni-
fier of the Jewish People and a catalyst of 
Jewish reflection. If we are successful, 
Shabbat can help revolutionize Jewish 
engagement as a new social habit in the 
lives of hundreds of thousands of Jews, 
sealing the bonds of the Jewish People for 
generations to come. 
■
FROM THE TIME of our inception as 
a community , Shabbat has been an 
oasis of social, spiritual and sensual 
sanctity . It is time to return Shabbat to 
its role as a unifier of the Jewish 
People and a catalyst of Jewish 
reflection. 
4 CONTACT
S
habbat is perhaps the best gateway 
drug for an involved Jewish life. 
For so many in the Jewish com-
munity , Shabbat is the clearest 
expression of the positive aspects of counter-
cultural Jewish values. The general culture val-
ues electronic connectedness; Shabbat values 
unplugged fellowship. The general culture val-
ues the fast-paced and faddish; Shabbat values 
slow contemplation and consistency . The gen-
eral culture values non-stop working; Shabbat 
values enforced (and sometimes inconvenient) 
breaks in the work cycle. While Shabbat is not 
an obvious step for many Jews, because of its 
counter-cultural nature, those who embrace its 
deep meaning and value often can’t imagine 
how they could live without it.
 Yet, Shabbat is also a lightning rod for 
some of the larger criticisms of engaged Jew-
ish living. For many , alienation from Judaism 
was sparked by a particular Shabbat experi-
ence. “I didn’t know what to do in services.” 
“I felt judged by someone more observant.” 
“This wasn’t the tune I grew up with.” “No 
one said hello to me at Kiddush.” 
 This paradox is particularly acute in inde-
pendent minyanim. Since the year 2000, 
more than 100 independent minyanim have 
been formed across the United States, in large 
cities and suburbs and, most recently , on col-
lege campuses. Tens of thousands of Jews (80 
percent under the age of 40) have engaged 
with these minyanim. For many participants, 
these services provide their first real expres-
sion of intensive Jewish community . And 
these minyanim are overwhelmingly formed 
around Shabbat ritual: prayer and meals.
 Independent minyanim represent some of 
the most positive aspects of Shabbat in the 
modern world. They also illustrate a particu-
lar challenge around the power of Shabbat. 
 First, the positive: Shabbat in an indepen-
dent minyan is powerful because it is orga-
nized around a specific vision of what 
Shabbat ritual can be. People form minyanim 
because they have a picture of what Shabbat 
services, and/or Shabbat meals, should look 
like. They don’t mean for that vision to 
encompass all of Jewish life. But for the peo-
ple who connect to that particular vision (for 
instance, prayer infused with original music; 
potluck meals; small and intimate physical 
settings), it can lead to a powerfully positive 
Shabbat experience. 
 When it works well, this focus on a spe-
cific vision can have broad appeal. If I attend 
a service that has a lot of participatory sing-
ing, even if I am not familiar with the words 
or melodies, I can often connect to positive 
aspects because I see the other people having 
a powerful experience. This runs counter to 
conventional wisdom about welcoming syna-
gogues. A welcoming service (with page 
announcements, greeters and plenty of 
smiles) can sometimes lack appeal if the regu-
lars don’t connect to the core service itself. It 
is one thing to be welcomed into a room; it is 
another to enter a room where something 
powerful is happening. Of course the best 
services (in synagogues or independent min-
yanim) manage to do both.
 The same is true for Shabbat eating cul-
ture. Similar to many traditional synagogue 
communities, many independent minyanim 
value the culture of inviting people for a 
meal. This happens both organically , relying 
on a culture of ad hoc hospitality , and 
through systems of organized hosted meals or 
of designated hosts for on-the-spot meal invi-
tations. Other minyanim favor regular potluck 
meals: Come for the davening, stay for the 
meal. Community is often thickened through 
the one-on-one intimacy of sharing a meal 
together, and the benefits of the meal culture 
often pay back into the prayer culture.
 There are of course challenges in inde-
pendent minyanim around Shabbat, and I 
want to raise two of them. One is similar to a 
problem faced by many synagogues trying to 
welcome Bar Mitzvah guests: How can we 
best welcome people to an unfamiliar prayer 
experience, much of which is in Hebrew? The 
conventional wisdom is to guide the people 
through the choreography: Stand here, turn 
to this page, please be seated. Similarly , the 
written material focuses on the history and 
structure of the service: The Shema is about 
God’s unity; the Alenu entered the Shabbat 
service in the Middle Ages, etc. Independent 
minyanim typically eschew these guides, but 
don’t replace them with anything else. Per-
haps, however, the Shabbat experience for the 
first-timer in any prayer community shouldn’t 
be focused on history or choreographic 
instructions, but on preparation for an expe-
rience. The focus can be more on the aes-
thetic experience than on intellectual 
information. Imagine a guidebook or email 
sent in advance that reads (in part) like this:
Welcome to our Shabbat service! A tradi-
tional Jewish prayer service is probably 
unlike most things you experience in your 
daily life. You will see people standing
