SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_winter_2008.pdf

and RABBI DANIEL S. BRENNER 
Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of The Stein-
hardt Foundation for Jewish Life. Rabbi Daniel S.
Brenner is Vice President, Education of the
Birthright Israel Foundation.
4 CONTACT
A
fter breakfast on the second day
of a recent Jewish service learn-
ing trip to southern Louisiana,
the student participants began to ask dif-
ficult questions. “What is the point of us
being here?” “We can do so little.”
“What’s Jewish about service learning?”
It’s upsetting to confront the extent
of devastation in the Gulf Coast or the
poverty of inner-city Los Angeles. It’s
frustrating to realize how little a group
can physically accomplish in a single
week. It’s confusing to unpack the rela-
tionship between acting as a Jew and
acting as a concerned citizen. 
Rather than avoiding these difficult
conversations, we embrace them. This is
the turning point of the week, when stu-
dents begin to think about what they can
do long-term that will make even more
of a difference: how they can fight
poverty at its root and why they might
do so as Jews. Through the act of service,
they realize for themselves that the sig-
nificant work of repairing houses with
their hands is important but insufficient. 
Our Jewish service learning trips last
a week. The pursuit of justice as Jews
lasts a lifetime.
Over the course of our week-long
programs, our curriculum guides stu-
dents through a difficult process. First
we explore the most obvious question:
“Why am I here?” Each day brings new
queries: “How did things get so screwed
up?” “What can people do to fix this?”
By the end of the trip, students are ask-
ing themselves, “When I get back to my
high school or university campus, what
am I going to do about what I saw?” and
“What is my responsibility as a Jew?”
In this way , the entire curriculum of
our service trips is dedicated to the idea
of follow-through.
In the spring of 2007, Spark: the
Center for Jewish Service Learning at the
Jewish Funds for Justice (JFSJ) partnered
with the Reboot network of the Andrea
and Charles Bronfman Philanthropies to
take a group of talented, creative, under-
40 Jews to the Gulf Coast. The group
worked in Boothville, Louisiana with the
Southern Mutual Help Association
(SMHA), a partner of JFSJ. 
Inspired by their experience and
knowing that a few days of service was
just a start, the group decided to spread
word about the region’s ongoing needs
after returning home. 
When they returned, they created a
short video from footage of the devasta-
tion and of the Boothville community
members they met. Working with JFSJ,
Simon Greer is the President and CEO of Jewish
Funds for Justice. 
Following Through On 
Serviceand Relationship
