SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_winter_2003.pdf

ne of the ancient lessons of Jewish history is that when a
Jew suffers anywhere, we all suffer.
We seem to be forgetting this lesson today .
While Israel continues to hold emotional resonance
throughout the American Jewish community , we have yet
to display the same levels of solidarity as in the past. Yes,
we attend rallies. We telephone Congress and the Presi-
dent. We insist, in Letters to the Editor and open debates,
that Israel is fighting a war against terror launched by
those who rejected the peace process. Words, however,
only amount to so much. A more profound indication of
our support would be a substantially increased level of
philanthropy to meet the crisis. While emergency funds
have been raised, the levels are nowhere near the need.
Even more important than money is our physical
presence. For the past 50 years, personal visits to Israel as
well as the act of Aliyah have served as the most pro-
found expression of solidarity with our brethren in the
Holy Land. During the current crisis, American Jews have
shamefully abrogated their responsibility . Quite literally ,
we are abandoning Israel when it needs us most.
True, day-to-day life in Israel is not easy . There are
dangers inherent in even mundane tasks. The most pri-
mal parental instinct is to protect one’s children, and it is
not easy to urge moms and dads to send their kids to a
region perceived as unsafe. But we must ask ourselves: if
we exist only for ourselves in the comfort of American
safety , if we do not stand united with Israel during its
moments of crisis, what are we as a people?
Jewish unity is not an empty cliche, but a spiritual con-
cept rooted in an awareness of our common destiny . It is for
this reason that the severe reduction of American Jewish
visits to Israel is alarming. It calls to mind the image of a
mercenary relationship: Israelis will fight for a Jewish
future, and American Jews will cheer them on from the
sidelines. The situation is exacerbated by the demographics.
America has the most populous Jewish community in the
world. Avoiding Israel inflicts hardship not only by deci-
mating Israel’s tourism industry . On a deeper level, it makes
the unprecedented emotional claim that we are united with
Israelis only when it is convenient for us. When the situa-
tion becomes difficult, they are on their own.
Now is the time to buttress and even expand trips to
Israel for adults and youth alike. The need is crucial
among young adults, who lack memories of Israel’s galva-
nizing historical moments such as its heroic birth in 1948
or its miraculous triumph over annihilation in 1967.
Young people are more prone to take Israel for granted or,
worse yet, to view it through the lens of the media as an
oppressive and unjust regional superpower. Israel’s con-
temporary image as Goliath wins out over its historical
experience as David. When I visit college campuses, I
sense a greatly diminished interest in Israel as the bedrock
of Jewish life. The only way to reverse this trend is to
vastly expand our programs that bring people to Israel.
The unrecognized power of visits to Israel lies not in
the ancient buildings and sites, although these too are
vital, but in transformative encounters between people.
Birthright israel, the revolutionary program to reconnect
young Jews with Jewish identity , also serves to reestablish
Israel’s centrality in the lives of Diaspora Jewry . One
underlying premise of birthright israel is that Israel and
Diaspora Jews are one people who cannot subsist in sepa-
ration. Diaspora Jews need Israel as a foundation of his-
tory and heritage, while Israelis need Diaspora Jews as a
reminder that Jewish identity transcends place and time.
In birthright israel, we learned the symbiotic power of
peer-to-peer experiences when we implemented a major
locus of birthright programs, the mifgashim, or encoun-
ters, between Diaspora and Israeli Jews. The idea was to
allow birthright participants to meet with Israelis in their
same age cohort. At first, because of the difficulty of
scheduling time with Israelis who were serving in the
Army , most mifgashim were short-lived, lasting less than a
single day . But after speaking with the Education Officer
of the Israel Defense Force, we learned a startling fact:
Israelis were as moved and transformed by their encoun-
ters as were the birthright participants! By making friend-
ships with their counterparts in the Diaspora, they became
profoundly aware of the Jewish, as opposed to the exclu-
sively Israeli, aspects of their identity . The leadership of
the Army was so impressed by the character-building
nature of mifgashim that it granted soldiers five days to
spend with birthright groups. By the second year, the scale
of mifgashim had been elevated. Ninety-five percent lasted
between two and ten days. Mifgashim now form the heart
of birthright israel trips. They emphasize the dual-pronged
approach employed by birthright israel to inculcate Jewish
identity: reuniting with Jewish values and history , and
reuniting with the people of clal Yisrael.
At this critical juncture, we must do more than buy
Israeli goods and write to Congress. It is time for all of us
— individuals, philanthropies, Federations — to recom-
mit to programs that bridge the gap between the wide
varieties of worldwide Jewish experience and that teach,
through tangible, peer-to-peer experiences, that each of
us is responsible for the other.
I
am a student in the Pardes Educators
Program, and I live in Jerusalem. This
past August, while I was in America
for my wedding, a terrorist’s bomb
killed two of my classmates while they
sat eating lunch in Hebrew University’s
Frank Sinatra Cafe.
Ben Blutstein’s funeral was on Friday , my
wedding was on Sunday , and Marla Bennett’s
funeral was on Monday . My wedding will for-
ever be associated with this communal
trauma. A number of our guests were at one
or the other funeral. Rabbi Daniel Landes, the
Rosh Yeshiva of Pardes and our officiant,
traveled from Ben’s funeral in Harrisburg to
our wedding in New Jersey , then immediately
to Marla’s funeral in San Diego.
Our community came together for our
wedding — some in spite of the pain, and
others because of it. We had no idea how
to proceed under the circumstances, but
our friends insisted. They needed to dance
and sing just to keep from crying. They
needed to fulfill the mitzvah of gladdening
the bride and groom. They needed to cele-
brate as well as mourn. And nobody
knows better how to do that than those
who have lived in Jerusalem.
My parents, and all those present at the
wedding, felt the power of our community
— the power of people drawn together by
ideology and learning, shared danger and
shared joy , but most of all by shared com-
mitment. In tears at the end of the wedding,
my parents told me how they finally under-
stood why I live in Israel. And why , time
and again despite the danger, I return. To
live in Israel, in Jerusalem, is to experience
how important, how precious and how
sacred life can be.
The sadness of our friends and family at
our departure was clearly deepened by their
fear for our safety . But while we could
understand their feelings, my wife and I did
not consider, not even for a second, remain-
ing in America. One expects that it should
have been a more difficult decision. Let me
try to explain why it was not.
First, and this for me is an essential dis-
tinction, I am not a tourist in Israel. I am an
oleh, a new immigrant. Formally , this means
that I am a citizen of Israel. I can describe in
detail when and how this happened. I
remember getting the necessary documents
to prove my Jewishness. I remember the trip
to the Ministry of the Interior. I remember
getting my oleh identity card.
But I am also an oleh in a deeper sense.
Israel is my point of reference, and I don’t
know exactly when or how that happened.
But I do know that my formal change of
status simply made explicit what had, for a
long time, been implicit — that being a
Jew was more central to my identity than
being an American. And whether or not I
planned to live the rest of my life in Israel,
the clearest expression I could find for this
epiphany was formally changing my status.
It was an act aimed at harmonizing my
internal and external realities.
I believe that how we live is a function
of how we handle fear of our own mortal-
ity . We can either accept it, or live in
denial. We can believe in something more,
or we can believe that this is all there is.
Growing up in suburban America, the
choice seemed clear — mortality was not
to be faced. Instead, life is spent prolong-
ing life. Install a security system. Buy a
safer car. Go to the best doctor. Exercise
and take vitamins.
I did not feel part of something greater.
Rather, the message seemed to be that this
life is all you have; fill it with as much as
possible. The idea that “you can’t take it
with you” did not mean one should
devalue possessions. Rather, it meant mak-
ing sure to get them early so you can enjoy
them before you die.
I had a nagging feeling that no matter
how long or full a life I might lead in Amer-
ica, it would still feel empty . And my fear of
death is the fear of living an empty life. In
Israel, I may have a higher risk of dying, but
I have a lower risk of never really living.
Israel is of paramount importance to
the Jewish people. On this, many American
Jews agree. But I choose to demonstrate my
commitment to Israel by living here,
because I am not able to stomach the idea
of other people paying the ultimate price to
make it a reality while I sit comfortably in
America. Is my blood redder than theirs?
Someday , Jews will look back at this
moment in history and see clearly that Israel
was the Jewish people’s central project.
Everything else will be seen as marginal.
I recognize that there are many who dis-
agree. Of those who agree in principle, many
prefer to do what they can from America. I
spent two years working at United Jewish
Communities with people whose commit-
ment to Israel I do not question.
But living here, I regularly visit places
mentioned in the Bible. I speak Hebrew
every day with Jews whose ancestors were,
just 50 years ago, dispersed all over the
globe. I celebrate Shabbat, not only with
my immediate community , but with the
entire country . I do not just face East when
I pray; I use local landmarks to orient
myself toward the Temple Mount itself.
Every purchase I make helps the Israeli
economy . And, when I want to impact
Israeli policy , I vote.
Most importantly , I am privileged to be
surrounded by people who are lit up by
the same passion. People like Ben and
Marla, who, prior to dying tragically , lived
heroically . 
Andrew Katz received a BA and MA from Stanford
University in 1994, and has served as a leader and
educator in a variety of Jewish institutions. He and his
wife Emily Shapiro make their home in Jerusalem.
T o live in Israel,
in Jerusalem, is to experience
how important, how precious
and how sacred life can be.
WINTER 2003 7
NOW MORE THAN EVER:
Why I LiveIn Israel

unparalleled laboratory for the
acquisition of modern spoken
Hebrew by our students. More pro-
foundly , Jerusalem introduces our
students to the reality of a diverse
and vibrant Jewish people who have
returned to our ancestral homeland
from the four corners of the earth —
an exposure to kibbutz galuyot that
could never be matched in the Dias-
pora. Allied to this is the recogni-
tion that the State of Israel occupies
a central position in the life of the
Jewish people and religion today ,
and HUC-JIR therefore asserts that
all persons whom the College-Insti-
tute educates for roles of leadership
in the contemporary Jewish commu-
nity must have an extended first-
hand acquaintance with the reality
of Jewish national rebirth as evi-
denced in the State today .
Our students’ sojourn in Israel
therefore ultimately bespeaks a reli-
gious-spiritual commitment that
Shimon Rawidowicz captured in his
famed work, “Jerusalem and Baby-
lon.” In this piece, the late head of
the Near Eastern and Judaic Studies
Department at Brandeis University
employed the two sites contained in
his title as emblematic of Jewish
existence in both the Land of Israel
and the Diaspora, and
he utilized the metaphor
of an ellipsis to capture
the integral connected-
ness that binds Jews
everywhere into one
people. The ideals of
achdut and areivut —
Jewish solidarity and
mutual responsibility —
that emerge from these
teachings are the foun-
dational components of
the education HUC-JIR
provides for our stu-
dents, and Israel consti-
tutes the lynchpin in
this educational process
of religious formation.
We believe that the jour-
ney to Jewish religious leadership is
much more than an individual spiri-
tual quest. We call upon our gradu-
ates to recognize that they are part
of a people, that Jews throughout
the world share a covenant of des-
tiny . This conviction animates and
informs our course of study at
HUC-JIR. Our students must recog-
nize that their responsibility extends
to the Jewish family everywhere.
All this has been at stake in the
discussions that have tested the
ongoing commitment of the College-
Institute to our Year-in-Israel pro-
gram. Our Board of Governors and I
are keenly aware of and have been
deeply distressed by the marked
escalation in the cycle of violence in
Israel during these past two years. At
the same time, members of our
Board of Governors and I have made
numerous trips to Israel during this
time, and we have seen that life con-
tinues. We have had countless
searching discussions with col-
leagues and students both in Israel
and in the Diaspora. In the end, we
are convinced that our unanimous
decision to maintain our Year-in-
Israel requirement for our students is
both correct and responsible. It is
also consistent with the religious
mandate and moral undertaking that
inform the mission of HUC-JIR. 
Speaking on March 15, 1948, at
his inauguration as President of
Hebrew Union College, just a scant
two months before the State of Israel
was born, Nelson Glueck observed
that the soon-to-emerge Jewish State
was “literally under fire.” He went on
to state that “to abandon” an embry-
onic Israel would grant “license to
terror.” Dr. Glueck refused to do so.
We who have inherited his mantel
can do no less. 
WINTER 2003 9
RENEWING
OUR TIES TO 
ISRAEL
