SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_spring_2010.pdf

T
he Jewish fundraising world is in a serious decline. 
And I say this without the benefit of statistical 
research and analysis. It is more of a sense based 
on experience and intuition. This experience, combined 
with strong feelings from those around me, leads me to 
conclude that there is a nearly profound drop in giving 
to Jewish causes.
 For a long time, I have been of the view that this situ-
ation was in the making — for intergenerational reasons 
if no other. But my sense is that the current decline is far 
more immediate and more dramatic. Maybe I’m wrong, 
but what if I’m right? What if Jewish fundraising is no 
longer declining incrementally , but has truly fallen off a 
cliff? How long can we blame this on a recession or on 
Madoff?
 The community’s establishment recipients of tzedakah 
are loath to acknowledge a decline in receipts, consider-
ing that to be a failure, so numbers are not easily forth-
coming. But if my intuition is correct, and again I 
emphasize it is only intuition, then the changes that I 
have foreseen in the Jewish institutional world may 
already be here — unannounced, unexpected and 
unhappy .
 We have been living on yesterday’s fumes for too long. 
Old fashioned anti-anti-Semitism, unrealistic Zionism, 
superficial and, in the end, meaningless congregational 
life (including painfully unspiritual Bar and Bat Mitz-
vahs) are finally taking their toll. Yes, there is a new gen-
eration with hundreds and hundreds of new 
organizations attempting to emerge on the Jewish scene. 
But each of them is small and, alas, by their nature, I 
think doomed to remain small — one of the unhappy 
byproducts of pluralism. Thus we may be entering a new 
period devoid of leadership except in our youngest gen-
erations, where there is a spiritual renaissance, a little 
inchoate but hopeful nevertheless. 
■
COUNTERPOINT
SPRING 2010 15
The Steinhardt Foundation for Jewish Life
6 East 39th Street
10th floor
New York, NY 10016
Address service requested
Non-Profit Org.
U.S. Postage
PAID
Rockville, MD
Permit No. 800
...That was the way it 
was. Israel was the 
trigger to fundraising. 
Giving was collective 
and emotional. There 
was no talk about 
supporting Jewish 
education and identity; 
that was for the nerds 
and the Orthodox. At 
that time, giving money 
to the Federation was a 
religion unto itself, and 
God forbid someone 
should try to designate 
their gift or ask where 
the money was going. 
They would have been 
banished from the 
community . Those were 
the days of the UJA!
— ROBERT P . ARONSON
