SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_spring_2003.pdf

leadership focused instead on the bogey-
man of European anti-Semitism — a sure-
fire way to increase contributions, but an
ineffective strategy to stem the demo-
graphic and cultural decay .
One possible reason for its complacency
is that the Jewish organizational world has
stopped viewing the vast majority of Ameri-
can Jews as its constituency . One often
hears the rationale that we are soon to
become a smaller but more intensely Jewish
community . That may be true, but the
premise sugarcoats the central fact that we
are declining. The least affiliated are invari-
ably the first to disappear; given that there
are few replacements, the result, however
ameliorated, is decline. When our commu-
nal outreach, mostly Orthodox-sponsored,
“reaches out,” it mostly doesn’t connect
beyond the observant, near-Orthodox
minority . In the freest society in the world,
why do Jewish institutions continue to be
insular? Our organizations consider their
narrow mailing lists and donor pools as the
only turf worth fighting for. They do noth-
ing to project an image of contemporary
Jewish life to those who are unaffiliated or
unengaged. The Mormon Church spends
millions of dollars on savvy , polished televi-
sion ads for the New York media market.
The Jewish community , by contrast, does
not present itself to the more than 90 per-
cent of American Jews who do not read
Jewish publications and are largely cut off
from what’s going on Jewishly . Non-Ortho-
dox synagogue affiliation rates probably
reflect no more than a quarter of non-
Orthodox Jewry , and although many indi-
vidual synagogues are “points of light,” in
total, they too are
insufficient to
change the picture.
In this pluralis-
tic age, there exist
many experiments
in Jewish life, but
very few if any
have sustained
long-lasting appeal.
In the area of out-
reach and engage-
ment of young
adults, Jewish Life
Network created a
groundbreaking
model in Makor.
Opened in 1999,
Makor achieved
unprecedented suc-
cess in reaching
unaffiliated Jews in
their 20s and 30s. By integrating cultural,
educational and social programming and
by targeting young adults, the center dis-
tinguished itself from typical Jewish pro-
gramming. However, it is expensive,
sophisticated and risky . Thus far, no other
community in the country has shown the
will — let alone the commitment and
money — that would be necessary to repli-
cate this model.
In the area of day schools, too, we
must embrace a broader strategy of out-
reach. Currently , the community targets
families who are already involved in syna-
gogue and community life, without paying
heed to the hundreds of thousands of fam-
ilies who exist outside the community’s
radar. The vast majority of day schools
remain acutely religious in orientation,
whereas the vast majority of American
Jews are decidedly secular. Why are we not
building a network of secular day schools
to reach out to this untapped con-
stituency? The community is projecting
the message that only those Jews who are
actively involved are worth educating.
In order to draw in the untapped con-
stituency , we must spread our net wide, and
we must start as early in the life cycle as
possible. The Jewish organizational world
can create meaningful connections for the
families of 75,000 Jewish infants born in
North America each year with a compre-
hensive system of quality preschool centers.
I would also propose a program by which
every young family receives a gift from the
community at the time of childbirth. The
gift could be a down payment, for instance,
on a future educational trip to Israel.
The community’s narrowminded focus
is evident in the area of philanthropy as
well. Time and again, Jewish institutions
return to the usual suspects for funding.
When it comes to cultivating non-tradi-
tional philanthropic sources, the commu-
nity’s efforts add up to a resounding
failure. Although Jewish teaching stresses
the crucial importance of tzedakkah, each
passing generation gives a greater propor-
tion of its charity to non-sectarian causes.
One cannot argue that we lack the funds,
for the American Jewish community is the
wealthiest in the history of our people.
What we lack is the sense of priority . Jews
are major donors to universities, muse-
ums, orchestras and hospitals, but when it
comes to the vitality of our own people,
we fall short. Today , only 20 percent of our
giving goes to Jewish causes. In the middle
of the 20th century , the figure stood at
about 50 percent. Even those who give to
Jewish causes give smaller amounts to
Jewish charity than to secular causes. The
Chronicle of Philanthropy recently
announced the largest individual philan-
thropic gifts of 2002. The gifts ranged
from $100 million to $375 million. Of the
ten philanthropists, six were Jewish. Not a
single one gave anything meaningful to a
Jewish cause. Meanwhile, without a major
infusion of younger funders, the commu-
nity of Jewish philanthropists has become
increasingly geriatric. Let it be clear: We
will not change the direction of the com-
munity unless there is a meaningful rise in
funding directed at the Jewish world.
The 2000 NJPS revealed that the Jew-
ish people are at a critical juncture. Our
community is shrinking, and it will con-
tinue to do so unless we rethink our
strategies of engagement and philanthropic
leadership. It is time to implement a vision
of American Jewish renaissance that
engages the majority of secular, unaffili-
ated American Jews who are currently
ignored by Jewish institutions. There is no
time to waste. Based on our actions today ,
future population studies will reveal a
community in continuing disarray — or in
the midst of renaissance.
10 CONTACT
Our community is shrinking, and it will continue to do so unless we
rethink our strategies of engagement and philanthropic leadership.

II
n the 1950’s, when I was studying to be an American historian, I
read a book, Men to Match My Mountains, by Irving Stone. Stone’s
thesis was that the American character was shaped decisively by
the fact that the United States was a nation with unprecedented
opportunities and undeveloped land everywhere. The wide-open
country crystallized a new personality type: the aggressive, searching
high-achiever who would not allow himself to be held back by status-
quo thinking or social stratification. When hemmed in by entrenched
interest, or checked by the play-it-safe community , the American set-
tler would move on in order to push forward. Over time, this nation
attracted the adventurous immigrants and the restless pioneers who
overcame the obstacles, climbed the mountains, cut the forests, fought
the health and safety risks and created a dynamic, affluent and free
society . Thus, America developed men to match its mountains.
(Women also, but in the Fifties no one mentioned them.)
The American Jewish community faces unprecedented freedom and
economic opportunity that dwarfs all past history , and a unique cultural
environment of total openness and an exposure to every religion and
alternative lifestyle. In the past, Jewish identity and values were shel-
tered by the fact that communities were isolated from one another, by
the wall of anti-Semitism or discrimination, and by financial constraints
which limited choices. The protective shelter operated, in somewhat
different ways, for every community and religion. Today , all retaining
walls are eroding under the challenge of choice, i.e., the access to every
lifestyle, career and value system in the world. In their book One Nation
Under God, Seymour P . Lachman and Barry Kosmin estimate that 25 to
30 percent of Americans switch their religious affiliation denomination-
ally — an extraordinary ratio by any historical measure. Jews, as a
minority , are doubly vulnerable to these trends. American Jews are dis-
proportionably affluent, and this further increases their options. Ninety
percent of Jewish youth enter higher education, which stimulates a
desire for personal expression and intensifies alternative values. The
result is an inexorable bleeding away of loyalty and identity . The same
openness generates an environment for people to choose Jewishness as
well as to bring Jewish identity and commitment into the highest
realms of achievement (witness Joe Lieberman in American public life,
Steven Spielberg in popular culture, Timberland’s Jeff Swartz in busi-
ness). The critical question is: which choice will individual Jews make? 
Unfortunately , America’s wide open society has not yet crystallized
a new Jewish personality , or even a reconfiguration of the community
to meet the challenge. Alarmed by rising intermarriage and assimila-
tion, as documented in the 1990 National Jewish Population Survey ,
American Jewry has taken important steps toward a renewal of Jewish
Philanthropists
toMatchMy
Mountains
