SOURCE_URL: https://web.archive.org/web/2012id_/http://www.nytimes.com/2001/10/14/business/round-table-the-new-challenges-for-wall-street.html

Round Table - The New Challenges for Wall Street - NYTimes.com 

Subscribe Now 

Subscribe 

campaign: nyt2015_bar1_digi_may_holi_4Q4Y6 -- 277178, creative: crs-5640_nyt2015_bar1_digi_may_holi_LC -- 404775, page: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/business, targetedPage: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/business, position: Bar1 

Log In 

Register Now 

Help 

Home Page 

Today's Paper 

Video 

Most Popular 

Edition: U.S. / Global 

Business Day 

World 

U.S. 

N.Y. / Region 

Business 

Technology 

Science 

Health 

Sports 

Opinion 

Arts 

Style 

Travel 

Jobs 

Real Estate 

Autos 

International 

DealBook 

Markets 

Economy 

Energy 

Media 

Technology 

Personal Tech 

Small Business 

Your Money 

Round Table: The New Challenges for Wall Street

Published: October 14, 2001

LAST week, five veteran market watchers -- David W. Mullins Jr., Michael H. Steinhardt, Henry Kaufman, Richard C. Breeden and Douglas M. Atkin -- met to discuss the lessons learned and the potential impact of Sept. 11 on Wall Street. 

Q. Were you surprised by the vulnerability of the markets, that they had to close for four days? 

STEINHARDT -- I thought that the market opening as early as it did, in light of the physical problems, was very impressive. The market was extraordinarily -- far more than I would have envisaged -- stable, in light of the circumstances. 

MULLINS -- When the attack happened, it had profound implications for investors and the value of stocks. Many, if not most, U.S. companies were simply worth less after the attack than they were before. So the markets had an enormous amount of work to do. Investors had to rebalance their portfolios, adjust their risk levels. Essentially every stock in the U.S. equity markets had to be repriced. 

We knew this would involve a massive volume of trading, and it was extraordinarily important that the trading go smoothly. It's a remarkable achievement under those conditions and under those constraints that the New York Stock Exchange, for example, was able to trade a record 2.37 billion shares, indeed trade an average of 2 billion over that entire week. 

Had there been problems in the functioning of the market, this potentially could have been quite destabilizing. 

BREEDEN -- The government bond market resumed trading Thursday morning [Sept. 13]. So what we saw, both in the fixed-income markets and in the equity markets, was the legacy of almost 20 years of work in strengthening the physical infrastructure of our markets, making sure that they are resilient to interruptions. And both globalization and the move to greater electronic systems have helped put us in a more resilient position than we were 20 years ago. 

KAUFMAN -- And the Federal Reserve did yeoman work during that hectic period. There were a lot of open contracts, repos, coming due, had to be refinanced. And the Federal Reserve, also the Bank of England, some of the other institutions, came in massively and injected a huge amount of funds very quickly. 

STEINHARDT -- I don't think we've touched upon what might happen. There remains an extraordinary amount of bullishness on most levels, particularly in light of the circumstances and the uncertainties that we face. That will be the next war. 

Q. You mean investor bullishness? 

STEINHARDT -- Yes. 

MULLINS -- One remote concern I had was that we might have a systematic move away from the stock market by individual investors -- in the extreme, a market equivalent of a bank run. It would take the form of large redemption of stock mutual funds. In the '87 event, stock mutual fund redemptions were a significant factor, but in 1987 stock mutual funds were tiny compared to where they are today, in absolute amount, relative to value and relative to volume. There was $180 billion in stock mutual funds in '87; now there's $3.4 trillion. 

As it turned out, redemptions were less than 1 percent. This is easily absorbed by cash reserves, and individual investors over the past number of years have shown a remarkable capacity for calm and rational behavior in the face of wide swings. 

ATKIN -- One of the repercussions from the '87 crisis was actually a push toward centralization. The events of Sept. 11 will make us look at market fragmentations in a different way, and we should look for ways to decentralize rather than centralize the markets. 

Q. Is there a need for a centralized exchange in one place on Wall Street -- specifically, the New York Stock Exchange? 

BREEDEN -- We learned there are some disadvantages of concentration, vulnerability to this type of situation. And both globalization and electronic networks in this tragic event proved their importance. Across the board, firms could switch to London systems to help out when New York was under strain or not operating. While over the last 20 years many people have decried globalization as something we should be spooked about and might be a danger to the markets, it showed this time that it can be a big plus to the stability of the markets. 

Similarly, the electronic systems showed that they can play an important role in dispersing market activity from any single physical location, which gives us an ability to deal with not only terrorism but the natural disasters that we have seen take exchanges out temporarily in the past. 

Both of those trends are pluses. But they don't add up to saying that the New York Stock Exchange is irrelevant. The big problem was the transportation infrastructure and the communication infrastructure, not the markets infrastructure the way we had in '87. Too many telephone lines ran through the basement of 7 World Trade Center. We need to think a little bit more about dispersing the fiber optic cables and communication lines. 

MULLINS -- It does demonstrate that a centralized market has to have the same sort of redundancy and backup facilities that a firm has. And that is an extra cost. We have for a long time had a competition between a centralized marketplace and a less centralized marketplace in Nasdaq. My view is let 'em slug it out and we'll see who's provided the best value. 

Q. A lot of professionals have pulled back from a lot of their operations, as if the year ended on Sept. 11. What does that mean? 

KAUFMAN -- Well, they got disrupted. Some people in management aren't there. 

1

2 

3 

4 

Next Page > 

Inside NYTimes.com 

Health » 

Too Hot to Handle 

Arts » 

The Harmony of Liberty 

Opinion » 

Should Beach Privatization Be Allowed? 

Room for Debate asks whether shorefront homeowners should have to open their land to all comers.

Sports » 

A Woman’s Leadership May Steady Murray 

Opinion » 

Menagerie: Streaming Eagles 

U.S. » 

Curlers’ Aim: Sweep to a Win Over the Heat 

Television » 

The Cold War Brews Anew in Prime Time 

Book Review » 

Command Performance 

Opinion » 

Op-Ed: Fooling Mexican Fans 

World » 

Reading, Writing and Allegations 

Opinion » 

Op-Ed: Elite, Separate, Unequal 

New York City’s top public schools must become more diverse.

Business » 

Vice Has Media Giants Salivating
