SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_autumn_2008.pdf

Only by investing significantly 
in Jewish life today will we 
be able to nurture the leaders 
of tomorrow. 
AUTUMN 2008 3
4 CONTACT
I 
often hear complaints that there are 
not enough young leaders in the 
Jewish world. These outcries are 
filled with a sense of urgency and fear 
for the future of the Jewish people. 
While a crisis of leadership would 
truly be a cause for concern, 
I believe that the solu-
tion for this per-
ceived 
prob-
lem is 
closer than we 
think. We have pow-
erful models of leadership 
in our tradition to which we 
can turn to inspire a new generation 
of Jewish leadership. 
 True Jewish leadership is rarely , if 
ever, defined as such except in hind-
sight. Even Moses’ career was character-
ized by conflict with those he led and by 
challenges to his leadership. Like many 
leaders, Moses was at first reluctant and 
unsure of himself. Today we look back 
through the prism of time and see a 
great leader, but it was not so clear dur-
ing his life. 
 In my lifetime, I have learned much 
through the example of my father, Edgar 
Bronfman. As a leader, he chose to take 
on challenges due to his belief that one 
must leave the world a better place than 
one finds it. Hindsight tells us that my 
father was right in each instance, but it 
was not so clear during the battles he 
waged. When fighting for the freedom of 
the Jews in the Soviet Union, there was 
fear that conditions there would worsen. 
In his work exposing Kurt Waldheim’s 
Nazi past, concern arose regarding 
increased anti-Jewish fervor. My father’s 
battle with the Swiss banks was chal-
lenged by those who believed that there 
was no cause for legal redress against 
such powerful financial institutions. 
Guided by his internal moral compass 
and personal family history , he perse-
vered even in the face of many who dis-
agreed with him. Based on my father’s 
example, my own work in the Jewish 
philanthropic world has been founded in 
a deep belief that we can make this 
world a better place. 
 Long before I started 
working with my 
father, I 
advo-
cated for 
an open and 
welcoming Jewish 
community for all. My 
work started in Santa Bar-
bara, CA and Park City , UT, 
where I chose to help with the work 
of building and strengthening those Jew-
ish communities based on glaring needs. 
In both places, there was a great yearn-
ing for Jewish life. It either did not exist, 
as was the case in Park City , or it was 
inadequate for the needs of the commu-
nity , as was the case in Santa Barbara.
 In Park City , our community has 
done astonishing work. I expressed my 
deep conviction that our area needed a 
spiritual leader, one who would fight for 
the same welcoming and open atmo-
sphere in which I strongly believe. I vol-
unteered my time, my opinion and my 
money to advocate for our rabbi, and 
subsequently for the building of a syna-
gogue campus that welcomes all. There 
were many doubters. Most did not 
believe that our experiment would work. 
Now , our building is complete, our com-
munity welcomes all and we are thriv-
ing. We frequently have over 100 people 
attending Friday night services, we cele-
brate a Bar or Bat Mitzvah almost every 
week, and our other programs are 
repeatedly over-subscribed.
 I became a leader simply by accident 
when I stood up to fight for what I 
believed. Like many of the people in 
these communities, I am intermarried 
and yearn for meaning in my life. Like 
them, I want to belong to a group and 
to transmit a rich tradition to my chil-
dren. Taking leadership was not some-
thing I sought or anticipated. It came 
from working with my neighbors. It 
came from understanding the needs 
and concerns of the community in 
which I established my home. It came 
from doing what felt very natural, 
which is stepping up and helping out. 
In inspiring a new generation, it is 
important to teach that anyone can 
become a leader. It doesn’t require 
superhuman strength; it simply requires 
dedicated commitment and a willingness 
to act on one’s beliefs.
 In our increasingly complicated 
world, it is often difficult to know 
exactly how to be an effective Jewish 
leader. Certain elements of leadership, 
however, remain essential regardless of 
the era. People tend to follow those who 
have a meaningful message and to 
admire leaders who are willing to take 
a stand based on principle. Effective 
leaders are individuals who help others 
feel a sense of belonging to a greater 
whole and who empower the members 
of their community to contribute to a 
greater good. 
 I believe that expressions of concern 
about the future of Jewish leadership are, 
in many ways, a fear of the unknown 
and a reluctance to disturb the status 
quo. I hope to send a message that 
assuages that fear. The message is simply 
that as leaders, we must listen to the 
people who look up to us and establish a 
personal connection with them. We 
must acknowledge our changing demo-
graphics and the changing realities fac-
ing our people, and we must break down 
the barriers to inclusion and embrace 
the intermarried and their children. 
Judaism belongs to those who are 
searching for it. We must align ourselves 
with those who are invested in “big tent 
Judaism” and welcome all who choose to 
enter that tent.
 By opening the doors, our people 
will grow with a newfound sense of 
self-respect and respect for others. If we 
can accomplish this, our ideas will 
become stronger, and our people will 
attain a greater sense of belonging and 
meaning. Young people will be willing to 
stand up for a Judaism they believe in 
and will feel inspired to become leaders 
within their community . By addressing 
our challenges directly , the notion that 
we are facing a crisis of leadership will 
disappear and, almost by accident, we 
will become a people of innovators and 
leaders.
 ■
Adam Bronfman is Managing Director of The Sam-
uel Bronfman Foundation.
Accidental 
Leadership
