SOURCE_URL: https://www.forbes.com/2001/11/08/1108steinhardt.html

Michael Steinhardt's Voyage Around His Father
Today’s Stocks
Michael Steinhardt's Voyage Around His Father
By Robert Lenzner ,
Former Contributor.
Nov 08, 2001, 02:45pm EST Jun 06, 2013, 02:19pm EDT
This article is more than 10 years old.
For 40 years, demi-billionaire hedge fund operator
Michael Steinhardt
hid from the world the truth about his father,
Sol Frank "Red" Steinhardt
. Now, 60 years old and in retirement, Michael Steinhardt has decided to come clean in his newly published autobiography, No Bull: My Life In and Out of Markets .
Sol was a compulsive high-stakes gambler and colorful New York nightclub patron. He was also New York's leading jewel fence, a convicted felon and pal to underworld figures such as
Meyer Lansky
and "Three Finger"
Jimmy Aiello
. The night before crime figure
Joey Anastasia
was rubbed out in the Park Sheraton barbershop in 1957, he and Sol were out on the town gambling together.
The next year, Sol was convicted on charges of buying and selling stolen jewelry and was sentenced to five to ten years in prison on each of two felony counts.
Visiting his father in prison was an "obligation" since Sol had paid for Steinhardt's education at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School--most likely with ill-gotten gains, Steinhardt suggests. He recalls the "desolate miserable gray visits, where his father would vehemently insist that he was innocent."
"I believed totally in my father's innocence," Steinhardt writes. But he says that, when he was starting out on Wall Street, he was lucky no one identified him as the son of a convict serving time at Sing Sing and Dannemora, a maximum-security prison in upstate New York. Otherwise, such white-shoe firms as
Calvin Bullock
, a mutual fund group, and
Loeb Rhoades
, the brokerage firm that was a precursor to
Merrill Lynch
, would not have hired him.
Sol had long been the bane of Steinhardt's existence. Though, Steinhardt writes, his mother was devoted to him, his father was an "overpowering phantom figure." Sol was "unreliable and seemingly capricious," prone to severe mood changes and unable to be a devoted paternal figure. "His anger could appear in a flash and at the most inopportune times."
But he was also a boon: Early on, Sol gave his son envelopes stuffed with $10,000 in $100 bills to put in the stock market. This helped Steinhardt build his net worth to $200,000 at a young age. In effect, his father was Steinhardt's first investment client.
"He was always pleased when I gave him a high number for my wealth. But he never showed how pleased he was with me as a son. He complained that I had not made him a full partner [in
Steinhardt Partners
, the hedge fund the younger Steinhardt started with such distinguished co-investors as
William Salomon
, former managing partner of
Salomon Bros.
, and
Jack Nash
, founder of
Odyssey Partners
,] and shared the profits," Steinhardt says today.
It was an ambiguous, complex relationship that was never properly resolved. When his father died in 1999, Steinhardt "cried uncontrollably, an experience I had never before had. How I had longed for him to be the father I wanted him to be. How I had tried to make myself love him but realized I could not."
No Bull is Steinhardt's heartfelt attempt to come to terms with his father. It was "a catharsis" to finally tell the truth, Steinhardt admits.
No Bull also reveals similarities between the two men. It goes beyond the fact that Steinhardt had his own run in with the law. He and his firm were investigated, with Salomon Bros. and Caxton Group, for allegedly attempting to corner the market for short-term Treasury notes in the early 1990s. "When you're a target of the government investigation, it is very unpleasant," he says. He personally paid 75% of the $70 million in civil fines that were part of settling the case with the Securities and Exchange Commission and Justice Department--a mere fraction of the $600 million his hedge fund made on the Treasury positions.
At heart, Steinhardt is a compulsive gambler like his father. "Speculative joy, the joy derived from being right and being rewarded may well be similar to the rush felt by a winning gambler," he writes. "I was happier when pursuing success than I was when savoring its fruits; the attraction, perhaps the addiction, was in the process, as much as in its end."
At breakfast the other day, Steinhardt unconsciously revealed another habit of his father's he has adopted. He opened up his wallet to show a visitor a huge wad of $100 bills he keeps at the ready.
Editorial Standards Reprints & Permissions
LOADING VIDEO PLAYER...
FORBES’ FEATURED Video
