SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_spring_2009.pdf

4 CONTACT
W
hen I was a child, one of the first 
lessons my father taught me was 
that charity is the rent we pay for 
our lives on this planet. My father lived by this 
philosophy . I remember accompanying him as 
he brought food and friendship to many of the 
homebound seniors who lived in our commu-
nity . As a young adult, I vowed to follow in his 
footsteps and committed to always do my best 
to help those in need and those working to 
make our world a better place. 
This responsibility to assist one another is a 
fundamental tenet of our Jewish tradition. The 
Hebrew word for giving, tzedakah, is rooted in 
the word for righteousness. When we give, we 
not only help someone else, we also bring a 
measure of justice and God’s love into the 
world. Tzedakah is something we perform as 
well as give. In fact, it is something we must do 
to be good Jews and good human beings.
With the uncertain economic situation 
forcing all of us — regardless of income level 
— to rethink our financial commitments, it 
would be understandable if we tried to whit-
tle down the “rent” we pay for our life’s 
blessings. There are many who have lost their 
jobs or their wealth and who cannot afford to 
give at all. Foundations have seen their assets 
decline in value by an estimated 30 percent 
and are struggling to make their budgets 
while also meeting their obligations on previ-
ously announced gifts. As a result, many are 
cutting back gifts and turning down emer-
gency grant applications.
But even now , especially now , we have to 
remember that tzedakah is not what we do 
only when we can; it is a commandment. We 
all feel the chill of the economy’s downturn, 
but our hearts must not turn cold as well. We 
must respond. 
When times are tough, courage, vision and 
strong leadership become even more important. 
Sometimes, one person’s dream becomes a real-
ity that affects the entire community . That is 
why our foundation is honored to support 
those who are doing the heavy lifting to make a 
difference in these difficult times. 
Jay Feinberg is one of those people. 
Through his Gift of Life Bone Marrow Foun-
dation, Jay and his team have recruited tens 
of thousands to create a worldwide registry 
of potential donors, based on the knowledge 
that Jay understands that chances of success-
ful matches require access to donors from the 
same ethnic background. Stung by financial 
losses suffered by several of his largest con-
tributors, Jay quickly began finding ways to 
raise new revenue and cut costs so that his 
critically important work could continue. 
While not finished yet, Jay has managed to 
keep Gift of Life moving ahead.
I also find inspiration in David Cygielman, 
the founder of Moishe House. Moishe House 
has 23 houses in 7 countries that serve as 
hubs for Jewish young adults as they create 
their visions of an ideal Jewish communal 
space. When support from a long-time bene-
factor came to a close in 2008, David rolled up 
his sleeves and went to work. Recently named 
to a 2009 AVI CHAI Fellowship — an Invest-
ment in Individuals, and with continued sup-
port from the Jim Joseph Foundation, David is 
in the process of using those resources and 
securing additional funds to help Moishe 
House realize its full potential. 
At Keshet, an organization dedicated to 
creating a welcoming and inclusive Jewish 
community for gay , lesbian, bisexual and 
transgender Jews, Idit Klein and her board 
took a careful look at programming and chose 
to limit their expansion into affiliate commu-
nities for 2009, thus avoiding the risk of dilut-
ing programming in existing communities.
In Israel, the inspiring young leaders of 
Ayalim are currently foregoing salaries in order 
to keep their organization afloat. The Ayalim 
Association was founded in September 2002 by 
a group of young army veterans who wanted to 
strengthen settlement in the Negev and the Gali-
lee, while educating towards Zionist goals and 
fostering ties between the people of Israel and its 
land. Today , several hundred students participate 
in these programs, and hundreds more students 
and volunteers join in during summer break.
These inspiring individuals and organiza-
tions aren’t throwing in the towel, nor are 
they compromising the important work of 
their organizations. 
Another value that my father instilled in 
me is that being Jewish means caring for all 
of those around you, no matter their religion 
or background. This is why our family is also 
committed to supporting the community in 
which we have lived for four decades, our 
hometown of T ulsa, Oklahoma. 
At the end of 2008, we recognized the 
struggle of our city’s vital social-service pro-
grams to meet the increased demands this 
economy was creating — just when significant 
portions of their funding were drying up. 
That’s when we initiated our Lights On! pro-
gram. Without advance notice to the organiza-
tions, our foundation awarded end-of-the-year 
grants to fifteen non-profit agencies that pro-
vide direct services to the most vulnerable in 
our community . We encouraged them to use 
this money to help pay their utility bills dur-
ing 2009 and to spend the funds on other 
ongoing costs that many funders seldom sup-
port. This allowed them to remain focused on 
their missions to provide shelter and support 
to those who most need it. 
Through a similar program, Curtains 
Up!, we’re helping our local art museum, 
opera, ballet, orchestra and arts and humani-
ties council meet their operational costs so 
that they can continue feeding the creative 
spirit of T ulsa residents. As arts and educa-
tional organizations experience draconian 
budget cuts, we decided to make a statement 
— that the arts are food for the soul and that 
the soul needs to be fed, even in tough times.
While many families are fortunate 
enough to make charitable contributions on 
such a scale, a donation does not have to be 
large or public to make a difference. In fact, 
the gifts that matter most in any community 
are those of small- and mid-sized contribu-
tions, often in checks of $50 or $100, from 
many individuals, families and businesses. 
Those gifts not only help keep vital services 
up and running, they also build morale. For 
a caregiver, teacher, social worker or adminis-
trator, those checks arriving regularly are 
votes of confidence. Each one says: “You 
matter. You make a difference. We need you. 
Thank you. Don’t stop. Especially now .” 
It is in the most difficult times that each 
of us is tested to do good, to go the extra mile 
and to lend a hand to those around us. One 
individual can make a difference, whether as a 
funder or a service provider. That’s what keeps 
my family giving — the desire to make a dif-
ference — and we see evidence each day of 
the human spirit rising to the challenge, feed-
ing our collective stomachs and souls, making 
this a better place for all. 
For while the economic and investment 
worlds are unpredictable, our rent payments 
to the world still come due — and whatever 
our capacity , each of us needs to continue to 
pay on schedule. 
■
Lynn Schusterman is Chair of the Charles and Lynn 
Schusterman Family Foundation.
THE TIME FOR RENEWED
TZEDAKAH IS NOW
