SOURCE_URL: https://jewishjournal.com/commentary/327502/sheldon-adelson-his-own-man/

Sheldon Adelson: His Own Man 

Skip to content 

Sheldon Adelson: His Own Man

By 
Michael H. Steinhardt 

Published 
January 15, 2021 

[additional-authors]

Michael H. Steinhardt 

January 15, 2021 

Sheldon Adelson speaks at the Global Gaming Expo (G2E) 2014 at the Venetian Las Vegas on October 1, 2014. (Photo by Ethan Miller/Getty Images) 

https://jewishjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/speaker/post-327502.mp3?cb=1673834828.mp3 

With the passing of Sheldon Adelson, the Jewish people has lost a true hero.

In these hyper-partisan times, it is almost impossible to see beyond a man’s political legacy. Sheldon Adelson poured capital into Republican politics to a degree previously unseen in America. He also backed politicians on the Israeli right, and even launched a newspaper, Israel Hayom , to give the Israeli right a comprehensive voice in journalism.

But while we often disagreed about politics, we were united by one thing: our deep love for, and commitment to, the future of the Jewish people.

Sheldon and I first met in the early 2000s at an event at Tel Aviv University where we were both being honored. We hit it off immediately. As hard-charging businessmen, we shared a certain impatience with the hidebound bureaucratic approach of established American Jewish institutions, and their failure to engender a strong sense of Jewish identity among younger non-Orthodox Jews. We agreed about the need for a completely new approach to engaging them with Israel.

Every time Sheldon came to New York, we’d meet for lunch at Barney Greengrass on Amsterdam Avenue. We saw each other at least twice a year, and in between I’d send him care packages that included the restaurant’s famed pickled herring and smoked salmon, which he loved. He was a casino mogul who never gambled, a man of infinite vigor who met difficult physical challenges as he aged. One thing my wife Judy and I saw immediately was how much Sheldon loved his family, especially his wife Miri. Theirs was a full partnership built on a depth of love that you could sense the first time you met them.

But his love was not just for his family. He loved the Jewish people as well, and expressed it through his philanthropy: He was a major donor to Yad Vashem and to the Israeli-American Council. But above all, he expressed it through his heroic commitment to Birthright Israel, the most successful single program for building Diaspora Jewish identity in modern history.

Charles Bronfman and I started Birthright in 1999 along with a group of donors who each committed $5 million over five years, with a similar gift from the Israeli government and a smaller contribution from the federations. Birthright quickly became immensely popular, overcoming the challenges of institutional skepticism and the fears caused in the early 2000s among American Jewish parents by the Palestinian Intifada. Tens of thousands of young Jews came to Israel each year.

But it never faced a tougher challenge than the financial crisis of 2008, when the Israeli government slashed its contribution to the program, and neither the Jewish community nor private donors felt they could pick up the slack. It was Sheldon who stepped in, without being asked, and poured millions of dollars into keeping it going. He single-handedly saved Birthright. 

It was Sheldon who stepped in, without being asked, and poured millions of dollars into keeping it going. He single-handedly saved Birthright.

By the time he passed away, Sheldon had given more than $400 million of his own money to Birthright, making him by far the biggest single donor in its history, and one of the biggest Jewish donors to any single project in our people’s history.

There were people who saw Sheldon’s support for Birthright as proof that it had somehow become a “right-wing” program. But the truth was quite the opposite. If you ask Charles Bronfman — hardly a right-winger — he’ll agree that at no point did Sheldon even hint at trying to influence the program ideologically.

Why did he do it? Because he saw Birthright for what it was: An incredibly powerful tool for building a healthy sense of Jewish pride among young Jews from across the diaspora. While so many people criticized Birthright as too shallow, too short, and a waste of communal money, Sheldon believed in it. Over the years, when studies showed that the trip had major long-term impact, not just on participants’ relationship with Israel, but with their overall Jewish commitment—his investment was proven right. Sheldon helped turn Birthright into a ritual in the lives of nearly a million Jews.

Sheldon was possibly the proudest Jew I ever met. And he acted on that pride. Though his actions and statements sometimes rubbed liberal Jews the wrong way, there was a great deal to learn from his unwavering Jewish pride and his willingness to stand up to anti-Zionists and anti-Semites with conviction and courage. 

Sheldon was possibly the proudest Jew I ever met. And he acted on that pride.

We were not always of one mind on philanthropic questions. For years, I wanted Birthright to explore follow-up projects that would harness the enthusiasm created by the trip. Sheldon disagreed. “It’s all about the trip,” he would say. He had incredibly acute business instincts—pretty much all his business efforts were successful—and he understood Birthright through this entrepreneurial lens. He understood the secret of its success. And as a canny investor, he would put his money only into something he knew would pay off.

In a Jewish world where turf-conscious bureaucrats run the show and most private philanthropists are concerned more with social status and the plaques and plaudits of other Jews, Sheldon was one of a kind. He didn’t care about any of that. Sheldon was his own man , and I admired him for it. He trusted his own judgment, he didn’t give a fig about what other people thought of him, and above all, he took action. An energetic street fighter of a kind that used to be more common among Diaspora Jews, he didn’t have the benefits of a large inheritance or an elite education. He built an empire with his own hands and used the wealth he had created to help his fellow Jews.

Every Jew who cares about the future of our people should mourn the loss of Sheldon Adelson. We are unlikely to see another like him.

Michael H. Steinhardt is the Chair of the Steinhardt Foundation for Jewish Life. 

Did you enjoy this article?

You'll love our roundtable.

Previous article If Not Now When: an MLK Day Event 

Next article We Don’t Have Adequate Tools to Combat Domestic Terrorism. Biden Should Change That. 

Editor's Picks

Israel and the Internet Wars – A Professional Social Media Review 

Marion Haberman 

The Invisible Student: A Tale of Homelessness at UCLA and USC 

Tabby Refael 

What Ever Happened to the LA Times? 

Dan Schnur 

Who Are the Jews On Joe Biden’s Cabinet? 

Ryan Torok 

You’re Not a Bad Jewish Mom If Your Kid Wants Santa Claus to Come to Your House 

Marion Haberman 

No Labels: The Group Fighting for the Political Center 

Larry Greenfield 

Latest Articles

What Will It Take? 

Thane Rosenbaum 

Mamdani Needs to Pay a Price for Harming Jews 

David Suissa 

Rabbis of LA | Rabbi Geller’s Feminist Education 

Ari L. Noonan 

Rabbi Artson Honored by WLCJ, Mem Global’s Embark Names Executive Director 

Jewish Journal Staff 

I Can’t Always — A poem for Parsha Va’etchanan 

Rick Lupert 

A Bisl Torah — Senseless versus Sensible 

Rabbi Nicole Guzik 

Moment in Time: Tisha B’Av – A Time to Comfort 

July 23, 2026 

Poussin’s Menorah Chimes Without Jews at Midnight 

July 23, 2026 

Print Issue: Haredim at War | July 24, 2026 

July 23, 2026 

The Haredim who break out of their bubbles to join the IDF are often caught between faith, family and country. Here are some of their stories.

The Inversion of History 

July 23, 2026 

Molly Crabapple has written a work of great inversion and of ultimate betrayal.

From ‘The Chosen’ to ‘Imaging Torah’: Jeremy Kagan’s Journey to Bring Torah to Life 

July 23, 2026 

For the director/artist, creating images inspired by Torah is a way of engaging with the stories, ideas and interpretations that have shaped Jewish life for thousands of years.

Three Dates to Dataland 

July 23, 2026 

I took three different dates, ages 6, 72 and 35, to see Dataland, the unusual digital art experience in downtown Los Angeles. 

Hakol Shalom, All Is Shalom 

July 23, 2026 

This is the transcript of the speech Rabbi Dr. Bradley Shavit Artson gave at the 2026 AJU Gala on May 19, 2026.

A Slice of Aussie Heaven for the Jewish Day of Love 

July 23, 2026 

A classic Australian dessert chocolate coconut slice features a rich, dense, fudgy chocolate base packed with dried coconut, finished with a thick cocoa frosting and generously dusted with even more coconut.

Recipes that Celebrate Love for Tu b’Av 

July 23, 2026 

This roundup has recipes from two matchmakers: one is perfect for a special date night, the other is the perfect representative of lasting love.

Table for Five: Va’etchanan 

July 22, 2026 

Secret Sauce

The Haredi Soldiers Caught Between Faith, Family and Country 

July 22, 2026 

For decades, the question of Haredi enlistment has remained one of Israel’s most sensitive and unresolved conflicts.

Why Are Jews Not Suing Mamdani for Slander and Defamation? 

July 22, 2026 

At the very least, the case would provide a global stage to debunk the genocide lie that is devastating world Jewry.

The Empty Plaza and the Eternal Bond 

July 22, 2026 

This Tisha b’Av, as we mourn over the Temple once more, it is an occasion to consider what resonance the remnants of the Temple structure hold for us today.

Rosner’s Domain | A Leftist (Not) by Choice? 

July 22, 2026 

Coalition supporters want to define Eisenkot as a leftist because leftist is a title most Israelis do not want their Prime Minister to hold. But this definition has inherent limitations. 

Love for the Sake of Love: A Lesson from Tisha b’Av 

July 22, 2026 

Last week, I moderated a panel of interfaith leaders fighting antisemtism and supporting Israel as part of the American Muslim and Multifaith Women’s Empowerment Council’s conference. 

Life, Love and Tisha b’Av 

July 22, 2026 

As if life needed one more complication, my anniversary with life, my birthday, usually falls somewhere inside the Three Weeks, that narrow corridor of Jewish time when celebration starts to feel suspicious.

Accidental Pilgrim: My Moroccan Adventure 

July 22, 2026 

Does Morocco have genuine warmth toward Jews, or is it a way to reignite lucrative Jewish tourism? Does it even matter? 

The Hits Just Keep Coming 

July 22, 2026 

What the Changing Narrative Around Israel Reveals About the Fragmentation of the West 

July 22, 2026 

Anti-Israelism has become a kind of cultural and political loyalty test that has almost nothing to do with the actual policy questions at stake. If the postwar liberal order is fragmenting, the story of Israel is a symptom of that fragmentation, not its cause.

Echoes of Oct. 7 in ‘The Odyssey’ 

July 20, 2026 

The film reminded me that an ancient poet could write about massacres but also about moral courage, while terrorists who dream of killing Jews can only think of going right to the massacre.

More news and opinions than at a Shabbat dinner, right in your inbox.

×
