SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_spring_2009.pdf

SPRING 2009 3
S
peculation about our economic
future often leads to estimates as to
when the decline in economic activ-
ity will end, how much further the stock
market will fall, and how much further
unemployment will grow . This is all well
and good, but it may not get to the heart
of the issue: the ways in which our society
is being transformed. One could argue that
money and material possessions have been
a perennial, dominant force in American
life, particularly in the last quarter century .
Huge houses, private planes and art selling
for heretofore unimaginable prices have
become a norm. Wall Street has been by
far the premier place for attracting so
many of our best and brightest in the past
20 to 30 years, certainly among Jews. Will
these things change and, if so, how and
why? For me, it is much more worthy to
ruminate about this than about which
quarter the GDP will turn up.
So recently , “The End of History” was a
catch phrase in the minds of many . Can we
now be suggesting an end to Capitalism as
we know it? It does seem extreme, but so
does the revulsion for business leaders of
recent vintage — and perhaps more impor-
tant, the revulsion for their morality .
Are we seeing the beginning of a move-
ment to the Left that reflects not only a
sense of unhappiness with the growing
inequalities of income in recent years, but
also a different view as to what is fair and
just in our society? The fact that many cor-
porations and some of the wealthy pay such
a small share of the tax burden, and that
there is no longer a perceived relationship
between wealth and virtue as perhaps there
once was, are signs that we might be about
to undergo major transformations. I think
this applies globally as well, including in
the Israeli business community . I have often
asked, “Who are the role models in the
business world today?” Other than perhaps
a few technology geeks, there are very few .
So what could this new landscape be
like? Will it be like Mexico, or other parts
of Latin America and Africa, where over-
whelming poverty abounds, the rich need
bodyguards and violence is a constant
undercurrent? Will there be protectionism
and the rise of a new nationalism, the
hints of which we are beginning to see? It’s
hard to say , and one should not think only
in extremis. But, for many of us, this is the
greatest economic upheaval in our lifetime.
And what about the Jews? We certainly
were prime beneficiaries of the prosperity
of the last quarter century . In every area of
American life, but especially in economic
matters, we raised ourselves to unprece-
dented abundance. But where has this left
us? As much as we’ve assimilated into
America, it takes nothing more than a man
like Bernard Madoff to reveal Jewish inse-
curity . “What will the Christians think?” is
on the minds of many . The degree of Jew-
ish introspection about potential anti-Sem-
itism based on this and other events with
notable Jewish “villains” has been vast. Is
such insecurity justified? I think not, but
time will tell. Perhaps more important, is
there a Jewish message in our wealth, in
our prominence in much of the ugliness of
the moment? Again, I think not, but Jew-
ish antennae remain sensitive, however
much we are integrated. And I believe that
we are, and perhaps should be, our own
worst critics.
One thing that bears examining is the
degree to which we Jews have partaken in
society’s excess. We have been in the front
ranks in participating in every possible
material glory . And we do it openly , lav-
ishly , ostentatiously , playing the game of
“mine is bigger than yours” perhaps better
than anyone. Is it wrong? Is it wrong for
Jews to dominate the real estate business
in so many cities? What about Jewish sway
in Hollywood? Is it wrong for some Jewish
families to own some of the world’s great-
est art? When does nouveau riche become
establishment riche? Have our ethics been
compromised by immersion in material
excess? Has the age-old Jewish focus on
learning been replaced by the lust for mul-
tiple estates and yachts?
For American Jews, the prevailing
ethos has often been about “making it.”
Will the present circumstance temper our
material desires? Is the bloom off the rose
of Wall Street glamour? What will take its
place? Are we on the verge of witnessing a
new morality not only in America but in
Jewish life? We have already seen a recent
surge in interest in becoming teachers. In a
similar vein, a surprisingly large number of
Birthright Israel alumni have found their
way back to Israel, many without clear
long-term motivations. Is it possible that
young people are reconsidering the values
a previous generation considered para-
mount? Will this grow beyond the present
period of job scarcity? Are we finally revis-
iting who we are?
In the spirit of the change we are
undergoing, I believe that there could not
be a better time to contemplate Jewish val-
ues. Why be Jewish? What makes us spe-
cial? Why are we high achieving? What
really are Jewish values? The answers to
these questions may be difficult to come
by , and will not necessarily come most
insightfully from rabbis.
Finally , much has been said about the
impact of the economic crisis on the Jew-
ish community and on Jewish philan-
thropy . There is concern that both the
community and its philanthropy will be
weakened. I would argue that in the non-
Orthodox world, we don’t have much of a
community nor a Jewish philanthropic
structure that is both vibrant and cohesive.
Thus, while I am concerned about the
social-welfare aspects of our communal
affairs, aside from these, I have long felt
that we need a deep overhaul in our
already deteriorating community . That can
only happen from a new and more pro-
found understanding of Jewish values and
the spirituality that develops therefrom.
My further hope is that the next genera-
tion of Jews, inspired by Birthright Israel,
can begin to fulfill these visions. This is by
no means a high probability bet, but we
Jews are no strangers to long odds.
■
Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of The Steinhardt
Foundation for Jewish Life.
 THELandscape
 AHEAD
 by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
