SOURCE_URL: https://images.law.com/contrib/content/uploads/documents/292/102693/2021-12-06-Steinhardt-Statement-of-Facts-w-Attachments-Filed.pdf

from illegal excavations.” Because the antiquities had been looted, the villagers were not paid or
given any reward. On April 24, 1991, shortly after more reports of looting, Steinhardt purchased
the Antelope Standard and Bird Rattles —bronze animal figurines—directly from Symes for
$84,000. See Exhibit 42 for the most recent photograph of the Antelope Standard and Bird
Rattles. No verifiable provenance for the Antelope Standard and Bird Rattles prior to the 1991
sale by Symes to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Robert Hecht (45 antiquities)
Robert Emmanuel Hecht (b. 1919) was a Paris -based antiquities dealer born in
Baltimore, Maryland. In 1946, while studying archaeology at the University of Zurich, Hecht
met Fritz Bürki, who, at the time, worked as a doorman and sporadically did restoration work
for the Archaeology Faculty. In the early 1950s, Hecht started selling antiquities and moved
to Rome.
In 1962, Hecht was caught on a flight attempting to smuggle gold coins out of Turkey.
The coins were confiscated and Hecht declared persona non grata in Turkey. Hecht had also
been expelled from Italy, but in 1963 was allowed back in —at first, for one month at a time,
then for three months, and finally in 1965, he was authorized to live in Italy for one year at a
60

time. All the while, Hecht continued trafficking in antiquities with Medici until, in June 1973,
Hecht fled Italy after a criminal tribunal in Rome issued an arrest warrant, charging him with
buying, illegally exporting, and selling to the Met one of the most famous looted antiquities of
the last 50 years, the Euphronios Crater. At Hecht’s trial in absentia, a tombarolo named Roberto
Biscetti testified that “tombaroli were afraid of Hecht because he was in touch with It alian
mafia” and that “Hecht had traded looted antiquities from Cerveteri for years.” The criminal
tribunal initially acquitted Hecht, but he was subsequently convicted on appeal. In 1976,
however, the Supreme Court of Cassation set aside the conviction.
Then, in 1997, Hecht, Fritz B ürki, and well -known collector Jonathan Rosen were
indicted in Italy for the theft and sale of the Guglielmini Tripod and Etruscan Candle Holder
stolen from Villa Giulia. In 2000, these defendants were joined with Medici’s tria l. Then, in
February 2001, French and Italian authorities executed a search warrant on Hecht’s apartment
in Paris, recovering 43 antiquities hidden under his bed, 24 folders of documents, and Hecht’s
memoirs. Of the 43 antiquities, 42 were authentic and 32 were from Italy. The memoirs
detailed many of the illegal antiquities he had trafficked over the years, and the folders contain
articles, letters, photographs, sale records, and auction sales of antiquities. Together, they are
collectively referred to as the “Hecht Archive.” In a draft of his autobiography, Hecht
attempted to explain away his trafficking: “[d]uring my 50 years of dealing with antiquities I
have a ccidentally bought objects that were really ‘stolen’ from museums or excavations.”
Steinhardt’s name appears 14 times in the draft of the autobiography.
At trial, antiquities dealer Freida Tchakos testified that “Hecht was
…selling a lot to
Steinhardt, his relationship with Steinhardt started five or six years ago, replacing Bob
61

Haber, and probably it had been Hecht who fabricated the tale of the phiale to do away
with his rival. In Steinhardt’s house, ten years ago, I have seen many beautiful objects,
especially Corinthian bronzes and helmets
. He had the bronze sphynx from Naples that he
later returned; a fresco with a young Hercules, sold by Hecht and of which I have seen a
photograph at [ tombarolo Raffaele] Monticelli’s house —a character well connected to both
Hecht and Becchina.” On January 1, 2012, the Judge dismissed the case for the running of the
statute of limitations, but added, “it should be noted, however, following the outcome of the
preliminary investigation carried out up to now, it is not possible to acquit Hecht for any of
the charges he has disputed […] the evidence acquired so far does not allow Hecht to contest
even the conspiracy crime.” Finally, the judge ordered that Hecht's assets be returned to their
legitimate owner: “namely the Italian State.”
Hecht died in Paris in February 2012. To date, this Office has executed 4 seizures of
47 antiquities trafficked by Hecht.
Kouros
The Kouros appears broken, dirty, covered in graffiti written in Greek, and lying on a
pallet in the dirt in two photographs recovered from Steinhardt’s files. See Exhibit 43A. Crafted
circa 560 B.C.E., the Kouros depicts a youth with 14 rows of braids and is characteristic of
kouroi found in archaeological sites in Greece. While the photographs recovered from
Steinhardt’s files are undated, the image s are consistent with those taken by looters shortly
after illicit excavations to prove the authenticity of antiquities to prospective buyers. A
photograph of the same Kouros was recovered from the Hecht Archive. See Exhibit 43B. In
the Hecht Archive photograph , the Kouros appears mounted upside down surrounded by
62

restoration tools in the Zurich laboratory of Fritz and Harry Bürki, a father-son duo of restorers
who cleaned antiquities supplied by Medici, Becchina, and other traffickers.
The kouros illustrates the practice of creating “orphans” referred to earlier. As previously
discussed, looters and smugglers often intentionally break large statues into smaller pieces to ease
transport and avoid detection by customs and other law-enforcement officials. Both the post-
looting photographs and the Hecht Archive restoration photograph depict the same statue: in
both photographs, the Kouros has 14 rows of braids, the same break at the neck, and the same
distinctive scarring—e.g., a sickle shaped scar on the shoulder and an inverted “v” scar over
the genitals. But in the post-looting photographs of the Kouros on the pallet, the Kouros has
both arms and both legs (to just below the knee). Thus, when it was looted, the Kouros was
relatively intact. But the Hecht Archive photograph from the Bürki laboratory in Zurich, taken
after the Kouros had been smuggled from Greece to Zurich, depicts the Kouros as missing both
arms and both legs.
The Kouros first surfaced on the international art market on November 17, 2000, when
Steinhardt purchased the Kouros directly from Hecht with no prior provenance for $2,348,500.
Here, Hecht falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Kouros was “exported legally
from [its] country of origin.” See Exhibit 43C for the most recent photograph of the Kouros .
No verifiable provenance for the Kouros prior to the 2000 sale from Hecht to Steinhardt has
ever been identified.
Griffin Cauldron with Stand
The Griffin Cauldron with Stand appears broken with the lebes , or ancient metal
cauldron, dirt-encrusted and broken in two parts in photographs recovered from the Hecht
63

Archive. See Exhibit 44A. Originating from a princely tomb located in the Lazio region of
Italy, the Griffin Cauldron with Stand was crafted from bronze circa 700 B.C.E. The Griffin
Cauldron with Stand first surfaced on the international art market on April 22, 2003, when
Steinhardt purchased it directly from Hecht with no prior provenance for $475,000. Although
the invoice lists this purchase price, other records recovered from Steinhardt ’s files indicate
that he purchased the Griffin Cauldron with Stand for $3,000,000. See Exhibit 44B for the
most recent photograph of the Griffin Cauldron with Stand. No verifiable provenance for the
Griffin Cauldron with Stand prior to the 2003 sale from Hecht to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
Gold Broach
Comprising approximately five interlocking feline figures, the Gold Broach dates to circa
600 B.C.E. and was crafted on the Greek island of Rhodes. In a photograph recovered from
Steinhardt’s records, the Gold Broach appears lying on a white sheet next to an alabastron (an
oblong vessel) and two wires or cords . See Exhibit 45A. In an October 22, 1999, letter from
Hecht to Steinhardt, Hecht wrote that the Gold Broach was “found with” an “alabastron with
the cartouche of Nekko II ca. 615-590 B.C.” As addressed previously, unless an antiquity was
discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized excavation, detailed knowledge about
that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only be possessed by the looter. It is well-
known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an unprovenanced
antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted. Hecht’s letter con tinues, “1) root-fuzz
which can be seen in the field among the smaller lions.” The presence of such delicate vegetation
(“root fuzz”) on the antiquity further underscores its recent removal from the ground.
64

The Gold Broach first surfaced on the international art market on September 29, 1999,
when Steinhardt purchased the Gold Broach for $728,000 from Harry Bürki. Although
Steinhardt received an invoice from “H. Bürki”, numerous records for the Gold Broach and
other Steinhardt antiquities reflect that Hecht and Bürki often jointly sold antiquities to utilize
the faux-Bürki provenance. Here, Bürki falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the
Gold Broach was “exported legally from [its] country of origin.” In 2017, Steinhardt attempted
to sell the Gold Broach to Sheik Hamad al-Thani, stating “I will sell [the Gold Broach and another
antiquity] for $1.6 million—no less.” Sheik al-Thani declined to purchase the objects because the
provenance was not strong enough. See Exhibit 45B for the most recent photograph of the Gold
Broach. No verifiable provenance for the Gold Broach prior to the 1999 sale from Bürki/Hecht
to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Minoan Hoard (33)
Containing spears, stone vessels, and metal fragments, the Minoan Hoard consists of
33 dirt-encrusted objects from 1500 -800 B.C.E. and originating in Crete, Greece. In a
photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s records, 16 objects of the Minoan Hoard appear dirt-
encrusted lying on a white sheet. See Exhibit 46A. The only known documentation of the
Minoan Hoard is its appearance on the same September 29, 1999, invoice as the Gold Broach,
when Steinhardt purchased the Minoan Hoard from Bürki/Hecht for $92,000 . Here, Bürki
falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Minoan Hoard were “exported legally
from their country of origin.” Steinhardt’s records refer to the set of objects as a “hoard.” As
previously discussed, within the archaeological community, a “hoard” (a series of objects
buried tog ether in antiquity) is extensively studied for its sociological and anthropological
65

insights into ancient civilizations. Thus, the discovery of a hoard is heavily reported and widely
published. The sudden appearance on the international art market of an unprovenanced (and
unpublished) hoard such as the Minoan Hoard, therefore, is often an indication that the
objects have been recently looted. See Exhibit 4 6B for the most recent photograph of the
Minoan Hoard. No verifiable provenance for the Minoan Hoard prior to the 1999 sale from
Hecht to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Female Figurine with Seven Gold Dress Ornaments (8)
A small crowned figure crafted from metal along with seven carved gold ornaments, the
Female Figurine with Gold Dress Ornaments dates to circa 600 B.C.E. The Female Figurine was
crafted in Ephesus, Turkey, with its numerous, small metal plaques attached to form a dress.
The Gold Dress Ornaments appear dirt -encrusted in a photograph recovered from
Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 47A. The Female Figurine with Seven Gold Dress Ornaments
first surfaced on the international art market on October 31, 2005, when Steinhardt purchased
all eight of these antiquities directly from Hecht with no prior provenance for $499,294. On
Hecht’s invoice, there is a handwritten note that the objects were “found together.” Again,
unless an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized excavation,
detailed knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only be
possessed by the looter. See Exhibit 4 7B for the most recent photograph of the Female
Figurine with Seven Gold Dress Ornaments. Although Hecht falsely claimed on his invoice
to Steinhardt that the Female Figurine and Seven Gold Dress Ornaments was “[his] property,”
no verifiable provenance for the Female Figurine with Gold Dress Ornaments prior to the
2005 sale from Hecht to Steinhardt has ever been identified
66

Nude Female Statuette
Dating to circa 2500 B.C.E., the Nude Female Statuett e was crafted from bronze and
originated in the site of Mari, Syria. A report prepared by the Art Conservation Group in
January 2017 notes the “widespread presence of what appears to be burial dirt, light brown to
grey in color” on the Nude Female Statuette. The Nude Female Statuette first surfaced on the
international art market on December 11, 2003, in the hands of Hecht , who identified the
Nude Female Statuette in his invoice to Steinhardt as “Syrian .” This was 8 months after the
April 2003 looting of Baghdad’s Iraq Museum—looting that an international investigation led
by U.S. Marine Colonel Matthew Bogdanos determined resulted in the theft of more than
10,000 antiquities, to include entire shelves and storage boxes of small statuettes similar to the
Nude Female Statuette. It is well-documented that looting of antiquities increases during times
of civil unrest and war. When an unprovenanced antiquity appears on the internat ional art
market for the first time immediately after geo -political turbulence in its country of origin,
therefore, that is often an indication that it has been looted. A ppearing on the art market just
months after significant reporting in the media of widespread looting in Iraq and Syria during
the 2003 Iraq War , the Nude Female Statuette had no prior provenance. Nonetheless,
Steinhardt purchased it from Hecht for $28,000. See Exhibit 48 for the most recent photograph
of the Nude Female Statuette. Although Hecht falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt
that the Nude Female Statuette was “[his] property,” no verifiable provenance for the Nude
Female Statuette prior to the 2003 sale from Hecht to Steinhardt has ever been identified
Edward and Samuel Merrin (4 antiquities)
Edward (“Ed”) Merrin (b. 1928) founded Merrin Gallery in 1963 to sell jewelry. In the
67

late 1960s, Merrin became interested in pre-Columbian art and shifted the gallery to focus on
selling antiquities. In 1987, Samuel (“Sam”) Merrin (b. 1963) joined his father’s business. In 1999,
Samuel Merrin became the director of the gallery.
According to records seized from convicted antiquities -trafficker Giovanni Franco
Becchina by law-enforcement authorities, the Merrin Gallery bought looted antiquities directly
from Becchina and even directly from tombaroli themselves. Among the records seized from
Becchina is a handwritten letter from a tombarolo in Sardinia to Becchina. It is unabashedly
revealing. In the letter, the tombarolo explains that he is writing Becchina to offer him a lucrative
new venture. According to the tombarolo who wrote the letter, although he had previously offered
Edward Merrin in New York the first choice of any looted Sardinian artifacts, the tombarolo would
like to now offer them to Becchina instead. In a subsequent letter, the same tombarolo requested
that Becchina shop photos of his looted Sardinian antiquities to important buyers on the U.S.
market, including Merrin Gallery, the Met, and the Getty Museum. In a similar letter to George
Ortiz, the same tombarolo made the same offer. Advertising himself as the “person who is bringing
the stuff to Merrin [Gallery] of New York,” the tombarolo concluded, “so, Mr. Ortiz, if you pay us
the same [amounts], we will bring all the stuff only to you.”
In 2005, both Edward and Samuel were indicted by the Office of the U.S. Attorney for
the Southern District of New York (SDNY) on charges of defrauding clients millions of dollars
by inflating the cost of antiquities they sold. In 2007, Edward Merrin was sentenced to one year
of probation and ordered to pay $50,000 in fines. That same year, Samuel Merrin entered a
deferred prosecution agreement with SDNY and the charges were ultimately dismissed pursuant
to that agreement.
68

Edward Merrin died in 2020, but Samuel Merrin continues to run the gallery. To date,
this Office has executed 5 seizures of 21 antiquities trafficked through Merrin.
Stag’s Head Rhyton
Depicting a finely wrought stag’s head in the form of a ceremonial vessel for libations,
the Stag’s Head Rhyton was crafted circa 400 B.C.E. in Milas, Turkey. In October 1986, illegal
excavations began in Milas prompting the Mini stry of Culture and Tourism to conduct
emergency excavations in the wake of the rampant looting. Later that same year, the
gendarmerie of Milas notified local leaders of community precautions motivated by the illegal
excavations and near-complete destruction of the ancient site at Milas. On October 18, 1988,
the Ministry of Culture and Tourism again reported on the illegal excavations at Milas and
noted antiquities were being smuggled out of Turkey. On May 17, 1990, an anonymous letter
was sent by a local resident to the Ministry of Culture and Tourism reporting that illegal
excavations had recommenced in Milas. The Stag’s Head Rhyton first appeared on the
international art market —with no prior provenance —shortly after this rampant looting in
Milas. On November 22, 1991, Steinhardt purchased the Stag’s Head Rhyton for $2,600,000
from Merrin Gallery.
Undated handwritten notes recovered from Steinhardt’s records for the Stag’s Head
Rhyton state, “Found in Western Turkey.” As discussed previously, detailed knowledge about
that antiquity’s “find spot” can only be possessed by the looter. It is well -known, therefore,
that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an unprovenanced antiquity is often
an indication that it has been looted. On May 15, 1992, Dr. Barbara Deppert, an archaeologist
and art advisor, wrote to Steinhardt, “I found out that your rhyton was found near Milas on
69

the western coast of Asia minor.” Twenty-nine years later, Dr. Deppert opined that she might
have based her statement about the find spot on parallels to the rhyton or “perhaps on
information provided by Robert Haber.” The facts suggest otherwise and Dr. Deppert’s
attempt to distance herself from the obvious implications of her original statement is
unconvincing. Haber’s well-documented involvement with antiquities traffickers is addressed
separately. Moreover, Dr. Deppert sent her 1992 letter from Germany at a time she was
connected to Fuad Ü zülmez, a Munich- based Turkish antiquities smuggler with extensive
connections to looters in the regions around Milas. Nor was this Dr. Deppert ’s first
involvement with Haber or looted antiquities. Less than a year earlier, she had advised
Steinhardt to purchase from Haber a gold phiale that had been looted from Italy and that
Steinhardt ultimately forfeited to Italy. On March 11, 1993, Steinhardt loaned the Stag’s Head
Rhyton to the Met, where it remained until this Office applied for and received a warrant to
seize the Stag’s Head Rhyton . See Exhibit 49 for the most recent photograph of the Stag’s
Head Rhyton. No verifiable provenance for the Stag’s Head Rhyton prior to its 1991 sale from
Merrin Gallery to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Syro-Hittite Idols (3)
The three Syro -Hittite Idols appear broken in fragments in a black -and-white
photograph that was recovered as the result of a different criminal investigation during the
execution of a judicially authorized warrant on New York-based Royal-Athena Galleries. See
Exhibit 50A. The photograph had been stored by Royal -Athena Galleries’ owner, Jerome
Eisenberg, in a folder labeled “ STEINHARDT, Michael – to 1997 .” Dating to the 2nd
millennium B.C.E., the three female Syro -Hittite Idols were crafted in northwest Syria. The
70

Syro-Hittite Idols first surfaced on the international art market on January 13, 1989, when
Steinhardt purchased two of the three idols —antiquities accessioned by Steinhardt as
A1989.20 and A1992.30—from Edward Merrin for a total of $20,000. On October 2, 1992,
the third Syro -Hittite Idol surfaced on the international art market with Merrin. That idol
(accessioned by Steinhardt as A1992.12) appears dirty, broken into five fragments, and lying
on a white sheet in an undated color Polaroid photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s records.
See Exhibit 50 B. In a handwritten note, Ed ward Merrin wrote, “Got this Polaroid before
putting together – shows absolutely that the figures [sic] parts go together (see depression for
neck – joining of le gs, etc.).” As discussed previously, the advent of color non -peel-apart
Polaroid technology in 1972 indicates that this color non- peel-apart post -looting
photograph—although undated —could only have been taken after 1972. This same idol
(A1992.12) appears p artially restored (still missing its left arm) in a photograph that was
recovered from the Symes Archive. See Exhibit 50C. Merrin Gallery sold Steinhardt this third
Syro-Hittite Idol (A1992.12) for $9,000 with a note, “from the same find as the two you have.”
Again, such detailed knowledge about an antiquity’s “find spot,” how it was found, and especially
what other antiquities it was found with, can only be possessed by the looter. It is well-known,
therefore, that such information from a seller is often an indication that those antiquities have
been looted. See Exhibit 50D for the most recent photograph of the Syro- Hittite Idols. No
verifiable provenance for the Syro -Hittite Idols prior to their respective 1989 and 1992 sales
from Merrin Gallery to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Robert Haber (2 antiquities)
Robert Haber (b. 1947) is an antiquities dealer born in New York who has been
71

operating his gallery, Robert Haber & Associates Ancient Art, in New York City since 1982.
In 1986, Haber sold a “Celtic bronze dagger and scabbard” to a private New York collector,
who later consigned it to Christie’s for sale. In fact, the dagger and scabbard had been looted
from Italy by convicted trafficker Giovanni Franco Becchina. In 2002, Haber sold another
Becchina-trafficked antiquity a Minoan larnax, dated to the 14th century B.C.E. to the
Michael C. Carlos Museum at Emory University.
In the late 1980s, Haber began selling millions of dollars’ worth of antiquities to
Steinhardt. According to Steinhardt himself, “the majority of the items I purchased [from
Haber] did not have provenance.” For example, in 1991, Haber sold Steinhardt a hammered
gold bowl from Sicily, dated to ca. 450 B.C.E., for more than $1 million. In 1995, the Office
of the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York (SDNY) seized the antiquity
from Steinhardt, alleging that it had been looted from Caltavuturo, Sicily, and then smuggled
out of Italy via Switzerland. In a 1997 forfeiture proceeding, Judge Barbara S. Jones found
that Haber himself “took great effort to ensure that the [gold bowl] was not exported
directly from Italy.” Indeed, despite seeing the gold bowl in person in Sicily, Haber flew to
Lugano, Switzerland, in order to take possession. Then he carried the looted gold bowl first
to Zurich and then to Geneva before flying it to New York. On customs forms, he
misidentified its country of origin as Switzerland, rather than Italy. Judge Jones noted that
“truthful identification of Italy on the customs forms would have placed the Customs
Service on notice that an object of antiquity, dated 450 B.C., was being exported from a
country with strict antiquity protection laws.” Accordingly, Judge Jones ordered the
repatriation of the antiquity to Italy.
72

The 74-year-old Haber continues to operate his gallery in New York. To date, this
Office has executed three seizures of three antiquities trafficked by Haber.
Orpheus Mosaic
The Orpheus Mosaic appears in a Polaroid photograph faxed on July 19, 1991 by a
Geneva-based transportation company Mat Securitas to Robert Haber and recovered from
Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 51A. Depicting the ancient musician Orpheus strumming his
lyre while surrounded by lions, rams, and other animals, the Orpheus Mosaic dates to circa
100 C.E. and once adorned a Roman villa in Sicily. The Orpheus Mosaic first surfaced on the
international art market in 1991, when Robert Haber arranged for the Orpheus Mosaic to be
shipped from Geneva to the United States on consignment for “Michael Steinhardt.” The path
taken by Haber for the Orpheus Mosaic parallels that of the looted phiale (forfeited by
Steinhardt to Italy in 1997), which was acquired from a Sicilian source and smuggled through
Switzerland to New York. On October 1, 1991, Steinhardt paid Haber $440,000 for the
Orpheus Mosaic. Once in the United States, the Orpheus Mosaic was immediately transported
to Ethos, a California -based restoration group, who described condition of the Orpheus
Mosaic in 1992:
The mosaic was cut into five sections in order to simplify lifting it from its original site. For the
most part, the figures were avoided when the cuts were made, with the exception of incisions which
run through the goat and Orpheus’ lyre. Judging from their ragged appearance, the cuts were made
with chisels…In addition, as the mosaic was lifted, unskilled manipulation of the blades used to
detach the sections (combined with an evident lack of any facing material) caused cracks and
breaks.

The “unskilled” and “incompetent” removal of the object des cribed in the report is
consistent with its looting of the mosaic from its “original site” since chisels and saws are the
tools of the trade for tombaroli. Although the looters may have been “incompetent,” the breaks
73

themselves (with four of the five cuts being between the human figures) further prove they were
intentional. Such a pattern of deliberate breakage is distinct from the type of random
fragmentation usually seen in artifacts due to the passage of time. Thus, this illustrates the
looting practice o f “orphans” referred to earlier in which looters and smugglers often
intentionally break large statues into smaller pieces to ease transport and avoid detection by
customs and other law-enforcement officials. When an unprovenanced antiquity—such as the
Orpheus Mosaic— appears in such strategically made fragments, therefore, it is often an
indication that it has been looted . In 2021, after providing notice to this Office, Steinhardt
consigned the Orpheus Mosaic for $800,000 to Phoenix Ancient Art, where this Office later
seized it. See Exhibit 51B for the most recent photograph of the Orpheus Mosaic. No verifiable
provenance for the Orpheus Mosaic prior to the 1991 sale from Haber to Steinhardt has ever
been identified.
Anatolian Terracotta Idol
The Anatolian Terracotta Idol, dating to 5000-4000 B.C.E., was crafted in Hacılar, Turkey
and depicts a Neolithic female figurine. Terracotta goddess figures consistent with the form, size,
and material of the Anatolian Terracotta Idol have thus far been found only in Hacılar, Turkey.
First surveyed by a British archaeological team in 1960, Hacılar began to suffer rampant looting
by local Turkish villagers as soon as the British left . On March 6, 1963, for example, the
Gendarmerie Commander of the region wrote that the villagers set up a system where a
designated “spotter” stood on lookout for approaching authorities and sent out a signal to the
diggers if any such authority was observed. Despite the law-enforcement efforts, the villagers
kept conducting the excavations, according to the Commander, “day and night.” On September
74

29, 1965, the National Security General Secretariat sent a letter to the Ministry of the Interior
requesting increased additional security at Hacıla r, noting that once the looters found any
antiquities, they sent them to Istanbul and İzmir, where criminal networks smuggled them
abroad. These activities continued until October 1964, when a guard was stationed at Hacılar.
The letter warned however, that authorities did not know “how long the present silence will
continue.” After this rampant and relentless looting, the Anatolian Terracotta Idol first surfaced
on the international art market in 1975, when the British Rail Pension Fund purchased the
Anatolian Terracotta Idol , with no prior provenance— at a Sotheby’s London a uction. On
February 1, 1990, Robert Haber purchased the Anatolian Terracotta Idol from the British
Railway Pension Fund. On August 19, 1990, Steinhardt purchased the Anatolian Terracotta Idol
from Haber for $ 79,610. See Exhibit 52 for the most recent photograph of the Anatolian
Terracotta Idol. The Anatolian Terracotta Idol has no verifiable provenance prior to the 1975
sale from Sotheby’s London to the British Rail Fund.
Eugene Alexander (7 antiquities)
Eugene Alexander, a/k/a Evgeni Svetoslavov Mutafchiev (b. 1956), rose from
appearing on Bulgarian television stations to directing international money -laundering
schemes for looted antiquities. Born in Varna, Bulgaria, Alexander grew up along the Black
Sea. In 1979, Alexander began reporting for a local television station in Varna before taking a
position in public relations at Varna’s National Archaeological Museum. Alexander left Varna
in 1984 and began working as an “art and antiquity investment consulta nt” in Munich,
Germany. In 1988, he left Germany to pursue a Master’s in Art History at Cleveland State
University, continuing his studies in 1989 at New York University (NYU), where he ultimately
75

completed a doctorate in ancient Greek and Roman History.
According to law- enforcement authorities, Alexander and his father (a Bulgarian
diplomat to Costa Rica) began to leverage their connections to senior government officials
and TIM, which—according law-enforcement authorities and the U.S. State Department —is
an organized crime syndicate incorporated as a holding company based in Varna. In 1999,
Alexander contacted German law- enforcement authorities to report that a former business
associate, Todor Iwanov, was trafficking in antiquities. The subsequent investigation revealed
that both Alexander and Iwanov were trafficking in illegal antiquities before their falling out.
Then, according to a Bulgarian news report published on December 29, 2003, Alexander
claimed to have been abducted by members of an organized- crime group that demanded $1
million for his return, but he managed to escape—still in handcuffs—in Sofia.
In 2004, German law-enforcement authorities executed a search warrant at Alexander’s
residence in Munich, seizing antiquities (ultimately returned to Alexander) and documents.
The latter revealed the general structure of Alexander’s antiquities -trafficking operation,
wherein local looters operating in Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean sent Alexander
photos of freshly excavated antiquities. Once Alexander determined he wanted an antiquity, it
would be smuggled into Germany where Alexander would often have the antiquity restored
by Flavio Bertolin and tested using Thermoluminescence (TL) Analysis by Ralf Kotalla —the
same individual who often supplied notorious trafficker Gi ovanni Franco Becchina with TL
Analysis reports. Because prior published provenance is often the only way to prove an
antiquity’s authenticity (as well as its legality), Alexander used this testing to establish that the
antiquities he was selling without any provenance were nonetheless authentic.
76

Alexander then sold the antiquities to collectors in Europe and the United States, using
a series of shell corporations and off -shore banks for payment. One of these banks, based in
Malta, was SATABANK. According to the Maltese register of business, SATABANK was
wholly owned by two entities (Christo Giorgiev and a private limited company), with
Alexander being a 19.8% owner of SATABANK. In 2020, the European Central Bank
revoked SATABANK’s ban king license due to an on -going investigation into its money
laundering. In 2021, Alexander opened four accounts at Cooperative Bank Bulgaria, a financial
institution connected to TIM. Alexander is currently the subject of criminal investigated in at
least one foreign jurisdiction.
Alexander sold his first antiquity to Steinhardt in 2006. Beginning in 2008, Alexander
requested that Steinhardt pay Alexander through Establissement Finagran, a financial entity
headquartered in Lichtenstein. A “Finagran” is a specific form of limited liability
arrangement in Germany, Switzerland, and Lichtenstein, which allows shareholders to take
over an existing company and replace the shareholders, making public only the trustee of the
company. Then, starting in 2012, Alexander requested that Steinhardt pay Alexander through
E.E. Capital Ltd, a financial entity headquartered in St. Helier, Jersey. E.E. Capital Ltd.’s
primary shareholder was a shell corporation managed by the same Christo Giorgiev who co-
owned SATABANK. Finally, in 2015, Alexander requested that Steinhardt switch his
payments to Alexander to Fine Arts Management (FAM) Services, an off-shore company
headquartered in the Seychelles.
The 65-year-old Alexander remains at large in Germany. To date, this Office has
executed two seizures of seven antiquities trafficked by Alexander.
77

Larnax
The Larnax, a small chest for human remains, appears broken into several large fragments
in a photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s files. See Exhibit 53A. The Larnax features painted
aquatic figures and was crafted in the ancient workshops at Rethymnon in eastern Crete between
1400-1200 B.C.E. Over the last twenty years, Rethymnon has been subjected to widespread
looting. The Larnax first surfaced on the international art market immediately after these
reports of looting on April 12, 2014, when Flavio Bertolin (b. 1965) a Munich- based restorer
began reconstructing the Larnax from fragments. This is another example of the looting practice
of “orphans” referred to earlier in which looters and smugglers often intentionally break large
statues into smaller pieces to ease transport and avoid detection by customs and other law -
enforcement officials. The reconstruction work appears to have been completed by Bertolin
on March 16 , 2016. On April 22, 2016, Ralf Kotalla performed a Thermoluminescence test
(TL)—a procedure done to evaluate the authenticity of an antiquity—in Haigerloch, Germany,
concluding that the Larnax was Minoan and 3300 years old (+/-20%). Kotalla often conducted
the same testing on looted antiquities for convicted antiquities- trafficker Giovanni Franco
Becchina.
On October 15, 2016, Steinhardt paid Seychelles -based FAM Services (via
SATABANK as Alexander instructed) $575,000 for the Larnax. On May 31, 2017, during the
investigation of the looted Calf Bearer that was ultimately seized and returned to Lebanon ,
Steinhardt was complaining to Special Agent J ohn Paul Labbat about a subpoena from this
Office that was being served requesting provenance documentation. Scoffing at the subpoena,
Steinhardt pointed to the Larnax, saying, “you see this piece? There’s no provenance for it. If
78

I see a piece and I like it, then I buy it.” See Exhibit 53B for the most recent photograph of
the Larnax. No verifiable provenance for the Larnax prior to the 2016 sale from Alexander to
Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Looted Antiquities from Naxos
One of nearly thirty islands clustered in the southwestern Aegean Sea, Naxos is famed
for its marble Neolithic artifacts, which have often been the target of looting. Indeed,
according to numerous contemporaneously prepared police reports from 2004, 2012, and
2014, archaeological sites in Naxos —including Cycladic t ombs—have been repeatedly and
continuously looted. As previously discussed, specific regions or areas are often the subject of
targeted looting due to insufficient security, active scientific excavations temporarily shutting
down for the season, or increas ed demand for a recently discovered object. The sudden
appearance of an unprovenanced antiquity (or group of antiquities) on the international art
market for the first time after reports of looting of that specific type of antiquity from the area
in which its type originated, therefore, is often an indication that it has been looted. Following
the looting on Naxos, Steinhardt purchased five Naxian antiquities from Alexander between
2010 and 2014. These five were trafficked by Alexander as follows.
Idol
Depicted with incised folded arms, the Idol dates to 2400 B.C.E., and was buried in the
ancient necropolis of Spedos on the island of Naxos. Such folded-arm idols were produced
during the Early Cycladic II period (2800‐2200 B.C.E.). The first appearance of the Idol on the
international art market was during the period of looting on Naxos : on December 15, 2010,
Steinhardt purchased the Idol from Alexander with no prior provenance for $100,000. Per
79

Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Idol through Lichtenstein-based Establissment
Finagran. See Exhibit 54 for the most recent photograph of the Idol. Although Alexander falsely
claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that he had “legal and equi table title” to the Idol, no
verifiable provenance for the Idol prior to the 2010 sale from Alexander to Steinhardt has ever
been identified.
Plate
Crafted from marble, the Plate features faint traces of red pigment and dates to circa 1200
B.C.E. Plates of this type, dimension, and form have been found in tombs in Naxos, particularly
the Naxian sites of Aghioi Anargyroi, Aplomata, Phiontas, and Tsikniades. The first appearance
of the Plate on the international art market was during the period of looting on Naxos: on
November 6, 2012, Steinhardt purchased the Plate from Alexander with no prior provenance
for $15,000. Per Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Plate through E.E. Capital Ltd,
a Jersey -based corporation. See Exhibit 55 for the most recent photograph of the Plate.
Although Alexander falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Plate was “not stolen
from a religious institution, museum, or archaeological site,” no verifiable provenance for the
Plate prior to the 2012 sale from Alexander to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Kandila
Crafted from warm-hued marble hewn from Naxian quarries, the Kandila (a type of
ancient vessel whose name comes from the similarity in appearance to modern Greek church-
lamps) dates to the Protocycladic Period (3200-2800 B.C.E.). The only known parallel to the
Kandila comes from the Naxian ar chaeological site of Apeiranthos. The first appearance of
the Kandila on the international art market was during the period of looting on Naxos : on
80

November 6, 2012, Steinhardt purchased the Kandila from Alexander with no prior
provenance for $75,000. Per Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Kandila through
Jersey-based E.E. Capital Ltd. See Exhibit 56 for the most recent photograph of the Kandila.
Although Alexander falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Kandila was “not
stolen from a religious institution, museum, or archaeological site,” no verifiable provenance
for the Kandila prior to the 2012 sale from Alexander to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Cycladic Cup
Crafted from white marble, the Cycladic Cup dates to circa 2200-1800 B.C.E. Most of
the known examples of the Cycladic Cup have been found on Naxos and that the only known
parallels come from Naxian cemeteries. The first appearance of the Cycladic Cup on t he
international art market was during the period of looting on Naxos: on February 20, 2013,
Steinhardt purchased the Cycladic Cup from Alexander with no prior provenance for $20,000.
Per Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Cycladic Cup through Jersey -based E.E.
Capital Ltd. See Exhibit 57 for the most recent photograph of the Cycladic Cup. A lthough
Alexander falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Cycladic C up was “not stolen
from a religious institution, museum, or archaeological site,” no verifiable provenance for the
Cycladic Cup prior to the 2013 sale from Alexander to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Cycladic Plate
A dark marble plate dating to circa 1200 B.C.E., the Cycladic Plate originated on the island
of Naxos. Specifically, the Cycladic Plate is consistent with vessels recovered during legal
excavations at cemeteries and settlements in Naxos. The first appearance of the Cycladic Plate
on the international art market was during the period of looting on Naxos: on April 9, 2014,
81

Steinhardt purchased the Cycladic Plate from Alexander with no prior provenance for $10,000.
Per Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Cycladic Plate through Jersey-based E.E.
Capital Ltd. See Exhibit 58 for the most recent photograph of the Cycladic Plate. No verifiable
provenance for the Cycladic Plate prior to the 2014 sale from Alexander to Steinhardt has ever
been identified.
Bronze Griffin Protome
Crafted from bronze circa 600-500 B.C.E., the Bronze Griffin Protome features a
pronounced eyebrow, convex beak with a small incision, and spiral on its neck and originates
from the sanctuary of Hera in Samos, a Greek island in the eastern Aegean Sea. The Bronze
Griffin Protome depicts the torso and head of the mythical griffin and would have adorned a
vessel, cauldron, or fixture in antiquity. The Temple of Hera has been worshipped for
millennia and protected by Greece’s patrimony law for nearly 100 years. Yet, the Bronze
Griffin Protome first surfaced on the international art market on November 6, 2012, when
Steinhardt purchased it from Alexander with no prior provenance for $350,000. Per
Alexander’s instructions, Steinhardt paid for the Bronze Griffin Protome through Jersey-based
E.E. Capital Ltd. See Exhibit 59 for the most recent photograph of the Bronze Griffin
Protome. Although Alexander falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Bronze
Griffin Protome was “not stolen from a religious institution, museum, or archaeological
site,” no verifiable provenance for the Bronze Griffin Protome prior to the 2012 sale from
Alexander to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Fritz and Harry Bürki (1 antiquity)
Fritz (father b. 1930) and Harry Bürki (son b. 1953) were Zurich -based restorers of
82

looted antiquities in Giacomo Medici and Giovanni Franco Becchina’s worldwide antiquities-
trafficking ring. At Medici’s 2004 trial in Italy, there was abundant evidence that Medici often
delivered his looted antiquities to the Bürkis for restoration, thereby eliminating traces of
recent excavation. The Bürkis also jointly bought antiquities with Medici and Paris -based
dealer (and trafficker) Robert Hecht for sale in Europe and the United States. Medici provided
the Bürkis with Italian material, but Hecht provided them with Turkish antiquities. As
discussed previously, Hecht was arrested, charged, and ultimately declared persona non-grata
in Turkey.
Italian police authorities came to know Harry Bürki for his involvement in the sale of
the famous Euphronious Krater, in the early 1970s. After Robert Hecht (called “Bob the
American” by tombaroli) purchased the krater, he brought it to Bürki in Zurich for restoration.
Once restored, Hecht sold the Euphronious Krater to the Met for one million dollars. In 2008,
the Met returned it to Italy.
After Italian and Swiss authorities raided Medici’s Geneva warehouses in 1995, they
began investigating his co-conspirators, including the Bürkis. In 1997, Steinhardt loaned Harry
Bürki $300,000 and another $150,000 the following year. On October 9, 2001, Swiss and
Italian law-enforcement officers and a Zurich magistrate raided the Bürkis ’ apartment and
their annexed workshop on the fourth floor of a building near the railway station. They found
561 antiquities: 337 in the workshop and 224 in the apartment. Later the same day, antiquities
experts Dr. Daniela Rizzo and Maurizio Pellegrini examined the antiquities in the apartment
and workshop—ultimately concluding that 520 of the 561 antiquities had been looted from
Italy. The Swiss magistrate permitted law- enforcement authorities to photograph and video -
83

record the antiquities and he ordered their “seizure in pla ce”—prohibiting the Bürkis from
remove any antiquities. But he did not authorize their removal by the Swiss or Italian officers.
Thus, when law -enforcement authorities completed the warrant, they left all the antiquities
behind, maintaining only the photographs and video recordings—now commonly referred to
as the “Bürki Archive.” In a sworn deposition to Swiss authorities that same day, Fritz Bürki
admitted that he knew that most of the objects he had been asked to restore were illegal, often
pretending such antiquities were part of their family heritage.
On March 27, 2008, the Italian judge issued an Order forfeiting the 520 antiquities as
authentic antiquities illegally excavated in Italy. But all criminal charges against the Bürkis were
dismissed due to the running of the statute of limitations. On November 21, 2008, a Swiss
judge affirmed the Forfeiture Order, and ordered the 520 antiquities returned to Italy. When
the Swiss police executed the Italian forfeiture order, however, they were only able to seize
132 antiquities, because the Bürkis had already removed the remaining 388 to an unknown
location. Many of those remain missing, but the Carabinieri added the corresponding
photographs in their database of stolen antiquities.
Fritz Bürki died in Zurich in 2015, but the 68-year-old Harry Bürki remains at large in
Switzerland. To date, this Office has executed six seizures of six antiquities trafficked by the
Bürkis.
Small Anatolian Limestone Idol
Dating to circa 2500 B.C.E., the Small Anatolian Limestone Idol depicts a stylized nude
female figure crafted of near-translucent limestone. The Small Anatolian Limestone Idol is of
the “Kilia” type, a style of antiquities created by an ancient Anatolian civilization outside the
84

modern-village of Kulaksizla r, Turkey. All the raw materials used in these Kulaksizlar Kilia
idols were sourced from the immediate vicinity of the site. In 1991, Kilia idols were discovered
in Kulaksizlar. Reports of looting soon followed. According to a letter dated November 3,
1994, from Dr. Rafael Dinic, an archaeologist working near Kulaksizlar, “illegal excavations
and collecting and selling idols from the surface have reached the highest level.” According to
a letter dated February 25, 2000, this activity continued into early 20 00, as Turkish
gendarmeries continued to seize fragments of idols recovered in the region where Kulaksizlar
was located. Shortly after these last reports of looting, the Small Anatolian Limestone Idol first
surfaced on the international art market on April 30, 2002, when Steinhardt purchased the
Small Anatolian Limestone Idol from Harry Bürki with no prior provenance for $47,500. Here,
Bürki falsely claimed on his invoice to Steinhardt that the Small Anatolian Limestone Idol was
“exported legally from its country of origin.” See Exhibit 60 for the most recent photograph
of the Small Anatolian Limestone Idol. No verifiable provenance for the Small Anatolian
Limestone Idol prior to the 2002 sale from Bürki to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Gil Chaya (30 antiquities)
Gil Chaya (b. 1961) is an Israeli antiquities dealer. Chaya initially sold pearls in
Switzerland with his father, Joseph, but in 1999, started Biblical Antiquities Ltd, with his
then-wife, Lisa, in Jerusalem. That same year, the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA) issued
Gil Chaya license #260 to buy and sell antiquities—but in 2008, that license expired and was
never renewed. In early 2006, Gil and Lisa Chaya divorced. But before they did, they
trafficked in illegal antiquities from Israel to the United States.
According to Israeli law-enforcement authorities who interviewed Lisa Chaya, Gil
85

Chaya, and other traffickers, and as confirmed by documents seized from Steinhardt’s
apartment, Gil and Lisa Chaya had a robust trade in illegal antiquities. Gil Chaya would buy
illegal antiquities from local looters in and around Israel, usually from the West Bank, Gaza,
and East Jerusalem. As detailed more fully below (as the evidence is presented for each
antiquity), files seized from Steinhardt illustrate that Gil Chaya bought directly from looters.
For example, after Steinhardt had directed his curator to get more information about a
particular antiquity, Lisa Chaya wrote to Steinhardt that Gil had “repeatedly requested” that
the “peasants” look for a missing part of an antiquity lost during the looting. For other
antiquities—and again as detailed below—the seized material contains emails in which the
Chaya’s repeated to Steinhardt’s employees the conversations they had with the looters and
middlemen regarding exactly where they had found the antiquities. Such detailed knowledge
about an antiquity’s find spot can only be possessed by excavators operating as part of a
scientific excavation—which these were certainly not—or by the looters themselves.
After receiving the freshly looted material, Gil Chaya would also arrange for the
antiquities to be cleaned and restored, frequently doing it himself. They would then
photograph the antiquities prior to any restoration. Israeli law-enforcement authorities took
possession of several of these photographs depicting antiquities covered in encrustations or
broken in several pieces. Such photographs and videos of dirty or damaged antiquities are
often maintained by looters and sellers to prove the antiquity’s authenticity to skeptical
buyers under the logical theory that “if it’s looted, it’s real.” Then, Gil Chaya would clean the
object. Indeed, on one occasion, Gil Chaya cleaned a dirty antiquity in a New York City
hotel bathtub before bringing it to Steinhardt’s apartment. Also, Gil Chaya would sometimes
86

combine pieces from multiple antiquities to make a single, more valuable one. The Chaya’s
would also transport the antiquities to New York for sale. Gil Chaya would carry illegal
antiquities to the United States so frequently that the pair took separate flights for fear of
being caught.
For example, in 2006, Chaya smuggled ten antiquities from Egypt and Israel into
New York for sale at an auction at Christie’s. Of these, at least one—an alabaster duck from
the third millennium B.C.E.—had been stolen from an archaeological storage facility in
Saqqara, Egypt, shortly after it had been discovered and photographed in 1979. It was seized
by Homeland Security Investigations officials and repatriated to Egypt in 2007.
The 60-year-old Chaya remains at large in Israel. To date, this Office has executed 2
seizures of 30 antiquities trafficked by Chaya.
Antiquities Looted from Israel
Pursuant to the 1993 Oslo Accords, the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) identified three sectors —Areas A, B, and C —of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. Specifically, Area A, covered major cities under Palestinian control;
Area B, covered the area over which there was to be joint control (Israeli control of security,
Palestinian control of civilian issues); and Area C, covered the area over which there was to be
full Israeli control. For each of the following Chaya -trafficked antiquities, the looting took
place either at an area within Israel’s borders or at an area over which Israel exercises legal
authority. Each antiquity was smuggled through and also illegally exported from Israel.
Carved Ivory Head (Larger)
Dating to 1300-1200 B.C.E. and measuring 1.75 inches tall, the Carved Ivory Head
87

(Larger) originated in Tel Dothan, an archaeological site rich in Middle and Late Bronze Age
material. The Carved Ivory Head (Larger) appears broken, pitted, and dirt -encrusted in a
photograph recovered by Israeli law enforcement. See Exhibit 61A. A letter from Gil Chaya
recovered from Steinhardt’s records describes the looting of the Carved Ivory Head (Larger):
[The piece was] said to have been found with the complete body – a full ivo ry statue, unique. The
‘peasants’ who found it said they ‘tried to glue the (wet) body back together; but because they were
ignorant of it’s (sic) importance and value as well as the fact that professionals might have been able to
restore it, they threw the body away when they could not fix it and just kept the head. Of course, we
asked them repeatedly to try to recover the body, but they could not & it is presumed lost.

The Carved Ivory Head (Larger) first surfaced on the international art market on
November 27, 2003, when Steinhardt purchased it from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance
for $25,000. See Exhibit 61 B for the most recent photograph of the Carved Ivory Head
(Larger). No verifiable provenance for the Carved Ivory Head (Larger) prior to the 2003 sale
from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Carved Ivory Head (Smaller)
The Carved Ivory Head (Smaller) appears caked with dirt in a photograph recovered
by Israeli law enforcement. See Exhibit 62A. Dating to circa 700 B.C.E. and measuring 1.5
inches tall, the Carved Ivory Head (Smaller) depicts an intricately carved figure sporting a
diadem and was found in Samaria. According to a letter from Gil Chaya recovered from
Steinhardt’s records, the Head was “found in Sebaste, capital of Samaria, near the Israelite
royal Palace (Omri’s Palace).” As discussed previously, unless an antiquity was discovered
pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized excavation, detailed knowledge about that
antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only be possessed by the looter. It is well -
known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an unprovenanced
88

antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted. The Carved I vory Head (Smaller) first
surfaced on the international art market on November 27, 2003, when Steinhardt purchased
it from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for $15,000. See Exhibit 62B for the most recent
photograph of the Carved Ivory Head (Smaller) . No verifiable provenance for the Carved
Ivory Head (Smaller) prior to the 2003 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet
A small red fish carved from carnelian, a brownish -red glassy mineral, the Red
Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet dates to circa 600 B.C.E. and originated in El Kom. Steinhardt’s
records contain an email from “Gil Chaya” (“gilchaya@actcom.co.il”) to Steinhardt’s then -
Collection Manager describing the find spot for the Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet, “This red
fish was found in ““El Khom” it is not very far from Hebron.” As discussed previously, unless
an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized excavation, detailed
knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only be possessed by the
looter. It is well-known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an
unprovenanced antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted . Indeed, the illicit
excavation of the Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet is confirmed by a second print -out of an
email in Steinhardt’s records, from “lisa and gil chaya” (“gilchaya@actcom.co.il”) to
Steinhardt’s then-Collection Manager describing the looting:
I asked Gil about the fish

[Gil] bought it from an East Jerusalem Palestinian wholesaler, middleman, who buys from diggers,
mostly in the West Bank area, Hebron, Bethlehem, Samaria…

All he would tell Gil, and Gil pushed, was that it came from an “Iron Age” area, and he promised
89

that much. We will press him for more information now but it’s a delicate thing; the wholesalers are
worried will go around them and cut them out, go directly to the sources, the diggers we know in that
area to find more stuff.

The Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet first surfaced on the international art market on
June 26, 2001, when Steinhardt purchased the Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet from Gil Chaya
with no prior provenance for $6,818. In 2017, Steinhardt consigned the Red Carnelian Sunfish
Amulet for sale to Alan Safani, owner of Safani Gallery. See Exhibit 63 for a recent photograph
of the Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet. No verifiable provenance for the Red Carnelian Sun
Fish Amulet prior to the 2001 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Although the antiquity did not sell in 2018, and this Office received a search warrant to seize
it, neither this Office nor Steinhardt has been able to locate the Red Carnelian Sun Fish
Amulet. As soon as it is located, it will be seized pursuant to this investigation.
Cosmetic Spoon
Carved from ivory, the Cosmetic Spoon dates to circa 800 -700 B.C.E. and features a
winged creature surrounded by a finely detailed border. Ritual cosmetic spoons were used in
antiquity to ladle incense onto fires as offerings to the gods or the dead. According to an email,
from “Lisa” (“gilchaya@bezqint.net”) to Steinhardt’s then -Collection Manager recovered
from Steinhardt’s files, the “Cosmetic Spoon is from the Hebron area, a place called El Kom,
Gil says, this is the area of the richest Iron age Jewish tombs (many royal).” As discussed
previously, unless an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized
excavation, detailed knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only
be possessed by the looter. Information from a seller identifying the find spot—in this case the
same spot as the looted Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet—of an unprovenanced antiquity is an
90

indication that it has been looted. The Cosmetic Spoon first surfaced on the international art
market on January 21, 2003, when Steinhardt purchased the Cosmetic Spoon from Gil Chaya
with no prior provenance for $6,000. See Exhibit 64 for the most recent photograph of the
Cosmetic Spoon. Although Chaya listed his dealer’s license in his invoice to Steinhardt, Chaya
never registered the Cosmetic Spoon (as required by Israeli law), and no verifiable provenance
for the Ivory Spoon prior to the 2003 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
Pin with Hand Holding Olive Wreath
A bronze pin in the shape of an extended hand with a wreath, the Pin with Hand
Holding Olive Wreath was a votive offering dating to circa 350 -300 B.C.E. and was found in
Samaria. According to a letter from Gil Chaya recovered from Steinhardt’s records, the Pin
was
Found in Samaria, near Sebaste, in the bottom of an ancient well; this site yielded about 500 bone
cosmetic sticks, many also with hands, as well as 7 marble feet, all Hellenistic period. We therefore
assume this well was a water source known for it’s (sic) curative waters (especially, it seems, known for
healing hands and feet), to which pilgrims made offerings in hope of restoring good health.

As discussed previously, unless an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and
legally authorized excavation, detailed knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it
was found can only be possessed by the looter. I nformation from a seller identifying the find
spot of an unprovenanced antiquity is an indication that it has been looted. The Pin with Hand
Holding Olive Wreath first surfaced on the international art market on November 27, 2003,
when Steinhardt purchased it from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for $2,500. See Exhibit
65 for the most recent photograph of the Pin with Hand Holding Olive Wreath. No verifiable
provenance for the Pin with Hand Holding Olive Wreath prior to the 2003 sale from Gil
91

Chaya to Steinhardt.
Sword
The Sword appears broken and encrusted in a photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s
files. See Exhibit 66. The iron sword, dating to circa 650 B.C.E., was found in Samaria.
Handwritten notes on the photograph of the Sword recovered from Steinhardt’s files describe,
“found in Samaria, Israel in royal or VIP tomb” and “found with varied rich goods.” As
discussed previously, unless an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally
authorized excavation, detailed knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was
found—including what other antiquities it was found with—can only be possessed by the looter.
It is well -known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an
unprovenanced antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted. The Sword first surfaced
on the international art market on June 29, 2005, when Steinhardt purchased the Sword from
Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for $30,000. Although Chaya falsely claimed the Sword
was “imported officially and legally into USA,” no verifiable provenance for the Sword prior
to the 2005 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified. Although this Office
received a search warrant to seize the Sword, neither this Office nor Steinhardt has been able
to locate the Sword . As soon as the Sword is located, it will be seized pursuant to this
investigation.
Ivory Set (16)
Crafted from ivory, bone, hippopotamus teeth, and terracotta, the Ivory Set comprises
nine pomegranate scepters and six Iron Age pomegranate pendants dating to 1300-900 B.C.E.
and originating in Samaria. The “pomegranate” represented a significant cultic object in
92

ancient Levantine communities, where the fruit symbolized righteousness, knowledge, and
wisdom. Photographs recovered from Steinhardt’s records depict the 16 Ivory Set antiquities
alongside handwritten find spots, indicating that some antiquities were “found in Samaria” or
others “found in Judea.” As discussed previously, such detailed knowledge about an antiquity’s
find spot when it is not the result of a scientific or legal excavation can only be possessed by
the looter. The Ivory Set first surfaced on the international art market on September 21, 2006,
when Steinhardt purchased the set from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for $45,000.
Chaya’s invoice notes the antiquities were “from Israel.” See Exhibit 67 for the most recent
photograph of the Ivory Set. No verifiable provenance for the Ivory Set to the 2006 sale from
Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified. Although this Office received a search warrant
to seize the entire Ivory Set, neither this Office nor Steinhardt has been able to locate 7 of 16
antiquities in the Ivory Set to this day. As soon as these antiquities are located, they will be seized
pursuant to this investigation.
Death Masks (3)
The Death Masks appear soil-encrusted and covered in dirt in photographs recovered
by Israeli law-enforcement authorities. See Exhibit 68A. Dating circa 6000 to 7000 B.C.E., the
Death Masks were crafted from stone and originated in the foothills of the Judean mountains,
most likely in the Shephelah in Israel. The Death Masks first surfaced on the international art
market on or around December 2006 when Gil Chaya invited [Redacted] to a Jerusalem
warehouse to view the antiquities. This is the same warehouse where [Redacted] had seen the
looted Heliodorus Stele, which will be discussed separately. When examined by the expert, the
death masks had, “soil that still existed in several locations,” as well as “sediment.” According
93

to an email dated July 16, 2007 , from “Gil Chaya” (“chayagil@bezeqint.net”) to “Michael
Steinhardt,” titled “Att: Micheal [sic] URGENT !!!,” recovered from Steinhardt’s records,
Chaya sent Steinhardt copies of photographs depicting the Death Masks soil -encrusted and
covered in dirt. On October 29, 2007, Steinhardt purchased the Death Masks from Gil Chaya
with no prior provenance for $400,000. A n invoice from Gil Chaya notes, “3 Neolitic [sic]
stone death masks from Israel.” A second invoice from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt includes the
false provenance, “from the Joseph Collection Geneva,” a reference to Gil Chaya’s father
Joseph Chaya, and the statement that the Death Masks were “found in Israel over 100 hundred
[sic] years old.” See Exhibit 68B for the most recent photograph of the Death Ma sks. No
verifiable provenance for the Death Masks prior to their 2006 appearance with Gil Chaya has
ever been identified.
Stone Skull
The Stone Skull appears with soil and pronounced encrustations in a photograph
recovered from Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 69A. Dating to circa 7,000 B.C.E., the Stone
Skull depicts a human skull or mythological creature. Through analyzing the isotopes and soil
still on the artifact, [Redacted] determined it may have been found in the Arad Valley or north
towards the Hebron Mountains. In an interview with law -enforcement authorities, Gil Chaya
admitted that he purchased the Stone Skull in the 1990s from a Palestinian dealer in Beit Omar
near Hebron. The Stone Skull first surfaced on the international art market on November 5,
2009, when Steinhardt purchased the Stone Skull from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance
for $99,500. A copy of check for $99,500 was recovered from Steinhardt’s records and includes
a note, “No invoic e—nothing—Michael gave him $500 cash.” As discussed previously, Gil
94

Chaya’s antiquities dealer license, which allowed him to legally sell antiquities registered with
the Israeli Antiquities Authority, expired at the end of 2007. Any antiquities sale by Gil Chaya
after January 2008, therefore, would have been illegal under Israeli law. See Exhibit 69B for
the most recent photograph of the Stone Skull . No verifiable provenance for the Stone Skull
prior to the 2009 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Incense Burner with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles
The Incense Burner with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles appears weathered and covered
in dirt in a photograph recovered by Israeli authorities. See Exhibit 70A. Crafted from bronze
with figures of animals, the Incense Burner with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles dates to circa
1700 B.C.E. and originated in Israel. In an email to law -enforcement authorities, [Redacted]
described how Gil Chaya created the Incense Burner:
It was very badly broken and Gil repaired and restored the whole thing in NYC from the small
pieces…Gil went alone to Michael with this stand and a statue; I didn't want anything to do with
this sale and I repeatedly warned Gil that he was out of control, reckless and dangerous. I remember
that Gil used parts from another bronze and added bowls.

The Incense Burner with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles first surfaced on the international
art market on August 1, 2006, when Steinhardt purchased it from Gil Chaya with no prior
provenance for $48,000. See Exhibit 70B for the most recent photograph of the Incense
Burner with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles . No verifiable provenance for the Incense Burner
with Ducks, Goats, and Gazelles prior to the 2006 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever
been identified.
Baboon Amulet
A figure of a baboon carved from red chalcedony, a material composed of delicate
interlocking of grains of quartz and moganite, the Baboon Amulet dates to circa 1600 -1200
95

B.C.E. and originated in Megiddo, Israel . According to an email from “lisa”
(“gilchaya@bezequint.net”) to Steinhardt’s then -Collection Manager recovered from
Steinhardt’s records, the Baboon Amulet came from “tombs at Megiddo.” As discussed
previously, unless an antiquity was discovered pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized
excavation, detailed knowledge about that antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only
be possessed by the looter. It is well-known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying
the find spot of an unprovenanced antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted. The
Baboon Amulet first surfaced on the international art market on January 21, 2003, when
Steinhardt purchased the Baboon Amulet from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for
$6,000. The invoice notes that the Baboon Amulet was “found in Israel.” See Exhibit 71 for
the most recent photograph of the Baboon Amulet. Although Chaya listed his dealer’s license
in his invoice to Steinhardt, Chaya never registered the Baboon Amulet (as required by Israeli
law), and no verifiable provenance for the Baboon Amulet prior to the 2003 sale from Gil
Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Heliodorus Stele
Crafted from limestone, the Heliodorus Stele bears the inscription of Sel eucus IV
Philopater and his minister Heliodorus. It dates to 200-100 B.C.E. and was looted from Cave
57 in Tel Maresha, Israel. In 2005, looters operating in Tel Maresha discovered the Heliodorus
Stele and sold it to a well-known trafficker from Halhul, Palestine. The trafficker then brought
the Heliodorus Stele to an open field near the village of Idna, where Gil and Lisa Chaya were
waiting. In an interview with Israeli law- enforcement authorities, Gil Chaya admitted he paid
the trafficker $2000 in cash for the Heliodorus Stele, put it his car, and drove to Jerusalem. In
96

2006, Chaya had invited [Redacted] to his Jerusalem warehouse to examine the Heliodorus
Stele. But it first surfaced on the international art market on December 26, 2006, when
Steinhardt purchased the Heliodorus Stele from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for
$375,000. In 2007, Steinhardt loaned it to the Israel Museum where Dr. Dov Gera (Ben
Gurion University) suspected and then confirmed that the bottom of the Heliodorus Stele fit
into base of a Stele recently discovered in Cave 57 at Tell Maresha. See Exhibit 72 for the most
recent photograph of the Heliodorus Stele. No verifiable provenance for the Heliodorus Stele
prior to the 2006 sale from Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified. The Heliodorus Stele
remains on loan at the Israel Museum and will be seized pursuant to this investigation.
Vase from Pan-Athenian Games
A ceramic amphora from the Pan-Athenian Games, a major religious festival consisting
of musical, poetic, and athletic competitions, the Vase from the Pan-Athenian Games dates to
circa 400-300 B.C.E. The style and details on the Vase from the Pan -Athenian Games are
characteristic of black-figure pots recovered from recent underwater excavations at Thonis -
Heracleion, off the coast of Egypt. In an interview with Israeli law- enforcement authorities,
Chaya admitted that he purchased the Vase from the Pan -Athenian Games in Dubai from
Mohd Said Issa Mousa Jaradot (a/k/a Abu al-Said) a major looter of antiquities known for his
role in smuggling a looted Gold Coffin from Egypt to the United Arab Emirates. This Office
seized the Gold Coffin from the Met and repatriated it to Egypt in 2019. The Vase from the
Pan-Athenian Games first surfaced on the international art market on December 23, 2008,
when Steinhardt purchased it from Gil Chaya with no prior provenance for $300,000. Gil
Chaya’s invoice noted the Vase had “one crack in the center.” As discussed previously,
97

intentional breaks are often a tell -tale sign of an item’s illicit origin since breaking facilitate s
smuggling. See Exhibit 73 for the most recent photograph of the Vase from the Pan-Athenian
Games. No verifiable provenance for the Vase from the Pan -Athenian Games prior to the
2008 sale from Gil Chaya to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Rafi Brown (28 antiquities)
Rafi Brown, a/k/a Rafael Braun (b. 1936), began his career as a conservator and
researcher of antiquities. According to Israeli law- enforcement authorities, Brown began
working at the Israel Museum in the mid- 1960s and ultimately was responsible for cleaning,
restoring, and analyzing new acquisitions of Judaica. Through his work at the museum, Brown
often met suppliers of freshly discovered antiquities. For example, in 1974, Brown notified
researchers at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem of an antiquity freshl y discovered by
someone in el-Arish, a town in the Northern Sinai.
On December 2, 2019, Israeli law-enforcement authorities interviewed Brown. On July
8, 2020, they executed a search warrant at Brown’s residence in Herzeliya, recovering
documents and loo ted antiquities and conducting a second interview. Then, on January 14,
2021, they executed additional search warrants at Brown’s residences in Herzeliya, Petah
Tiqwa, and Jerusalem, recovering looted antiquities, Polaroid photographs, and documents,
including correspondence with Steinhardt’s curators.
During the two interviews, and in exchange for an agreement not to be prosecuted in
Israel for the looted artifacts seized from his residences, Brown described his illegal-antiquities
trade. According to Brown, one of his friends at the Israel Museum, David Jesseljohn offered
Brown work with Rabello Anstalt, a shell company based in Lichtenstein that paid Brown to
98

restore antiquities in Zurich. Brown soon began flying to Zurich to perform restoration work
for Rabello Anstalt. In 1985, after leaving the museum, Brown obtained an antiquities license
from the IAA and opened a gallery at 10 King David Street in Jerusalem. Although required
under Israeli law to maintain (and annually update) a registry of his antiquities with the IAA,
Brown admitted he did not register antiquities that he had purchased from certain individuals.
The last time Brown registered an antiquity with the IAA was September 13, 1993 —though
he did not close his gallery until 1997.
According to Brown, he purchased antiquities from unlicensed diggers and middlemen
such as Abu Ali Tawil, a Bedouin best -known for discovering the Dead Sea Scrolls. Brown
also admitted to getting antiquities from Ghassan al-Rehani (a/k/a Hassan Ricani), a Jordanian
antiquities trafficker and smuggler well -known to Jordanian and Israeli law -enforcement
authorities. Brown often paid al -Rehani to smuggle those antiquities from Israel to
Switzerland, but Brown also delivered them directly to New York for restoration. Although
he now had his own gallery, Brown also continued to sell antiquities through Rabello Anstalt.
According to a document recovered by Israeli law- enforcement authorities, Brown
entered an agreement with Steinhardt in 2003, in which Brown agreed to sell Brown’s entire
“Collection” of antiquities to Steinhardt for $500,000 upon Brown’s death. That agreement
was signed by both parties.
The 85-year-old Brown remains at large in Israel. To date, this Office has executed
three seizures of 28 antiquities trafficked by Brown.
Gold Masks (2)
The two Gold Masks appear cracked and covered in dirt alongside a group of broken
99

and dirt-encrusted antiquities in a color Polaroid photograph recovered by Israeli authorities.
See Exhibit 74A. Dating to circa 5000 B.C.E. , the two Gold Masks were crafted during the
Chalcolithic period in Israel. Depicting the antiquities on a makeshift table, the Polaroid
photograph was taken shortly after the looting of the Gold Masks in Israel and sent to Rafi
Brown. Acc ording to a January 10, 2001, invoice recovered by Israeli authorities, Brown
appears to have intended to sen d the Gold Masks and the other antiquities depicted in the
color Polaroid photograph to Irene Shekhtman, a New York -based restorer. In an interview
with law-enforcement authorities, however, Shekhtman stated that Brown never sent her the
Gold Masks. The Two Gold Masks first surfaced on the international art market on March
27, 2001, when Steinhardt purchased the Gold Masks from Brown with no prior provenance
for $200,000. See Exhibit 74 B for the most recent photograph of the Gold Masks. No
verifiable provenance for the Gold Masks prior to the January 10, 2001 , invoice prepared by
Brown has ever been identified.
Neolithic Masks (5)
Carved from limestone, the five Neolithic Masks depicting stylized human heads were
accessioned by Steinhardt under A1991.23a, b, d, e, & f and date to circa 7000 B.C.E.
Discovered as a single assemblage of finds, the Neolithic Masks originated from the Judean
Desert. The Judean Desert lies in Israel and the West Bank, east of Jerusalem and descending
to the Dead Sea. Following the discovery of the Neolithic Masks, noted trafficker Abu Ali
Tawil smuggled them from their find spot to two different locations: two —A1991.23b and
e—went to Brown’s gallery (at 10 King David Street in Jerusalem, Israel) and three—
A1991.23a, d, and f—went to al-Rehani. As noted previously, Abu A li Tawil not only found
100

the Dead Sea Scrolls, but operated as a smuggler in the West Bank and was caught by Israeli
authorities supplying metal detectors to looters on the West Bank. Initially, Brown examined
the two masks —A1991.23b and e —in Israel. Then, he sent the two masks to al-Rehani as
well. Al-Rehani, in turn, smuggled all five Neolithi c Masks to Zurich. From Zurich, Brown
shipped the Neolithic Masks to the United States.
The Neolithic Masks first surfaced on the international art market by February 1, 1991,
when Steinhardt purchased them from Brown with no prior provenance for an unknow n
price. In a letter from Brown recovered from Steinhardt’s files, Brown writes, “on the
following page you will find the descriptions of your recent acquisitions [including the subject
Neolithic Masks] from Mr. [ al-Rehani] of Jordan.” A handwritten note recovered from
Steinhardt’s records for the Neolithic Masks contains the name, “Abuwali Twill.” To date, no
invoice or proof of payment for any of the five Neolithic Masks has ever been recovered from
Steinhardt’s records, and a note in Steinhardt’s records indicates “no record of purchase.”
These are five of the seven antiquities—the other two are the Ivory Carving and the Neolithic
Female—for which this Office could not find any proof of payment or purchase price. In
2004 and 2014, the Neolithic Masks were exhibited at the Israel Museum. This Office has
seized three Neolithic masks: A1991.23a, b, and d. Two Neolithic masks, A1991.23f and e ,
remain at the Israel Museum and will be seized pursuant to this investigation . See Exhibit 75
for the most recent photograph of the five Neolithic Masks. No verifiable provenance for any
of the Neolithic Masks prior to their 1991 appearance with Brown has ever been identified.
Undated Yellow Note
Steinhardt’s records contain an undated handwritten note on a single page of yellow
101

paper written on both sides (“Yellow Note”). The note described 12 Brown -trafficked
antiquities included in this Report, 5 of which have their “find spots” listed: 4 Neolithic Bulls;
(“Cows — 1 find — 4…sites: Rabod JORDAN”) and a Neolithic Female (“near Hebron”).
The source of the note was Rafi Brown: a) the antiquities listed on the Yellow Note are the
same as those on a February 1, 1991, letter from Brown to Steinhardt; b) the find spot
descriptions in the Yellow Note also appear in the February 1, 1991 letter, from Brown; and
c) the Yellow Note includes the name “Abuwali Twill,” Brown’s source for the Neolithic
Masks.
Neolithic Bulls (4)
A set of four Neolithic limestone carvings of bulls with traces of red paint, the Neolithic
Bulls date to circa 7000-6000 B.C.E. and were found outside the village of Rabud. In a letter
from Brown recovered from Steinhardt’s files, Brown writes: “[a]ccording to the dealer they
were all found in one place.” The Yellow Note also identifies a “find spot”: “Cows — 1 find
— 4…sites: Rabod JORDAN.” As discussed previously, unless an antiquity was discovered
pursuant to a scientific and legally authorized excavation, detailed knowledge about t hat
antiquity’s “find spot” and how it was found can only be possessed by the looter. It is well -
known, therefore, that information from a seller identifying the find spot of an unprovenanced
antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted. The Neolithic Bulls first surfaced on the
international art market the February 1, 1991, when Steinhardt purchased them from Brown
with no prior provenance for $375,000. Although no invoice for the Neolithic Bulls has ever
been identified, there is a check to “Gutamo AG” for $375,000 —the purchase price for the
Neolithic Bulls—with a memo for “R. Brown” that was recovered from Steinhardt’s records.
102

See Exhibit 76 for the most recent photograph of the Neolithic Bulls. No verifiable provenance
for the Neolithic Bulls prior to the 1991 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
Neolithic Female
A Neolithic stone figure of a female, the Neolithic Female dates to circa 7000 -6000
B.C.E. and originated from a site near Hebron. The Yellow Note recovered from Steinhardt’s
files notes the Neolithic Female was found “near Hebron” in Israel. The Neolithic Female
first surfaced on the international art market on February 1, 1991, when Steinhardt purchased
it from Brown with no prior provenance. In a letter from Brown recovered from Steinhardt’s
files, Brown described the antiquity as: “Human Neolithic figur e probably of a female.” As
previously discussed, no record of payment for the Neolithic Female has ever been identified
though Steinhardt’s records contain a note, “piece purchased from Rafi Brown in February,
1991 no invoice.” See Exhibit 77 for the most recent photograph of the Neolithic Female. No
verifiable provenance for the Neolithic Female prior to the 1991 sale from Brown to
Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Terracotta Temples (3)
Made from terracotta, the three Terracotta Temples were cultic shrines from the time
of King David that originated in Israel circa 1000 B.C.E. One of the three Terracotta Temples
appears covered in loose soil in a photograph that was printed in November 19 92 and
recovered from Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 78A. In an interview with Israeli authorities,
Brown admitted that all three Terracotta Temples were smuggled from their find spot to
Switzerland by al -Rehani. The Terracotta Temples first surfaced on the international art
103

market on August 10, 1993, when Steinhardt purchased all three Terracotta Temples directly
from Brown with no prior provenance for $6 ,000. See Exhibit 78 B for the most recent
photograph of the Terracotta Temples. No verifiable provenance for the Terracotta Temples
prior to the 1993 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Chalcolithic Altar
Carved from basalt and dating circa 5000 to 4000 B.C.E., the Chalcolithic Altar originated
from a Chalcolithic site in Jordan. In an interview with Israeli authorities, Brown admitted the
Chalcolithic Altar was smuggled out of Jordan to Switzerland by al-Rehani. The Chalcolithic
Altar first surfaced on the international art market on July 20, 1995, when Steinhardt purchased
it through Dr. Jesseljohn—the Swiss-based associate of Brown—with no prior provenance for
$10,000. See Exhibit 79 for the most recent photograph of the Chalcolithic Altar. No verifiable
provenance for the Chalcolithic Altar prior to the 1995 sale from Brown/Jesseljohn to
Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer
The Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer appears in a pre- restoration condition lying on a
white sheet in a photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 80A. Dating to
circa 1800 B.C.E., the Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer features a bulbous body with dark-glaze
striped bands and a spout with fine holes to strain liquid. The Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer
originated from a site in the eastern Nile Delta of ancient Egypt. In an interview with Israeli
authorities, Brown admitted that the Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer was smuggled from its
find spot throug h Jordan to Switzerland by al -Rehani. The Tel El -Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer
first surfaced on the international art market on January 12, 1999, when Steinhardt purchased
104

it from Brown with no prior provenance for $5,000. See Exhibit 80B for the most recent
photograph of the Tel El -Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer. No verifiable provenance for the Tel El-
Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer prior to the 1999 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
Tombstones from Zoar (2)
Carved from stone, the Tombstones from Zoar date to 500 C.E. and originated in the
ancient city of Zoar, located within the modern-day boundaries of Jordan. In an interview with
Israeli authorities, Brown admitted that the two Tombstones from Zoar were smuggled from
Jordan to Switzerland by al -Rehani. The Tombstones from Zoar first surfaced on the
international art market on December 9, 1999, when Steinhardt purchased the antiquities from
Brown with no prior provenance for $40,000. See Exhibit 81 for the most recent photograph
of the Tombstones from Zoar. No verifiable provenance for the Tombstones from Zoar prior
to the 1999 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Astarte
A stone jar in the form of the goddess Astarte—who was venerated in the Canaanite
and Phoenician pantheon—the Astarte dates to the Midianite era and originated in Jordan. In
his interview with Israeli authorities, Brown admitted that the Astarte was smuggled fro m
Jordan to Switzerland by al-Rehani. The Astarte first surfaced on the international art market
on December 9, 1999, when Steinhardt purchased it from Brown with no prior provenance
for $15,000. Brown sold the Astarte on the same invoice as the Two Tombstones from Zoar.
See Exhibit 82 for the most recent photograph of the Astarte. No verifiable provenance for
Astarte prior to the 1999 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
105

Bronze Pitcher with Snake Shaped Handle
The Bronze Pitcher with Snake Shaped Handle appears dirty, covered in encrustations,
and missing a handle in a photograph recovered from Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 83A.
Dating to circa 300 -200 B.C.E., the Bronze Pitcher with Snake Shaped Handle orig inated in
Jordan. The Bronze Pitcher first surfaced on the international art market on August 9, 2001,
when Steinhardt purchased it from Brown with no prior provenance for $15,000. The invoice
lists the country of origin as “Jordan.” See Exhibit 83B for the most recent photograph of the
Bronze Pitcher with Snake Shaped Handles. No verifiable provenance for Bronze Pitcher with
Snake Shaped Handle prior to the 2001 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Statue of a Winged Human
A stone vessel of a winged human with red painted details, the Statute of a Winged
Human dates to circa 500 to 300 B.C.E. and originates from the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt.
Between the 1967 Six -Day War and the 1973 Yom Kippur War, the Sinai Peninsula
experienced significant armed conflict and multiple shifts in governance. It is a well-
documented that looting of antiquities increases during times of civil unrest and war. When an
unprovenanced antiquity appears on the international art market for the first time immediately
after geo-political turbulence in its country of origin, therefore, that is often an indication that it
has been looted. It was immediately after such a period that the Statue of a Winged Human first
surfaced. In a 1974 Israel Exploration Journal article, the authors examined the Statue of a
Winged Human and “thank[ed] R. Brown of the Israel Museum who kindly informed them
of the find and enabled them to examine it.” The authors noted that “grains of sand were
found among [the Statue of a Winged Human’s] groves” and that the statute had been found
106

between Bir el -‘Abd and Bir Salamana, and brought to Jerusalem by a resident of el -‘Arish.
The Statute of a Winged Human surfaced on the international art market on June 21, 1999,
when Steinhardt purchased it from Brown with no prior provenance for $25,000. See Exhibit
84 for the most recent photograph of the Statue of a Winged Human. No verifiable
provenance for Statue of a Winged Human prior to the 1974 Israel Exploration Journal article
has ever been identified.
Ivory Carving
The Ivory Carving appears caked in mud in photographs that were printed in November
1989 and recovered from Steinhardt’s records. See Exhibit 85A. A carved piece of ivory depicting
12 highly-engaged figures on musical instruments, the Ivory Carving dates to circa 100 B.C.E. to
100 C.E. and is characteristic of ivory antiquities recovered from Roman sites in Egypt. The Ivory
Carving first surfaced on the international art market in 1991, when Steinhardt purchased it from
Brown with no prior provenance for an unknown price. Steinhardt’s records indicate the Ivory
Carving was accessioned in 1991 from Brown, but—as previously discussed—no record of
payment for the Ivory Carving has ever been identified. According to a letter dated April 14,
1995, recovered from Steinhardt’s records, the Ivory Carving is described as featuring “loose
earth or fill material flaking off the back surface.” As discussed earlier, in scientific and legally
authorized excavations, recovered antiquities are thoroughly cleaned following their discovery.
Thus, dirt or encrustations on an unprovenanced antiquity is often an indication that it has
been looted. See Exhibit 8 5B for the most recent photograph of the Ivory Carving. No
verifiable provenance for Ivory Carving prior to its 1991 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has
ever been identified.
107

Egyptian Hoard (5)
A set of gold and silver ornaments and plaques, the Egyptian Hoard dates to 1300 -
1101 B.C.E. and originated in Egypt. The Egyptian Hoard first surfaced on the international
art market on June 21, 1999, when Steinhardt purchased the antiquities from Brown with no
prior provenance for $70,000. Brown’s invoice lists a “Silver Hoard,” including “2 plaques
with human figures, earrings, pendants and silver beads.” As previously discussed, within the
archaeological community, a “hoard” (a series of objects buried together in antiquity) is
extensively studied for its sociological and anthropological insights into ancient cultures. Thus,
the discovery of a hoard is heavily reported and widely published. The sudden appearance on
the international art market of an unprovenanced hoard such as the Egyptian Hoard (identified
as such by an antiquities trafficker), therefore, is often an indication that the objects have been
recently looted. A note recovered from Steinhardt’s records indicates that portions of the
Egyptian Hoard were “cleaned” by “Jane” on July 28, 2000. The need to “clean” the antiquities
following their arrival in the United States further corroborates their illegality . See Exhibit 86
for the most recent photograph of the Egyptian Hoard. No verifiable provenance for the
Egyptian Hoard prior to the 1999 sale from Brown to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Pasquale Camera (1 antiquity)
Pasquale Camera (b. 1948), also known as “the Fat Guy,” was a prominent capozona
(regional crime boss) who oversaw the tombaroli in a specific region of Italy. Camera rose to
captain in the Guardia di Finanza (Italian finance and customs police) before being fired
because of his criminal involvement in the illegal trafficking of Italian objects. In an interview
of notorious capozona Pietro Casasanta conducted by Public Prosecutor Paolo Ferri, Casasanta
108

claimed that Camera had been known for organizing thefts from museums and churches in
Italy as early as the 1960s when Camera was a Lieutenant in the Guardia di Finanza. Then, in
the 1980s, Camera began working as a capozona, purchasing stolen artifacts from tombaroli and
selling them to antiquities dealers. In 1995, pursuant to “Operation Gerione,” the Judicial
Authority of Santa Maria Capua Vetere (Castera, Italy) began investigating Camera for possible
involvement in the armed theft of eight Greek vases from the medieval castle of Melfi in 1994.
On August 31, 1995, Camera died in a car crash on Italy’s Autostrada del Sole. Upon
searching the car, authorities found 50 million lire (approximately $ 31,000) in cash in the car
and several photographs of recently looted antiquities. Within 30 minutes of the discovery of
the photographs, officers of the Italian Carabinieri applied for a search warrant to raid and
search Camera’s apartment in Rome. The next day, September 1, 1995, when the Carabinieri
searched Camera’s apartment, they found hundreds of documents and photographs
concerning looted antiquities.
The material recovered from Camera led to an additional 70 raids and 19 convictions.
One of these raids, conducted on January 13, 1996, on the property of Danilo Zicchi, resulted
in the recovery of the “Organigram,” a now -famous hand -written document prepared by
Camera. The Organigram depicted a diagram of the organizational s tructure of the largest
Italian trafficking network, naming most of the major players and linking them with arrows
and lines. The discovery of the Organigram represented a watershed in the investigation and
prosecution of antiquities trafficking networks throughout Europe and the United States. And,
in so doing, it confirmed the central roles of Giovanni Franco Becchina, Giacomo Medici,
George Ortiz, Robert Hecht, Frieda Tchakos, Mario Bruno, Raffaele Monticelli, and others in
109

a trafficking network with global reach.
To date, this Office has executed one seizure of one antiquity trafficked by Camera.
Ercolano Fresco
Depicting an infant Hercules strangling a snake sent by Hera to slay him, the Ercolano
Fresco dates to 50 C.E. and was looted in 1995 from a Roman Villa in “Oliva dei Monaci” in
Herculaneum, located near modern Naples in the shadow of Mount Vesuvius. Photo graphs
recovered by Italian law-enforcement authorities depict the precise find spot for the Ercolano
Fresco. On the photographs themselves, the looters made hand -written notes indicating the
location of the looting pit relative to the sea and to Mount Vesuvius. Italian law-enforcement
authorities had also received a letter containing eleven different photographs of the Ercolano
Fresco and of a second looted fresco. The letter, translated from Italian to English, noted:
[t]hese pictures concern somebody you know, Pasquale, also known as the fat guy, who died some time
ago and the pictures are related to the frescos that the professor from Taranto bought from Pasquale,
now you have to find the frescos where they are located, in the United States of America.

The “fat guy” in the letter was Pasquale Camera, and the “professor from Taranto” is
the well-known appellation for the prolific trafficker Raffaele Monticelli. Both the
photographs and the letter were sent anonymously to Italian law -enforcement authorities in
the port-city of Bari by tombaroli angered at being cheated out of their cut of the sale of the
looted Ercolano Fresco.
The information proved accurate. Monticelli had purchased the Ercolano Fresco from
Camera for approximately $120,000 in cash. Monticelli then smuggled the Ercolano Fresco
out of Italy and sold it to Robert Hecht for approximately $240,000 in cash. The Ercolano
Fresco first surfaced on the international art market on November 10, 1995, when Jasper
110

Gaunt (Hecht’s business partner) wrote to Steinhardt regarding a “crate being delivered to you
soon” containing the restored Ercolano Fresco. On November 22, 1995, Harry B ürki sent
Steinhardt an invoice for $650,000 with no prior provenance.
The invoice listed the same two frescoes that the anonymous tombaroli later sent to the
Italian authorities. The first fresco was described as “One roman painting, c.a. 50 A.D.” with
a hand -written note identifying it as “Herakles Strangling the Serpent,” i.e., the Ercolano
Fresco. The second fresco on the invoice was described as “also Roman, ca. 50 A.D. ca. 43
cm wide and 107 cm high wich (sic) will be shipped soon.” A handwritten note on the invoice
indicated that Steinhardt did not purchase this second fresco.
According to a letter dated February 17, 1999, from Harry Bürki to Steinhardt,
recovered from Steinhardt’s files, Bürki noted:
I was surprised to learn that the Italian government had suggested that the wall -painting had been
stolen from Herculaneum in May 1995.

This painting has been in my family for twentyfive (sic) years or so, and we acquired it from a Bulgarian
medical doctor.

As discussed previously, Bürki often created fake provenance for Hecht by attributing
works to his family’s “collection,” as he did here, falsely claiming on his invoice to Steinhardt
that the Ercolano Fresco was “exported legally from [its] country of origin.” See Exhibit 87
for the most recent photograph of the Ercolano Fresco. No verifiable provenance for the
Ercolano Fresco prior to the 1995 sale from Bürki /Hecht to Steinhardt has ever been
identified.
George Ortiz (1 antiquity)
George Ortiz (b. 1927) began collecting antiquities in the 1940s, convinced that “by
111

acquiring ancient Greek objects [he] would acquire the spirit behind them,” and eventually
amassed a vast collection of antiquities in Geneva. After a Carabinieri raid on several tombaroli
resulted in the recovery of documents they had from and to Ortiz, the Carabinieri investigated
Ortiz in Italy . In 1961, Ortiz was indicted in Rome for his possession of stolen Italian
antiquities. In 1976, Ortiz was convicted, but he appealed his conviction and was eventually
pardoned.
Ortiz appears frequently in the Becchina Archive, and those seized records depict a
clear picture of a close personal and business relationship between Ortiz and Becchina that
started in the late 1970s and grew particularly strong in the 1980s. For example, on November
30, 1981, Ortiz purchased from Becchina a dozen Black- and Red-Figure vases, all looted from
a single tomb in southern Italy. In 1988, Ortiz paid Becchina $920,000 for an “Etruscan
Treasure,” comprising a rare group of Etruscan gold jewelry looted from an Etruscan
necropolis. In addition to these and dozens more purchases, letters between Ortiz and
Becchina reveal that Ortiz was also selling looted antiquities through Becchina’s Basel -based
gallery, Antike Kunst Palladion. Their correspondence includes lists detailing: antiquities
consigned and sold, expenses paid by Ortiz for restorations and photographs, shipments of
looted items, amounts owed to Ortiz (“GO”) , and the 20% commission due to Becchina
(“GB”).
In 1996, Ortiz’s name reappeared on the infamous Organigram, the handwritten list of
the members of the antiquities trafficking ring operated by known-traffickers Giovanni Franco
Becchina, Giacomo Medici, George Ortiz, Robert Hecht, Frieda Tchakos, Mario Bruno,
Raffaele Monticelli and traffickers . Unabashed throughout his life about his rapacious
112

collecting, Ortiz once rationalized his approach, “to acquire antiquities, even if they have left
a country ‘illegally,’ more often than not amounts to saving these artefacts.”
Ortiz died in 2013. To date, this Office has executed one seizure of one antiquity
trafficked by Ortiz.
Glass Oinochoe
Featuring a marbled pattern of blue and yellow and a miniature mask of Zeus, the Glass
Oinochoe was crafted using the ancient core -formed technique between 400-300 B.C.E. The
color, form, and technique are characteristic of Hellenistic vessels discovered on the Greek island
of Rhodes, which sat at the cross-roads of East and West. A conservation report prepared for
the Glass Oinochoe found “burial soil in many of the recessed areas.” As discussed previously,
in scientific and legally author ized excavations, recovered antiquities are thoroughly cleaned
following their discovery. Thus, dirt or encrustations on an unprovenanced antiquity is often
an indication that it has been looted. The Glass Oinochoe first surfaced on the international art
market on April 2, 2002, when George Ortiz consigned it to Robert Haber. The invoice states
that the Glass Oinochoe is Greek, but lists no prior provenance, stating that Ortiz had “acquired
it some 20 years ago.” On February 22, 2008, Steinhardt purchased the Glass Oinochoe from
Haber with no prior provenance for $433,500. On August 11, 2015, Steinhardt loaned the Glass
Oinochoe to the Met, valuing it at $850,000. The Glass Oinochoe remained at the Met until this
Office applied for and received a warrant to seize it. See Exhibit 88 for the most recent
photograph of the Glass Oinochoe.
No verifiable provenance for the Glass Oinochoe prior to the 2002 Ortiz consignment
to Haber has ever been identified.
113

Noriyoshi Horiuchi (1 antiquity)
Antiquities dealer Noriyoshi Horiuchi (b. 1944) worked extensively with Giovanni
Franco Becchina and other Italian traffickers. Horiuchi began dealing in antiquities in the
1980s when he opened a gallery on London’s New Bond Street. By the 1990s, Horiuchi
relocated his gallery to Tokyo. In 2008, Italian and Swiss law- enforcement authorities seized
approximately 500 artifacts from Horiuchi’s storage unit in the Geneva Freeport, of which
337 were returned to Italy. In the Becchina decision, Judge Rosalba Liso declared that 90% of
the Italian objects seized from Horiuchi came from Becchina. In 2014, a st atue of sleeping
female owned by Horiuchi ( and purchased from Becchina) was returned to Italy after a
forfeiture action by the Office of the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of New York
(EDNY).
The 77-year-old Horiuchi remains at large in Japan. To date, this Office has executed
one seizure of one antiquity trafficked by Horiuchi.
Statue of a Woman
A figurine measuring 5.11 inches high, the Statue of a Woman was crafted from bronze
on the Greek island of Crete between 2000 -1500 B.C.E. A conservation report prepared by
the Met for the Statue of a Woman recorded that “the interior has a loosely bound mix of
earth” that “falls out when handling.” The photograph taken during the examination depicted
clumps of earth along the interior of the statue. See Exhibit 89A. The Statute of a Woman first
surfaced on the international art market on May 15, 1991, when Horiuchi purchased it from
Phoenix Ancient Art in Geneva. An undated database print -out prepared by Horiuchi
indicates that the Statue of a Woman is from “Greece” and was “found together” with another
114

object. Again, such detailed knowledge regarding the circumstances of an item “found” with
an antiquity can only be possessed by the looter. On December 8, 1994, Horiuchi hand-carried
the Statue of a Woman to the Met, which accepted the loan of the antiquity from Horiuchi
with no provenance whatsoever. On December 11, 2009, and wh ile the Statue of a Woman
was still on loan at t he Met, Steinhardt purchased it from Horiuchi for $650,000. The Statue
of a Woman continued on loan at the Met with Steinhardt valuing it at $1,300,000. The Statue
of a Woman remained at the Met until this Office applied for and received a warrant to seize
it. See Exhibit 89B for the most recent photograph of the Statue of a Woman. No verifiable
provenance for the Statue of a Woman prior to the 1991 sale from Phoenix Ancient Art to
Horiuchi has ever been identified.
Michael Ward (1 antiquity)
Michael L. Ward (b. 1943) dealt antiquities in New York City from 1982 to 2010
through his gallery in Manhattan. During this time, he bought antiquities directly from known
traffickers such as Giovanni Franco Becchina and Edoardo Almagià. He then sold them —
typically with no listed provenance —to U.S. museums and prominent collectors, including
Lawrence and Barbara Fleischman and Steinhardt. Ward’s attitude for due diligence and
provenance is demonstrated by a 1992 fax t o Steinhardt, in which he advises Steinhardt that
“[t]he more you inquire about details of ownership, etc. the less likely you will appear (if there
is, God forbid a question) a credible bona fide purchaser. Michael, you want to appear as dumb
as possible!”
In the early 1990s, Ward acquired a group of 50 gold pieces of Mycenaean jewelry,
dated to the 15th century B.C.E., from an unknown source. He then offered this group, known
115

as the “Aidonia Treasure,” at auction, with bidding set to start at $1.5 millio n. In fact, the
Aidonia Treasure had been looted from recently discovered tombs at Aidonia, a Greek site
northeast of Mycenae. In May 1993, Greece filed suit in the Southern District of New York
(SDNY) for the treasure’s return. In December 1993, Greece ag reed to drop the lawsuit in
exchange for Ward donating the treasure to the Society for the Preservation of Greek Heritage
in Washington, D.C. The Society later returned the Aidonia Treasure to Greece. Then, in 2005,
Ward sold a red-figure calyx krater, dated to the fourth century B.C., to the Dallas Museum of
Art. Contrary to Ward’s claimed provenance —that the vase came from a “Swiss private
collection”—the vase had actually been looted by Becchina and smuggled to Becchina’s gallery
in Basel . In other words , the “Swiss private collection” was the Italian G iovanni Franco
Becchina. The red-figure calyx krater was later repatriated to Italy.
Finally, Ward’s name also appears as the direct purchaser of more than a dozen looted
Italian artifacts in the private looting records of antiquities trafficker Edoardo Almagià.
The 78 -year-old Ward continues to operate his gallery in New York. To date, t his
Office has executed two seizures of two antiquities trafficked by Ward.
Veiled Head of a Female
Depicting a female figure with a draped head covering, the Veiled Head of a Female
was carved from reddish marble circa 350 B.C.E. The Veiled Head of a Fema le has been
identified as originat ing from a shrine within a tomb at the ancient city of Cyrene (modern -
day Shahhat, Libya). In 1999, scientific excavations in and around the area from which the
Veiled Head of a Female originated, were forced to shut down in the face of growing unrest
and governmental instability. Tombs in Cyrene almost immediately began to suffer extensive
116

looting (particularly of large female sculptures). It was immediately after these reports of
looting that the Veiled Head of a Female first appeared on the market. As previously discussed,
specific regions or areas are often the subject of targeted looting due to insufficient security,
active scientific excavations temporarily shutting down for the season, or increased demand
for a recently discovered object. The sudden appearance of an unprovenanced antiquity on
the international art market for the first time after reports of looting from the area in which
its type originated, therefore, is often an indication that it has been looted.
The Veiled Head of a Female first surfaced on the international art market on November
10, 2000, when Steinhardt purchased it from Michael Ward with no prior provenance for
$1,200,000. On his invoice, Ward noted the Veiled Head of a Female was “possibly from
North Africa” and “a light brown earthy deposit uniformly covering the head imparts to its
surfaces an attractive, warm patina.” This “earthy deposit” was confirmed in a condition report
by C & M Arts that was recovered from Steinhardt’s records to be “dirt (particularly on nose &
in veil).”
Ward’s invoice also noted that although the “tip of the nose was broken off in
antiquity…there is a clean break through the marble at the very base of the neck.” As previously
discussed, looters and smugglers often intentionally break large statues into smaller pieces to ease
transport and avoid detection by customs and other law -enforcement officials. When an
unprovenanced statute appears in fragments that are easily fixable (neck, elbow, knee, etc.),
therefore, it is often an indication that it has been looted. The fresh break at the very base of the
neck of the Veiled Head of a Female is characteristic of this type of intentional breakage wrought
by looters in order to facilitate the smuggling of looted antiquities. See Exhibit 90 for the most
117

recent photograph of the Veiled Head of a Female. No verifiable provenance for the Veiled
Head of a Female prior to the 2000 sale from Ward to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Svyatoslav Konkin (1 antiquity)
Svyatoslav (a/k/a Slav) Konkin (b. 1972) is a Russian citizen who began dealing in
Russian art and antiquities in the 1990s. Between 2003 and 2007, Konkin expanded his
business by purchasing the collections of two London- based dealers, Theodore Sarmas and
Ian Roper. Sarmas, now deceased, had a well-documented collection of Greek antiquities, but
Roper has been the subject of numerous investigations in the United Kingdom and Germany
for his role in consigning freshly excavated antiquities to European auction houses with fake
provenance. In 2010, Konkin expanded his business again, this time purchasing Central Asian
and Middle Eastern antiquities through dealers in Hong Kong.
Konkin sold his first antiquity to Steinhardt in 2017—selling him another 18 since then.
Prior to the execution of this Office’s January 2018 warrants on Steinhardt, Konkin delivered
all antiquities he sold to Steinhardt via international shipping. After the January 2018 warrants,
however, Konkin changed his manner of delivery, and hand- carried all six international
deliveries of antiquities to Steinhardt.
One of Konkin’s hand-carried antiquities is illustrative. On December 9, 2019, Konkin
arrived at Newark Airport from London’s Gatwick Airport with an antiquity, a gold drinking
horn (rhyton) in the form of a ram, which Konkin had declared on the customs entry
paperwork to be of Tajik origin and consigned to Steinhardt. In fact, it was a gold 6th- 4th
century B.C.E. Achaemenid (Persian) rhyton that had been looted and trafficked from Iran.
Konkin was intercepted by U.S. law-enforcement officials at Newark Airport and thoroughly
118

interviewed. The rhyton has been seized and will be repatriated to Iran.
The 49-year-old Konkin continues to operate in Russia and the United Kingdom. To
date, this Office has executed two seizures of two antiquities trafficked by Konkin.
Gold Bowl
Crafted from gold with a scalloped flower design, the Gold Bowl was looted from
Nimrud, a city in Northern Iraq that had its height in the modern Assyrian Age (911-612
B.C.E.). As previously discussed, an international investigation determined that more than
10,000 antiquities were stolen from Baghdad’s Iraq Museum in April 2003. During the course
of the investigation, the team recovered and photographed many items from Nimrud identical
to the Gold Bowl. Beginning in 2015, objects from Nimrud were again trafficked when the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) targeted cultural heritage from Nimrud, Hatra, and
Khorsabad, often documenting their efforts on YouTube. ISIL even established a Department
of Antiquities to profit from the looting of antiquities from its territory and supplied locals
with looting “permits.” According to a 2016 complaint filed by the Office of the U.S. Attorney
for the District of Columbia, ISIL placed special emphasis on ancient objects made of gold or
precious metal and demanded locals find such objects.
The Gold Bowl first surfaced on the international art market on October 22, 2019,
when Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) Officer Christopher Foulkes notified this Office that
Konkin was on a flight from Hong Kong to Newark, New Jersey , hand-carrying the Gold
Bowl for Steinhardt. Konkin initially stated that he had purchased the Gold Bowl in 2011 and
that it was of Tajik origin. He later admitted, however, that he knew the Gold Bowl would be
stopped by customs officials if declared any antiquity as Iranian or Iraqi.
119

As a result of the ongoing investigation into Steinhardt, this Office directed that the
Gold Bowl be returned to Konk in so he could deliver it as planned. He did so. And on July,
10, 2020, Steinhardt purchased the Gold Bowl from Konkin with no prior provenance for
$150,000. See Exhibit 91 for the most recent photograph of the Gold Bowl. Although Konkin
claimed in a letter to Steinhardt that the Gold Bowl “has clear history which goes back at least
up to 1970 and earlier,” no verifiable provenance prior to Konkin’s 2019 arrival into the United
States has ever been identified.
Axel Gordian Weber (1 antiquity)
Axel Gordian Weber (b. 1968) is the director of Axel Gordian Weber Kunsthandel, an
antiquities gallery based in Cologne, Germany, and well -known to law -enforcement
authorities. For example, in 2004, German law-enforcement authorities seized from Weber an
ancient axe that had been stolen from Iraq and sold to Weber by the previously discussed
Munich-based smuggler Fuad Üzülmez. It was ultimately repatriated in 2011.
The 53-year-old Weber continues to operate his gallery in Germany. To date, this
Office has executed one seizure of one antiquity trafficked by Weber.
Helmet
Crafted from iron, silver, bronze, and organic materials, the Helmet dates to circa 400-
300 B.C.E. and originated in Bulgaria, near modern -day Pletena. According to a report
recovered from Steinhardt’s records, the Helmet was, “shattered in more than thirty
dirt…encrusted pieces…which appeared irrecognizable (sic) and distorted partly due to the
thick organic build -up.” As previously discussed, in scientific and legally authorized
excavations, recovered antiquities are thoroughly cleaned following their discovery. Thus, dirt
120

or encrustations on an unprovenanced antiquity is often an indication that it has been looted.
The Helmet first surfaced on the international art market on March 24, 1998, when Steinhardt
purchased the antiquity from Axel Weber with no prior provenance for $175,000. Steinhardt’s
records include a note: “allegedly excavated from site in Bulgaria.” See Exhibit 92 for the most
recent photograph of the Helmet. No verifiable provenance for the Helmet prior to the 1998
sale from Weber to Steinhardt has ever been identified.
Patrimony Law of Foreign Nations
Each of the 180 Seized Antiquities constitutes stolen property under New York State
criminal law based on the evidence of theft as summarized above. This evidentiary basis is
sufficient irrespective of the manner of each antiquity’s exportation from its country of origin:
“Of course, owned property may have been illegally taken or converted [into stolen property]
before exportation, e.g., by discovering and failing to register an artifact or by an unlawful
transfer...If the artifacts were stolen before exportation, they still constitute[] stolen goods after
exportation” U.S. v. McClain, 545 F.2d 988, 1003 n.33 (5th Cir. 1977).
Apart from the actual theft (by looting, by illegal transfer, at gunpoint, etc.), however,
the illegal removal of an antiquity from its country of origin may also, under certain
circumstances, provide a second sufficient and independent basis for proving that antiquity
constitutes stolen property under New York State criminal law. It is well-settled that, standing
alone, wrongful exportation of an antiquity from its country of origin does not constitute a
crime under New York State’s criminal law. But once a country establishes a patrimony law,
its “declaration of national ownership suffices to render an illegally exported item ‘stolen’.” Id.
at 1001.
121

In other words, if an antiquity is removed from its country of origin after the effective
date of that country’s applicable patrimony law, then the “illegal exportation constitutes a
sufficient act of conversion to be deemed a theft.” Id. at 1003 n.33. Indeed, even if antiquities
were possessed prior to that country’s patrimony law, but the new, stricter law established a
requirement, for example, that all previously held antiquities be registered or sold only through
a licensed dealer, and the possessor failed to comply with either, then their “illegal exportation
is the act, if any, that renders them stolen.” Id. Notably, this basis of theft is independent of
any other basis, such as looting. This is because the illegal removal of an antiquity in violation
of the applicable patrimony law does not merely violate export-restrictions but a legislative fiat
that is “intended to assert true ownership of certain property.” Schultz, 333 F.3d at 410.
Here, all 180 antiquities were taken out of their countries of origin following the
effective date of their respective patrimony laws. Not a single one of the 180 Seized Antiquities
has ever received a valid export permit from its country of origin. Thus, each of the 180 Seized
Antiquities were illegally removed from their respective countries of origin under such
circumstances rendering them stolen under New York’s criminal law. In interpreting the
applicable patrimony laws in this inves tigation, this Office relied primarily on the following
legal experts for the following countries of origin.
Bulgaria
According to Dr. Maria Yordanova, a Senior Fellow at the Law Program of the Center
for the Study of Democracy, in Sofia, Bulgaria, in 1969, the Law on Cultural Monuments and
Museums (amended many times between 1973 -2005) regulated the protection of “any
immovable and movable authentic material evidence of human presence and activity and of
122

the processes in nature, which has scientific and/or cultural value and has public significance.”
This Law required cultural monuments to be registered with the State, including objects
outside the territory of Bulgaria, and assigned one of five categories of importance; namely,
monuments of international importance, national importance, local importance, informational
value, and ensemble significance. Clandestine discoveries had to be reported within one week
and were property of the State —any findings that were not reported were subject to
confiscation. Private persons or legal entities could own cultural property, but the export of
movable cultural objects outside of the Republic of Bulgaria without a special permit was
prohibited. Movable cultural monuments that were designated a national treasure could only
be exported temporarily for presentation to a foreign public or for conservation, restoration,
or research. Movables that were not a national treasure and did not fall into one of the five
categories could be exported through a certificate.
In 1991, the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria established state ownership of natural
and archaeological reserves. In 1999, The Culture Protection and Development Act set out the basic
principles and priorities of Bulgarian policy in the field of cultur e; namely, “safeguarding and
enriching the cultural and historical heritage.” In 2009 , The Cultural Heritage (Patrimony) Act
(CHA) replaced the 1969 Law and is the primary cultural patrimony legal act currently in effect
in Bulgaria. The law stipulates that cultural values (defined as non-tangible or tangible evidence
of human presence) can be either public or private property, and that they may be owned by
the state, municipalities, and registered religious denominations, as well as by natural persons
or legal entities. The CHA prohibits the export of movable cultural objects outside of the
Republic of Bulgaria without an export license or certificate, but cultural objects deemed as
123

national treasures may only be granted temporary export licenses and only for specific
purposes.
A 2011 amendment specifies that archeological sites in the territory and national waters
of the Republic of Bulgaria constitute state property. L egally acquired cultural property
remains private property. But anyone (natural person o r legal entity) who possesses cultural
property (identified as a collection) must maintain a register containing a descriptive and
photographic catalogue of the cultural property in their collection, as well as a certificate or
passport issued in accordanc e with the law. Cultural objects found clandestinely must be
brought to the attention of the nearest state, regional or municipal museum within seven days.
Museums, dealers, and auction houses may sell cultural objects if the objects are duly identified
and registered, and when the dealing persons/institutions have either the necessary permission
or necessary registration and licensing under the law.
Egypt
According to Dr. Patty Gerstenblith, Distinguished Research Professor at DePaul
University College of Law and Faculty Director of its Center for Art, Museum and Cultural
Heritage Law, the excavation and removal of Egyptian antiquities were first regulated in the
19th century with an 1835 ordi nance. This was followed by an 1869 ordinance prohibiting
export; an 1874 ordinance declaring all undiscovered antiquities to be the property of the State,
but dividing ownership rights among the government, the landowner, and the excavator; an
1883 decree declaring that the collection of the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities (as well as
collections in future museums) and “[a]ll the monuments and objects of antiquity, recognized
as such by the Regulation governing the matter” to be the inalienable property of the State;
124

and an 1891 decree prohibiting any excavations without a permit from the Director General
of Museums and Excavations. In the 1891 decree, all antiquities discovered during a legal
excavation belonged to the State, but the excavator had a right o f partage (division of the
finds) and the Antiquities Service had the right to purchase anything from the excavator’s
share. Ordinances of 1905 and 1909 continued —with some exceptions—the prohibition on
export and on excavation without a permit and on export.
Law No. 14 of 1912 vested ownership in the State of all antiquities “found on, or in
the ground,” including “all manifestations and all products of the arts, sciences, literature,
religion, manners, industries or Pharaonic, Greek, Roman, Byzantine and Coptic Egypt.” This
included an array of immovable structures and of movable objects, such as sarcophagi, coffins,
mummy wrappings, mummies, portraits and masks, stelai, statues and statuettes, inscriptions,
ostraca, manuscripts, worked stone, arms, utensi ls, vases, glasswork, fabrics of clothing,
jewelry, scarabs, amulets, weights, coins and engraved shells. The law continued the right of
partage for legal excavations, continued the prohibition on excavations without a permit,
required that the government be immediately notified of all discoveries, and authorized
licensed dealers to trade in antiquities. Later in 1912, three Ministerial Orders provided detailed
regulations concerning the excavation, trade, and export of antiquities, specifically requiring
dealers to keep and update a registry of objects in their inventory.
Law No. 215 of 1951 extended the definition of antiquities to include those from
prehistoric times to the end of the reign of Ismail Pasha (1895). All immovable and movable
antiquities remained the property of the State, except those belonging to the waqf (religious or
charitable endowment); excavations or exports without a permit continued to be prohibited;
125

all dealers still needed to be licensed; and all discoveries still required governm ental
notification. But museums were allowed to exchange or sell antiquities that were present in
duplicate, and some private ownership of antiquities was permitted; specifically, antiquities
already in private collections at the time of the enactment of the law, antiquities museums were
authorized to sell or exchange, antiquities imported from abroad, and antiquities from later
time periods that the State chose not to acquire.
In 1983, Egypt enacted Law 117, “The Law on the Protection of Antiquities,” defining
antiquities as any movable or immovable property “that was the product of the different
civilizations or was the creation of arts, sciences, literature and religion since the prehistoric
ages till before 100 years … provided that it is of value of an archaeological or historical
importance as an aspect of the different aspects of civilization which took place on the
Egyptian lands … ” Ownership of all antiquities (excepting those belonging to the waqf) was
vested in the State, and the ownership, posses sion, disposition, or trade of antiquities was
prohibited. But anyone in legal possession of antiquities before 1983 could maintain
possession if they notified the government and registered the antiquities within six months of
enactment of the law. This law was analyzed extensively in United States v. Schultz, 333 F.3d 393
(2d Cir. 2003), which held that the antiquities at issue were owned by Egypt and that any
antiquities removed from Egypt without the permission of the government were considered
stolen property. The 1983 Law is still in effect, but was amended in 2010 by Law No. 3 of
2010, maintaining the substantive aspects of the 1983 law.
Greece
According to Ms. Terressa Davis, the Executive Director of the Antiquities Coalition,
126

Greece is among the first nations in the world to vest ownership of its antiquities in the state.
Immediately after its War of Independence (1821 -1830), Greece issued a number of decrees
to protect antiquities. In 1834, Law No. 10/1834 “On Scientific and T echnological
Collections, on the Discovery and Conservation of Antiquities and the use thereof,”
established that “all objects of antiquity in Greece, being the productions of the ancestors of
the Hellenic people, are regarded as the common national posses sion of all Hellenes.” It also
provided for the inclusion of “objects of art dating from the most ancient period of
Christianity or the so-called Middle Ages.” Although permitting private ownership under very
limited circumstances, the law vested ownership in the state of all antiquities found on or
beneath publicly owned land, at the bottom of the sea, in public rivers, streams, lakes, or
marshes. It also required the state be notified of any sales or finds, granted a right of
preemption to the state in the purchase of antiquities, prohibited the excavation or export of
antiquities without permit.
In 1899, Law No. 10/1834 was replaced by the much stricter Law No. 2646,
establishing the exclusive right of ownership in the state over all movable and immovable
antiquities found anywhere in Greece—whether public or privately owned. In 1914, Law No.
401/1914 introduced measures of protection for pre-1830 Byzantine, Christian, and medieval
works of art and historical value. In 1920, Law No. 2447/1920 added pre- 1830 churches and
other artistic and historic monuments and buildings. All of these laws were consolidated into
Codified Law No. 5351/1932, “The Antiquities Act,” which served as the base for Greece’s
cultural heritage legislation until 2002.
In 2002, Law No. 3028/2002, “On the Protection of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage
127

in General,” that is in effect today maintains Greece’s laws of patrimony. The Law vests
ownership in the state of all pre -1453 movable and immovable cultural objects, while also
prohibiting the export of any cultural objects from Greek territory without a permit from the
Minister of Culture.
Iraq
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the area that is today the Republic of Iraq was part of
the Ottoman Empire until the end of the First World War. The Ottoman government enacted
the Antiquities Law of 1874 to ensure that the Imperial Museum (now the Archaeological
Museum of Istanbul) would receive one- third of all artifacts recovered through excavations.
The remaining share was divided between the excavator and landowner. Antiquities that were
discovered fortuitously, however, belonged to the State. The 1884 Antiquities Law vested
ownership of all types of antiquities in the State and prohibited export without the permission
of the Imperial Museum in Istanbul.
Following the First World War, Iraq became part of the British Mandate. The 1920
Treaty of S èvres defined antiquities as “any product of human activity earlier than the year
1700” and prohibited the transfer of an antiquity to anyone other than to the government
unless the government renounced its right of acquisition. The Antiquities Directorate,
established by Gertrude Bell, encouraged foreign expeditions and had the authority to
determine the division of finds uncovered through these excavations.
Following independence in 1932, Iraq enacted Antiquities Law No. 59 in 1936. With
minor amendments in 1974 and 1975, it remained the law of Iraq with respect to antiquities
until 2002. It defined antiquities as movable and immovable property at least 2 00 years old
128

and “erected, made, produced, sculptured, written, drawn or photographed by man.” The 1936
law declared that “[a]ll antiquities in Iraq whether movable or immovable that are now on or
under the surface of the soil shall be considered to be the common property of the State.” As
for those who possessed movable antiquities prior to 1936, they were required to deliver them
to the Directorate of Antiquities within 30 days of the law’s enactment. Thereafter, anyone
who accidentally discovered a movable antiquity was required to notify the government within
seven days. The Directorate was authorized to provide a reward, to allow the sale of antiquities
whose loss would not impair the value of Iraq’s museums, and to exchange certain antiquities
so long as the exchange increased the value of Iraq’s museum collections. The Directorate
could also allow for antiquities to temporarily leave the country for scientific studies, exchange,
and exhibitions. But no antiquity could be removed from Iraq permanently. Finally, all
antiquities discovered during authorized excavations belonged to the State; but the excavator
was entitled to a reward and could export collections of potsherds and organic materials for
study.
Under the 1936 law, any antiquities that had been possessed prior to 1936 and properly
registered within 30 days of the law’s enactment could be sold within Iraq if approved by the
Directorate. Faced with increased looting and smuggling, however, Iraq passed Law No. 120
of 1974: “it is hereby prohibited to possess antiquities and trade in them.” Law No. 164 of
1975 reaffirmed State ownership of cultural objects and the illegality of any trade in antiquities.
In 2002, Iraq adopted Antiquities and Heritage Law No. 55, maintaining the definitions
and protections in effect since 1936. Thus, antiquities are still defined as movable and
immoveable objects of not less than 200 years, the State still retained ownership of all cultural
129

objects, and any trade in antiquities was still prohibited. Indeed, in response to another increase
in looting and smuggling, the 2002 law instituted the death penalty for “[a]nyone who
knowingly takes an article of antiquity out of Iraq.” Moreover, any transfer of ownership or
possession still requires consent of the Directorate, such transfers may be only to those
residing within Iraq, and any person who discovers an antiquity must report the discovery to
the government. Antiquities rec overed during authorized excavations remained the property
of the State, but broken pieces of pottery and organic material could be exported for study.
The Directorate retained the authority to permit the temporary export of movable antiquities
for scientific study, conservation or temporary display; but the permanent export of antiquities
was still prohibited.
After the 2003 war, Iraq’s new constitution of 2005 reaffirmed State ownership of all
antiquities and archaeological remains: “[a]ntiquities, archeo logical sites, cultural buildings,
manuscripts, and coins shall be considered national treasures under the jurisdiction of the
federal authorities.”
Israel
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the geographic area that today comprises Lebanon,
Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and Israel, including the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, were
once part of the Ottoman Empire, whose 1884 Antiquities Law vested ownership of all
antiquities in the State and prohibited export without the permission of the Imperial Museum
in Istanbul. Following the First World War, the area of Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and
Israel became part of the British Mandate, whose 1920 Antiquiti es Ordinance vested
ownership of cultural heritage in the Civil Government of Palestine but allowed the sale of
130

antiquities not considered necessary for the national repository. Then in 1929, Antiquities
Ordinance No. 51 established that a landowner or fin der of an antiquity had no rights or
interest in an antiquity, could not transfer or dispose of it, and had to notify the government
of any find —giving the government the right to acquire that antiquity upon payment of an
award. The Ordinance further regulated the trade in antiquities, requiring a license to trade in
antiquities or export them.
When Israel became an independent country in 1948, it reinstated the Antiquities
Ordinance of 1929, which remained in effect until 1978 when Israel enacted Antiquiti es Law
5738-1978. This statute vests ownership of all antiquities discovered after 1978 in the State,
and defines antiquities as “[a]ny object … made by man before the year 1700.” A person who
discovers an antiquity other than through a licensed excavation must notify the Antiquities
Authority within 15 days of the discovery. The law does allow a legal trade in antiquities
discovered before 1978 to continue, but only if the dealer is licensed and only after the seller
notifies the State, which has the right to purchase the antiquity. The law forbids the export of
any “antiquity of national value” without the written approval of the Minister of Education
and Culture. The law also forbids the export of “any other antiquity” without the written
approval of the Director of the Department of Antiquities and Museums of the Ministry of
Education and Culture. In an effort to curtail the looting of sites in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip and the bringing of looted objects to Israel for sale, the Israeli law was amended in
2002 to prohibit the bringing of antiquities from either the West Bank or Gaza into Israel
without the permission of the State.
After the end of the British Mandate, the area of the West Bank was covered by
131

Jordanian law. In 1966, Jordan’s Law of Antiquities defined antiquities as “any movable or
immovable object which was made, written, inscribed, built, discovered, or modified by a
human being before the year 1700 A.D.” Vesting ownership of antiquities in the State, the law
required that any pers on who discovered an antiquity and who did not have a permit to
excavate was required to report the discovery to the government within three days. Trade in
antiquities was permitted, but all those engaged in the trade had to be licensed, and records
had to be kept of all transactions. Export of antiquities required a permit and export could be
prohibited for any antiquities “deemed necessary to remain in the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan for public interest.” After taking control of the West Bank in the Six-Days War, Israeli
authorities introduced Military Order No. 1166 of 1986, which prohibited the export of any
antiquity outside of the West Bank (excluding East Jerusalem) without a license and required
permission from the State to export any antiquities fro m the West Bank. Since adoption of
the Oslo Accords in 1993, the area of the West Bank has been divided into three sectors with
sector A under the control of the Palestinian Authority, sector C under the control of Israel,
and sector B under their joint control.
Italy
According to Ms. Davis, the first antiquities law of the modern Italian State was enacted
in 1902 with Law No. 185. This law established that all movable objects that have
archaeological or artistic value are subject to the provision of the la w. Under this Law, public
collections of art and antiquities are inalienable and could not, therefore, be sold or
transferred. In 1909, Italy passed Law No. 364, which vested in the State ownership of all
antiquities found by chance or during archaeologica l excavations within the borders of Italy
132

(Article 15.3). It also established that it is illegal to export items of historic, archaeological, or
artistic value out of the Kingdom (Article 8).
In 1939, Law No. 1089, “Protection of Objects of Artistic and Historical Interest,”
continued to vest in the State ownership of all antiquities, clarifying that all unearthed ancient
artifacts discovered after 1902 belonged to the State. The law protected all “movable and
immovable things of artistic, historic, archaeological or ethnological interest.” It also regulated
their excavation and exportation. Together, Law No. 185 (1902), Law No. 364 (1909), and
Law No. 1089 (1939) establish a broad legal regime that protected archaeological sites and
objects, vested the ownership of undiscovered antiquities in the state, and continued to act as
the means by which the government enforced its domestic and international patrimony
policies.
In 2004, Italy enacted the Code of Cultural Property and Landscape. Although this
Code replaced the 1939 law (which had been enacted under a fascist regime), the 2004 code
maintains the ownership regime established in the 1939 law.
Jordan
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the geographic area that today comprises Lebanon,
Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and Israel, including the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, were
once part of the Ottoman Empire, whose 1884 Antiquities Law vested ownership of all
antiquities in the State and prohibited export without the permission of the Imperial Museum
in Istanbul. Following the First World War, the area of Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and
Israel became part of the British Mandate, whose 1920 Antiquities Ordinance vested
ownership of cultural heritage in the Civil Government of Palestine but allowed the sale of
133

antiquities not considered necessary for the national repository. Then in 1929, Antiquities
Ordinance No. 51 established that a landowner or finder of an antiquity had no rights or
interest in an antiquity, could not transfer or dispose of it, and had to notify the government
of any find —giving the government the right to acquire that antiquity upon payment of an
award. The Ordinance further regulated the trade in antiquities, requiring a license to trade in
antiquities or export them.
Jordan has ha d legislation protecting antiquities since 1934 (Law No. 24). In 1953,
dealers were required to be licensed (Antiquities Order No. 1). In 1966, Jordan enacted a Law
of Antiquities, defining antiquities as “any movable or immovable object which was made,
written, inscribed, built, discovered, or modified by a human being before the year 1700 A.D.”
Vesting ownership to antiquities in the State, the law required that any person who discovered
an antiquity and who did not have a permit to excavate was required to report the discovery
to the government within three days. Trade in antiquities was permitted, but all those engaged
in the trade had to be licensed, and records had to be kept of all transactions. Export of
antiquities required a permit and export could be prohibited for any antiquities “deemed
necessary to remain in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for public interest.” In 1968, Jordan
adopted Law No. 26 on Antiquities, continuing the provisions of 1966. Then, in 1976,
Provisional Law No. 12 prohibited a ll trade in antiquities, cancelling all trading licenses,
establishing that all previously possessed antiquities be registered with the Department of
Antiquities, and prohibiting the disposition by any means of any antiquity without the
permission of the Department. The primary law in effect today is Law No. 21 of 1988, which
continues the prohibition on trade in antiquities. Under its provisions, no transport, export,
134

or sale of movable antiquities outside Jordan is permitted without the approval of the Cabinet.
Moreover, no movable antiquities may be privately “owned”—although they may be privately
“possessed” after providing the government an inventory of the holdings and with
government permission. Finally, Jordan is the owner of any new antiquities foun d during
excavations carried out with a license, and any person who discovers any antiquities must
report them to the government within ten days.
Lebanon
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the geographic area that today comprises Lebanon,
Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and Israel, including the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, were
once part of the Ottoman Empire, whose 1884 Antiquities Law vested ownership of all
antiquities in the State and prohibited export without the permission of the Imperial Museum
in Istanbul. Following the First World War, the area of Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, and
Israel became part of the British Mandate, whose 1920 Antiquities Ordinance vested
ownership of cultural heritage in the Civil Government of Palestine but allowed the sale of
antiquities not considered necessary for the national repository. Then in 1929, Antiquities
Ordinance No. 51 established that a landowner or finder of an antiquity had no rights or
interest in an antiquity, could not transfer or dispose of it, an d had to notify the government
of any find —giving the government the right to acquire that antiquity upon payment of an
award. The Ordinance further regulated the trade in antiquities, requiring a license to trade in
antiquities or export them.
The earliest legal provisions concerning movement of cultural objects for Lebanon
were enacted under the French Mandate. The first was Decision No. 651 (1926): a regional
135

agreement with Britain to prohibit the import of archaeological artifacts from the ar ea of the
British Mandate without proper authorization. The Regulation on Antiquities, Arrêté No. 166
(1933), was the first detailed legislation concerning the regulation of antiquities, and is still in
effect. It provides that movable antiquities discovered through licensed excavations belong
to the State, and that any antiquities discovered by chance (even on the owner’s land) be
reported to the government. Only if the government chooses not to acquire the antiquity may
the discoverer maintain possession. Finally, the export of antiquities from Lebanon has been
banned since 1988 under Ministerial Decision no. 8 dated February 6, 1988, effective since its
publication in the “official journal” February 18, 1988.
Libya
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the Ottomans —whose empire included Libya until
1911—adopted the first decrees in 1869 and 1873 regulating antiquities, including a
prohibition on any export. The 1884 Antiquities Decree expanded the definition of artifacts
to which State ownership applied, vesting ownership of all types of antiquities in the State and
prohibiting export without permission of the Imperial Museum in Istanbul. After 1911, the
area of Libya was under Italian control until the end of the Second World War, and then it
was under United Nations administration from 1943 until Libya gained its independence in
1951. While under Italian control, Libya’s cultural heritage was subject to the Italian system of
regional Superintendencies and Italy’s law of 1939, including the vesting of ownership of
antiquities in the State.
Following Italian control, Law Number 11 on Antiquities, Archaeological Sites, and
Museums (1953), Law No. 2 (1983) and Law No. 3 (1994) established protections and
136

regulation of antiquities. Both the 1953 Law and Law Number 2 of 1983 regarded the State as
the owner of record for cultural heritage resources that are older than 100 years. Law No. 2
assigns supervision of museums, relics, and documents to the Department of Antiquities.
Between 1968 and 1983, foreign archaeological expeditions were allowed to remove duplicate
pieces (that is, pieces that had a close analogue in the national collection). Foreign institutions
that acquired antiquities during this narrow time frame kept detailed records of their method
of acquisition. The 1983 Law No. 2 established definitions, including that an archaeological
object is “anything that has been made or manufactured by man and which relates to the
human heritage and can be dated back 100 or more years.” The State claimed as “public
treasure” all movable and immovable archaeological materials under or on the surface, except
for “those cultural properties recorded within private collections.” Export of antiquities was
prohibited for any purpose.
Law Number 3 of 1994 for the Protection of Antiquities, Museums, Old Cities and
Historical Buildings constitutes the current legal regulation of antiquities. Under this law,
textual and inscribed materials, such as manuscripts and other documents, need be only fifty
years old to qualify as an antiquity. Under Article 5, “All immovable and movable antiquities
and documents are considered public wealth, whether underground, on the surface, or below
regional waters.” The only exception is cultural objects already recorded with the authorities
as being in private collections under prior legislation. Anyone in possession of an antiquity
before the law came into effect was required to register it with the competent authority within
six months of this law coming into ef fect. The competent authority could choose to acquire
the antiquity or return it with a certificate of ownership. A permit is required for collecting,
137

acquiring, or disposing of antiquities. Any excavation must be licensed by the competent
authority. No la ndowner has the right to excavate to search for antiquities. Article 26 also
clarifies that the State owns all antiquities discovered through licensed excavations and all
objects in museums regardless of their age. Anyone who discovers an antiquity by chan ce or
during construction work must notify the competent authorities or the police within five days.
Owners of registered antiquities may not dispose of them in any way without first
obtaining the approval of the competent authority, which has the first r ight to purchase the
antiquity. Trade in antiquities is prohibited. Only those antiquities that were in private
possession before the law went into effect and registered with the state may be disposed of by
transferring them to the State in exchange for co mpensation. Permission of the competent
authority is required for any transfer of antiquities. It is prohibited to export documents and
“traditional crafts that have archaeological character.”
Syria
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the area that is today the Syrian Arab Republic was part
of the Ottoman Empire until the end of the First World War. The Ottoman government
enacted the Antiquities Law of 1874 decreeing that the Imperial Museum (now the
Archaeological Museum of Istanbul) receive one- third of all ar tifacts recovered through
excavations, with the remainder divided between excavator and landowner. Antiquities that
were discovered fortuitously, however, belonged to the State. The subsequent 1884 Antiquities
Law vested ownership of all antiquities in the State and prohibited export without the
permission of the Imperial Museum in Istanbul.
Following the First World War, Syria became part of the French Mandate. In 1922, the
138

League of Nations approved the Mandate, defining an antiquity as any “product of hu man
activity” that predated 1700 AD. Under the Mandate, any person who discovered an antiquity
was required to report the discovery to the government, any export of antiquities required a
license, and the government had the right of acquisition to any anti quity. Any antiquities
discovered during authorized excavations, however, could be divided between the excavator
and the government.
In 1933, the Decree Setting Forth the Regulations Governing Antiquities, enacted by
the French Mandate, applied to both Syria and Lebanon and remain in effect until Syria’s
independence in 1946. The Decree defined antiquities as any immovable or movable remains
of human activity from before 1700 AD; established that any antiquities discovered by chance
had to be reported to t he government, which had right of acquisition; and established State
ownership over movable antiquities discovered through licensed excavations —although a
portion of the finds might be handed over to an excavation team under the system of partage
(or division of finds). The Decree also regulated the sale of movable antiquities, requiring that
all dealers be authorized; that dealers register all acquisitions and sales; that antiquity could be
exported without a government -issued permit; and giving the government the right of
acquisition before any antiquity was exported.
The present law, Antiquities Law, Decree No. 222, was enacted in 1963. Defining
antiquities as “movable and immovable properties built, manufactured, produced, written or
drawn by man that date back to at least two hundred Christian years,” the 1963 law established
that “all movable and immovable antiquities, and antiquities placed in the Syrian Arab Republic
are public properties of the State.” Movable antiquities may be considered immovable if “they
139

are parts or decorations of immovable antiquities.” Movable antiquities cannot be sold or
given away, but where there are large numbers of similar objects , they may be sold or
exchanged with museums and scientific institutions through Presidential Decree. Individuals
and organizations that have collections must register any “important objects ;” movable
antiquities require governmental approval to be transfe rred; and any discoveries of movable
antiquities must be reported to the government, which has the right of acquisition. All
excavations require a permit, and any antiquities discovered are the property of the State,
although the government may give some a ntiquities to licensed excavators on the condition
that they display the artifacts in a public museum or a museum affiliated with scientific
institutions.
Law #1 of 1999 prohibited all trading in, and export of, antiquities --although export
permits may be granted for antiquities exchanged with museums and scientific associations
that have carried out official excavations.
Turkey
According to Dr. Gerstenblith, the Ottoman Empire ruled the area that today is called
Turkey until the end of the First World War. In 1874, the Ottoman government enacted its
first antiquities law, decreeing that the Imperial Museum (now the Archaeological Museum of
Istanbul) receive one-third of all artifacts recovered through excavations and that all antiquities
discovered fortuitously belonged to the State. The 1884 Antiquities Decree expanded the
definition of artifacts to which State ownership applied, vesting ownership of all types of
antiquities in the State and prohibiting export without permission of the Imperial Museum in
Istanbul. This Decree is the basis for all subsequent antiquities’ legislation in Turkey. A third
140

Ottoman law, enacted in 1906, removed the exception that allowed landowners to acquire
chance finds and established State ownership over all antiquities. After Turkey’s Independence
in 1923, State ownership of all antiquities was restated in Art. 697 of the 1926 Turkish Civil
Code—with this provision still in effect today as Art. 773 of the 2001 Turkish Civil Code.
The Antiquities Law of 1973 also maintained State ownership, but it was replaced by
1983’s Law no. 2863 on the Protection of Natural and Cultural Property of 21 July 1983. S till
in effect today, it defines “cultural property” as “movable and immovable property on the
ground, under the ground or under the water pertaining to science, culture, religion and fine
arts of before and after recorded history or that is of unique scientific and cultural value for
social life before and after recorded history.”
 The law states that “movable and immovable
cultural and natural property to be protected that is known to exist or will be discovered …
shall have the quality of state property.” This provision applies regardless of whether the
cultural property is discovered on public or private land and applies to “[a]ll kind of cultural
and natural property from geological periods, prehistory, and recorded history, having
documentary value in terms of geology, anthropology, prehistory, archaeology and art history
reflecting the social, cultural, technical and scientific characteristics and level of the period they
belong to.” Coins minted after 1839 are not subject to State ownership and may be freely
traded within Turkey.
The Ministry of Culture and Tourism has the exclusive right to excavate, and all
movable cultural property discovered through excavation must be brought to a state museum.
Similarly, the discoverer of cultural property, regardl ess of where the cultural property is
located, must notify the nearest museum or other local government authority within three days
141

of the discovery. Any antiquities not turned over to the government upon discovery belong to
the government. Cultural proper ty that does not meet the definition of property “to be
protected” and not needed to be placed in a museum may be returned but with documentation.
Movable cultural property that does meet the definition of cultural property “to be protected”
may not be taken out of the country without permission of the Council of Ministers.
Conclusion
Based on the evidence developed during the criminal investigation into Michael
Steinhardt’s acquisition, possession, and sale of antiquities, this Office has concluded that the
180 Seized Antiquities were looted and illegally smuggled out of their respective countries of
origin, thereby rendering each of the them stolen property under New York criminal law. As
a result, this Office applied for and received pursuant to New York Criminal Procedure Law
§690.10 judicially authorized warrants to seize each of the antiquities that are in the United
States. As previously discussed, 9 of 180 Seized Antiquities have not been located yet —the

Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet, Sword, and 7 objects from the Ivory Set—but will be seized
and repatriated as soon as they are found. A nd 3 of the 180 Seized Antiquities —the
Heliodorus Stele and two Neolithic Death Masks —are on loan from Steinhardt to the Israel
Museum in Jerusalem. Israeli law- enforcement authorities have been notified of the findings
of this investigation and the three antiquities are effectively seized in place. Because these three
antiquities are at the Israel Museum as part of the private, and not public, collection, each will
be transferred to the Israeli government.
Under New York Penal Law §450.10(5), therefore, the 180 Seized Antiquities must be
returned to their owner countries. People v. Museum of Modern Art (In re Grand Jury Subpoena Duces
Tecum), 9~ N.Y. 2d 729 (1999) (N.Y. Penal Law §450.10 "provides a mechanism for returning
allegedly stolen property to an owner prior to, or during the pendency of, a criminal
proceeding"). Further, N.Y. County Law §935 mandates the return of seized property to its
rightful owner: "[a]ll property delivered into the custody and held and kept by the district
attorney of the county of New York, for use as evidence or otherwise, in any criminal
investigation, action, appeal, or other proceeding, shall be returned by him to its rightful owner
upon proper demand therefore." This Office will, therefore, repatriate to each of the victim
countries their priceless cultural heritage without additional delay.
This Office has a long tradition of promoting respect for the rule of law by bringing
justice to victims of crime-no matter who they are or where they are. We are honored to
have been able to continue that tradition here.
Dated New York, New York
~JW>., ~ 2021
Cyrus Vance Jr.
District Attorney
By: '-¼ Q >,. Q 4.e>t,
Apsaraier
Antiquities Trafficking Analyst
142
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
1 Bull's Head 1 Lebanon $700,000 $12,000,000
2 Calf Bearer 2 Lebanon $2,000,000 $10,000,000
3 Sardinian Idol 3 Italy $675,000 $1,200,000
4 Togate Figure 4 Italy $800,000 $1,000,000
5 Eos Carrying Cephalus 5 Italy $100,000 $250,000
6 Bronze Pegasus 1 6 Italy $200,000 $200,000
7 Bronze Pegasus 2 6 Italy $200,000 $200,000
8 Villanova Helmet 7 Italy $180,000 $300,000
9 Terracotta Panel 1 8 Italy $435,000 $600,000
10 Terracotta Panel 2 8 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
11 Sphinx Kylix 9 Italy $310,000 $310,000
12 Berlin Painter Oinochoe 10 Italy $215,000 $500,000
13 Leagros Hydria 11 Italy $127,000 $250,000
14 Antimenes Hydria 12 Italy $169,411 $400,000
15 Attic African Head Aryballos 13 Italy $163,313 $200,000
16 Proto-Corinthian Duck 14 Italy $130,000 $200,000
17 Proto-Corinthian Owl 15 Italy $120,000 $200,000
18 Ionian Ram's Head 16 Italy $70,000 $100,000
19 Corinthian Bull’s Head 17 Italy $60,000 $80,000
20 Corinthian Lion Vessel 18 Italy $25,000 $40,000
21 Faliscan Askos 19 Italy $55,000 $75,000
22 Marble Oscillum 1 20 Italy $175,000 $400,000
23 Marble Oscillum 2 20 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
24 Marble Oscillum 3 20 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
25 Marble Oscillum 4 20 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
26 Spouted Bowl 21 Greece $500,000 $600,000
27 Apulian African Head Flask 22 Italy $130,000 $200,000
28 Italo-Corinthian Duck Vessel 23 Italy $25,000 $40,000
29 Bronze Gorgon 1 24 Italy $150,000 $250,000
30 Bronze Gorgon 2 24 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
31 Bronze Gorgon 3 24 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
32 Etruscan White-Ground Aryballos 25 Italy $55,000 $75,000
33 Geometric Oinochoe 26 Greece $23,485 $30,000
34 Figulina Plate 27 Italy $48,375 $52,000
143
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
35 Attic Black-Figure Eye Kylix 28 Italy $170,750 $350,000
36 Bronze Handle 1 29 Italy $92,500 $100,000
37 Bronze Handle 2 29 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
38 Etruscan Panel 1 30 Italy $155,000 $300,000
39 Etruscan Panel 2 30 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
40 Etruscan Panel 3 30 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
41 Etruscan Panel 4 30 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
42 Polychromed Terracotta Antefix 31 Italy $10,000 $50,000
43 Corinthian Aryballos In The Form Of A
Helmeted Head
32 Italy $5,000 $7,500
44 Attic Black-Figure Amphora 33 Italy $13,000 $20,000
45 Archaic Faience Aryballos 1 34 Italy $12,000 $20,000
46 Archaic Faience Aryballos 2 34 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
47 Faience Baboon 35 Italy $9,000 $10,000
48 Attic Black-Figure Plemochoe 36 Italy $84,083 $90,000
49 Bronze Oinochoe 37 Italy $180,000 $185,000
50 White-Ground Lekythos 38 Greece $380,000 $400,000
51 Ivory Plaque 39 Iraq $400,000 $450,000
52 Situla 40 Italy $250,000 $320,000
53 Warrior 41 Italy $320,000 $320,000
54 Rider 41 Italy Included in
above
Included in
above
55 Antelope Standard 42 Turkey $84,000 $100,000
56 Bird Rattle 1 42 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
57 Bird Rattle 2 42 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
58 Kouros 43 Greece $2,348,500 $14,000,000
59 Griffin Cauldron with Stand 44 Italy $3,000,000 $3,500,000
60 Gold Broach 45 Greece $728,000 $1,300,000
61 Minoan Hoard 1 46 Greece $92,000 $150,000
62 Minoan Hoard 2 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
63 Minoan Hoard 3 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
144
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
64 Minoan Hoard 4 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
65 Minoan Hoard 5 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
66 Minoan Hoard 6 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
67 Minoan Hoard 7 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
68 Minoan Hoard 8 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
69 Minoan Hoard 9 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
70 Minoan Hoard 10 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
71 Minoan Hoard 11 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
72 Minoan Hoard 12 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
73 Minoan Hoard 13 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
74 Minoan Hoard 14 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
75 Minoan Hoard 15 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
76 Minoan Hoard 16 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
77 Minoan Hoard 17 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
78 Minoan Hoard 18 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
79 Minoan Hoard 19 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
80 Minoan Hoard 20 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
81 Minoan Hoard 21 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
82 Minoan Hoard 22 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
83 Minoan Hoard 23 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
145
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
84 Minoan Hoard 24 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
85 Minoan Hoard 25 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
86 Minoan Hoard 26 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
87 Minoan Hoard 27 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
88 Minoan Hoard 28 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
89 Minoan Hoard 29 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
90 Minoan Hoard 30 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
91 Minoan Hoard 31 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
92 Minoan Hoard 32 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
93 Minoan Hoard 33 46 Greece Included in
above
Included in
above
94 Female Figurine 47 Turkey $499,294 $800,000
95 Gold Dress Ornament 1 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
96 Gold Dress Ornament 2 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
97 Gold Dress Ornament 3 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
98 Gold Dress Ornament 4 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
99 Gold Dress Ornament 5 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
100 Gold Dress Ornament 6 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
101 Gold Dress Ornament 7 47 Turkey Included in
above
Included in
above
102 Nude Female Statuette 48 Syria $28,000 $35,000
103 Stag's Head Rhyton 49 Turkey $2,600,000 $3,500,000
104 Syro-Hittite Idol A1989.20 50 Syria $15,000 $100,000
105 Syro-Hittite Idol A1992.12 50 Syria $9,000 $35,000
106 Syro-Hittite Idol A1992.30 50 Syria $5,000 $25,000
146
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
107 Orpheus Mosaic 51 Italy $440,000 $800,000
108 Anatolian Terracotta Idol 52 Turkey $79,610 $85,000
109 Larnax 53 Greece $575,000 $1,000,000
110 Idol 54 Greece $100,000 $100,000
111 Plate 55 Greece $15,000 $35,000
112 Kandila 56 Greece $75,000 $75,000
113 Cycladic Cup 57 Greece $20,000 $25,000
114 Cycladic Plate 58 Greece $10,000 $30,000
115 Bronze Griffin Protome 59 Greece $350,000 $400,000
116 Small Anatolian Limestone Idol 60 Turkey $47,500 $50,000
117 Carved Ivory Head (Larger) 61 Israel $25,000 $25,000
118 Carved Ivory Head (Smaller) 62 Israel $15,000 $15,000
119 Red Carnelian Sun Fish Amulet 63 Israel $6,818 $7,000
120 Cosmetic Spoon 64 Israel $6,000 $6,500
121 Pin with Hand Holding Olive Wreath 65 Israel $2,500 $3,000
122 Sword 66 Israel $30,000 $35,000
123 Ivory Set 1 67 Israel $45,000 $50,000
124 Ivory Set 2 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
125 Ivory Set 3 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
126 Ivory Set 4 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
127 Ivory Set 5 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
128 Ivory Set 6 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
129 Ivory Set 7 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
130 Ivory Set 8 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
131 Ivory Set 9 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
132 Ivory Set 10 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
133 Ivory Set 11 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
134 Ivory Set 12 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
147
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
135 Ivory Set 13 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
136 Ivory Set 14 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
137 Ivory Set 15 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
138 Ivory Set 16 67 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
139 Death Mask 1 68 Israel $400,000 $650,000
140 Death Mask 2 68 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
141 Death Mask 3 68 Israel Included in
above
Included in
above
142 Stone Skull 69 Israel $100,000 $250,000
143 Incense Burner with Ducks, Goats, and
Gazelle
70 Israel $48,000 $70,000
144 Baboon Amulet 71 Israel $6,000 $7,000
145 Heliodorus Stele 72 Israel $375,000 $435,000
146 Vase from the Pan-Athenian Games 73 Egypt $300,000 $300,000
147 Gold Mask 74 Israel $100,000 $250,000
148 Gold Mask 74 Israel $100,000 $250,000
149 Neolithic Mask A1991.23a 75 Israel Unknown $250,000
150 Neolithic Mask A1991.23b 75 Israel Unknown $100,000
151 Neolithic Mask A1991.23d 75 Israel Unknown $600,000
152 Neolithic Mask A1991.23e 75 Israel Unknown $1,000,000
153 Neolithic Mask A1991.23f 75 Israel Unknown $600,000
154 Neolithic Bull 1 76 Jordan $375,000 $500,000
155 Neolithic Bull 2 76 Jordan Included in
above
Included in
above
156 Neolithic Bull 3 76 Jordan Included in
above
Included in
above
157 Neolithic Bull 4 76 Jordan Included in
above
Included in
above
158 Neolithic Female 77 Israel Unknown $100,000
159 Teracotta Temple 1 78 Israel $2,000 $25,000
160 Teracotta Temple 2 78 Israel $2,000 $20,000
161 Teracotta Temple 3 78 Israel $2,000 $10,000
162 Chalcolithic Altar 79 Jordan $10,000 $30,000
163 Tel El-Yahudiyeh Beer Strainer 80 Egypt $5,000 $20,000
164 Tombstone from Zoar 1 81 Jordan $20,000 $30,000
148
Attachment A
Included in above = priced as group
Piece
#
Name Exhibit
#
Country Purchase Price Current Value
165 Tombstone from Zoar 2 81 Jordan $20,000 $30,000
166 Astarte 82 Jordan $15,000 $20,000
167 Bronze Pitcher with Snake Shaped
Handle
83 Jordan $15,000 $20,000
168 Statue of a Winged Human 84 Egypt $25,000 $30,000
169 Ivory Carving 85 Egypt Unknown $350,000
170 Egyptian Hoard 1 86 Egypt $70,000 $150,000
171 Egyptian Hoard 2 86 Egypt Included in
above
Included in
above
172 Egyptian Hoard 3 86 Egypt Included in
above
Included in
above
173 Egyptian Hoard 4 86 Egypt Included in
above
Included in
above
174 Egyptian Hoard 5 86 Egypt Included in
above
Included in
above
175 Ercolano Fresco 87 Italy $650,000 $1,000,000
176 Glass Oinochoe 88 Greece $433,500 $850,000
177 Statue of a Woman 89 Greece $650,000 $1,300,000
178 Veiled Head of a Female 90 Libya $1,200,000 $1,200,000
179 Gold Bowl 91 Iraq $150,000 $200,000
180 Helmet 92 Bulgaria $175,000 $200,000
$26,422,639 $69,508,000
149
Attachment B
150

1. Anne-Marie Afeiche (Lebanon), Former Director General at the General Council
of Museums within Lebanon’s Ministry of Culture. Ms. Afeiche is an expert in Lebanese
antiquities, museum professional, and the former Editor-in-Chief of Bulletin d’Archéologie et
d’Architecture Libanaise. In 1999, she supervised the reopening of the National Museum of Beirut.
In this role, Ms. Afeiche compiled dossiers on the illicit market for Lebanese antiquities.
2. Shaaban Abdel Gawad (Egypt), Director General of the Repatriation of Antiquities
Department within Egypt’s Ministry of Antiquities. Mr. Abdel Gawad directs Egypt’s efforts to
identify, analyze, and recover stolen Egyptian antiquities . In this role, Mr. Abdel Gawad has
examined numerous real (and forged) Egyptian export permits.
3. Dr. Amr Al-Azm (Syria) , Professor of Middle East History and Anthropology at
Shawnee State University. Dr. Al-Azm holds a Ph.D. in Archaeology from University College
London. Dr. Al-Azm directs the Antiquities Trafficking and Heritage Anthropology Research
(ATHAR) Project, an investigative initiative focused on the intersection of antiquities and
transnational trafficking, terrorism financing, and organized crime. An expert in Syrian cultural
heritage, Dr. Al-Azm has excavated numerous archaeological sites in Syria.
4. Lynda Albertson (Italy), Chief Executive Officer of the Association for Research
into Crimes against Art (ARCA). Ms. Albertson directs ARCA, an initiative to promote the
study and research of art crime and cultural heritage protection. In this role, Ms. Albertson
compiles dossiers on international trafficking networks and liaises with law enforcement
globally.
5. Dr. Lindsey Allen (Iran), Lecturer in Greek and Near Eastern History at the
Department of Classics, Kings College London. Dr. Allen holds a Ph.D. from University
Attachment B
151

College London and has held research fellowships at Wolfson College (Oxford) and the
Warburg Institute. Dr. Allen is an expert in the history of the ancient Near East, especially the
Achaemenid Persian empire and pre-Islamic Iran.
6. Dr. Holger Baitinger (Bulgaria), Scientific Assistant at the Römisch-Germanisches
Zentralmuseum (RGZM). Dr. Baitinger holds a Ph.D. from Ludwig Maximilians University. Dr.
Baitinger is an expert on Mediterranean metallurgy and weaponry. Dr. Baitinger has particular
expertise with material originating from Bulgaria, Italy, Greece, and Turkey.
7. Morgan Belzic (Libya), Researcher at the Institut National D’Histoire de l’Art. An
expert in Libyan archaeology, Mr. Belzic participated in the French archaeological missions in
Libya and works closely with the Libya Department of Antiquities to identify looted Libyan
objects on the international art market.
8. Stephane Blumel (France), Officer at the Office Central de Lutte Contre le Trafic
des Biens Culturels ( OCBC), or Office for Combating Cultural Property Trafficking , in the
French National Police. Officer Blumel directs investigative efforts on antiquities networks in
France, to include law-enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
9. Zeynep Boz (Turkey), Head of Combatting Illici t Trafficking Department within
Turkey’s Ministry of Culture and Tourism. In her role, Ms. Boz documents illicit excavations in
Turkey, identifies Turkish antiquities trafficked abroad, and coordinates the appropriate law -
enforcement authorities to prevent the trafficking of antiquities.
10. Dr. Silvia Cecchi (Italy), Deputy Public Prosecutor of Pesaro, Italy. Dr. Cecchi has
been involved in numerous cases involving Italian cultural heritage trafficked abroad, to include
the legal proceedings regarding the statue of a “Victorious Youth” at the Getty Museum.
Attachment B
152

11. Sandy Cobden (USA), Former Senior Vice President and General Counsel, Dispute
Resolution & Legal Public Affairs at Christie’s New York. In her prior role at Christie’s, Ms.
Cobden shaped the policies and practices on art-related matters and cultural property issues and
served as Christie’s liaison with law-enforcement.
12. Lorenzo D’Ascia (Italy), Director of the Legislative Office within Italy’s Ministry of
Culture. A lawyer with Italy’s State Attorney General, Mr. D’Ascia presides over Italy's
Committee for the Return of Cultural Assets. Mr. D’Ascia has been involved with litigation and
negotiations concerning repatriations of Italian antiquities from museums across the globe.
13. Terressa Davis (Greece and Italy) , Executive Director of the Antiquities
Coalition. Ms. Davis is admitted to the New York State Bar 3rd Department and holds a J.D.
from the University of Georgia and prior degree in archaeology from Boston University. An
expert on cultural property issues, Ms. Davis has conducted extensive legal research on cultural
property laws for Italy and Greece.
14. Dr. Vincenzo d’Ercole (Italy) , Archaeologist at Italy’s Ministry of Culture’s
Directorate of Archaeology. Since 1979, Dr. d’Ercole has worked at the Ministry of Culture and
has coordinated with the Carabinieri during on -going investigations involving looted Italian
antiquities. Dr. d’Ercole has also supervised numerous excavations in Abruzzo and southern
Etruria in central Italy.
15. Brenton Easter (USA), Special Agent with Department of Homeland Security,
Homeland Security Investigations (DHS-HSI). An agent with DHS -HSI since 2002, Special
Agent Easter has investigated the interstate sale and transportation of stolen cultural property,
the smuggling of contraband, and art fraud. As a Special Agent, he has led or joined teams of
Attachment B
153

agents in the execution of hundreds of judicially-authorized search and arrest warrants seeking
the arrest of individuals and recovery of evidence.
16. Sarkis el -Khoury (Lebanon), Director- General of the Directorate General of
Antiquities within Lebanon’s Ministry of Culture. As the Director-General of Antiquities, Mr. el-
Khoury is responsible for the protection of Lebanon’s cultural heritage sites as well as its
moveable heritage, such as antiquities. In this role, Mr. el-Khoury maintains registers of Lebanese
archaeological sites and antiquities.
17. Paolo Giorgio Ferri (Italy) , Former Deputy Public Prosecutor in the Public
Prosecutor’s Office in Rome and Special Advisor to the Director- General of ICCROM. A
graduate of Sapienza University in 1977, Mr. Ferri became a magistrate before joining the Public
Prosecutor's Office in Rome where he led Italy’s efforts to prosecute networks of illicit antiquities
trafficking. Mr. Ferri led the prosecution of Giacomo Medici, Giovanni Franco Becchina, and
other notable Italian traffickers. By the end of his career Mr. Ferri had identified more than 47
museums that possessed illicit Italian antiquities. Mr. Ferri passed away on June 14, 2020.
18. Dr. Patty Gerstenblith (Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Libya, Lebanon, Syria,
and Turkey) , Distinguished Professor at DePaul University College of Law and Faculty
Director of the Center for Art, Museum and Cultural Heritage Law. Dr. Gerstenblith holds a
Ph.D. in Fine Arts and Anthropology from Harvard University, and a JD from Northwestern
University. As the author of the widely-published Art, Cultural Heritage and the Law casebook,
Dr. Gerstenblith lectures on the international trade in art, particularly antiquities, and the
protection of cultural heritage during armed conflict.
19. Christopher Foulkes (USA), Program Manager of the Antiquities Unit within U.S.
Attachment B
154

Customs and Border Protection. An officer with U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Officer
Foulkes monitors all objects entering (or departing from) the United States with a focus on art
and antiquities. In this role, Office r Foulkes is responsible for notifying appropriate law-
enforcement authorities whenever objects possess improper customs paperwork or reflect other
violations arising from the entry (or departure) of stolen property.
20. Ilan Hadad (Israel), National Inspector for Antiquities Trading of the Antiquities
Theft Prevention Unit within the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA). As the head of the
Antiquities Theft Prevention Unit, Mr. Hadad is responsible for investigating cases of looted
Israeli antiquities, conducting witness interviews, and engaging in counter-trafficking efforts.
21. Dr. Monica Hanna (Egypt ), Egyptologist and Dean of the College of
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage at the Arab Academy of Science, Technology, and
Maritime Transport. Dr. Hanna holds a Ph.D. from the University of Pisa. A n expert in
Egyptology, Dr. Hanna founded Egypt’s Heritage Task Force, which documents the
destruction of cultural heritage across Egypt.
22. Sophie Hayes (United Kingdom), Detective Constable in the Art and Antiquities
Squad of the London Metropolitan Police, formally New Scotland Yard. Detective Constable
Hayes investigates stolen cultural property in the United Kingdom, to include conducting law-
enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
23. Stefan Holz (Germany) , Head of the Art and Cultural Property Crime of
Germany’s Federal Criminal Police Office in Stuttgart. Mr. Holz investigates stolen cultural
property in Germany, to include conducting law-enforcement activity involving targets of this
Office.
Attachment B
155

24. Tom Jackson (United Kingdom), Detective Constable in the Art and Antiquities
Squad of the London Metropolitan Police, formally New Scotland Yard. Detective Constable
Jackson investigates stolen cultural property in the United Kingdom, to include conducting law-
enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
25. Silvelie Karfeld (Germany), Officer in the Art and Cultural Property Crime of
Germany’s Federal Criminal Police Office. Ms. Karfeld investigates stolen cultural property in
Germany, to include conducting law-enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
26. Dr. Ibrahim Kawkabani (Lebanon), Former Head of the Excavation Department
at the Directorate General of Antiquities within Lebanon’s Ministry of Culture. Dr. Kawkabani
holds a Ph.D. in archaeology from the Sorbonne in Paris. From 1985 to 2002, Dr. Kawkabani
was a Professor of Archaeology at Lebanese U niversity. During his tenure as Head of the
Excavation Department, Dr. Kawkabani was responsible for the transportation of antiquities
excavated at Eshmun to the Jubayl/Byblos Citadel.
27. Dr. Eitan Klein (Israel), Deputy Director of the Theft Prevention Unit within the
Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA). Dr. Klein holds a Ph.D. in the Land of Israel Studies and
Archaeology from Ban -Ilan University. An experienced archaeologist with a specialty in the
Judean Foothills, Dr. Klein oversees the IAA’s efforts to prevent antiquities trafficking by
patrolling areas across Israel, maintaining inventory registers of licensed dealers of antiquities,
and conducting investigations into trafficked Israeli antiquities.
28. Ghattas Khoury (Lebanon), Former Minister of Culture of the Lebanese Republic.
A distinguished surgeon and politician , Mr. Khoury served as a Member of Parliament in
Lebanon before being selected to lead the Ministry of Culture in 2016. From 2016 -2019, Mr.
Attachment B
156

Khoury was responsible for overseeing Lebanon’s heritage, antiquities, arts, literature, cultural
industries and management of cultural and historical property.
29. Dr. Elena Korka (Greece), Director General of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage
of the Hellenic Ministry of Culture and Sports. Dr. Korka holds a Ph .D. from the National
Kapodistrian University of Athens. An expert in Greek antiquities, Dr. Korka has extensive
excavation experience at sites across Greece and has extensively researched the illicit removal
of Greek cultural heritage.
30. William Korner (United Kingdom), Former Manager of International Art Fairs at
the Art Loss Register. In his role at the Art Loss Register, Mr. Korner advised national and
international stakeholders of cultural property legislation and routinely liaised with international
law-enforcement authorities on investigations concerning stolen cultural property.
31. Jürgen Kühlmeyer (Germany), Chief Officer in the Art Crime Unit of Germany’s
Federal Criminal Police Office in Wiesbaden. Mr. Kühlmeyer investigates stolen cultural
property in Germany, to include conducting law-enforcement activity involving targets of this
Office.
32. John Paul Labbat (USA), Special Agent with Department of Homeland Security,
Homeland Security Investigations (DHS-HSI). An agent with DHS -HSI or its predecessor
agencies since 1997, Special Agent Labbat investigates the interstate sale and transportation of
stolen cultural property, the smuggling of contraband, and art fraud. As a Special Agent, he has
led or joined teams of agents in the execution of hundreds of judicially -authorized search and
arrest warrants seeking the arrest of individuals and recovery of evidence. Special Agent Labbat
serves as the lead agent on the Steinhardt investigation.
Attachment B
157

33. Ahmad Lash (Jordan) , Former Head of the Archaeological Loans Sector in the
Excavation and Survey Directorate within Jordan’s Department of Antiquities. An expert in
Jordanian archaeology, Mr. Lash has conducted excavations at the sites of Al -Azraq, Amra,
Tuba, Mushatta and Qastal in Jordan. Mr. Lash also leads MEGA Jordan, an initiative to
inventory and track Jordanian archaeological sites nationwide.
34. Tina Lenz (Germany), Officer in the Art Crime Unit within Germany’s Federal
Criminal Police Office in Wiesbaden. Mr. Kühlmeyer investigates stolen cultural property in
Germany, to include conducting law-enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
35. Robert Mancene (USA), Special Agent with Department of Homeland Security,
Homeland Security Investigations (DHS-HSI). An agent with DHS -HSI or its predecessor
agencies since 1994, Special Agent Mancene investigates the interstate sale and transportation of
stolen cultural property, the smuggling of contraband, and art fraud. As a Special Agent, he has
led or joined teams of agents in the execution of hundreds of judicially -authorized search and
arrest warrants seeking the arrest of individuals and recovery of evidence. Special Agent Mancene
serves as the lead agent on the Almagià investigation.
36. Fadwa Manea (Iraq), Third Secretary at the Embassy of the Republic of Iraq (Legal
and Cultural Affairs). Consul Manea coordinates with Iraqi governmental agencies on cultural
heritage policy and facilitates the examination of Iraqi antiquities by experts. As a liaison between
the Iraqi Ministry of Culture and foreign law-enforcement, Consul Mena also serves to support
on-going law-enforcement efforts related to antiquities trafficking.
37. Marcel Marée (England), Assistant Keeper at the Department of Ancient Egypt &
Sudan at the British Museum. Mr. Marée is an expert in Egyptian art and social history and has
Attachment B
158

conducted fieldwork in Edfu and Elkab in Upper Egypt. As the Director of the British Museum’s
“Circulating Artifacts” (CirArt) initiative, Mr. Marée works to combat the illicit trade in Egyptian
antiquities.
38. Moshe Mizrachi (Israel), Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) Attaché in Israel.
Mr. Mizrachi supports HSI efforts in Israel, to include supplying translations, collecting and
transmitting documents, and liaising between local law-enforcement and U.S. authorities.
39. Dr. Sara Neri (Italy), Archeologist Italy’s Ministry of Culture. Dr. Neri holds a
Ph.D. with a specialty in Etruscan archaeology. Dr. Neri works at the Ministry of Culture and
coordinates with the Carabinieri during on -going investigations involving looted Italian
antiquities.
40. Dr. Aktham Oweidi (Jordan), Director of Excavations and Surveys within Jordan’s
Department of Antiquities. Since 1994, Dr. Oweidi has worked within Jordan’s Department of
Antiquities and conducted extensive research on Jordanian archaeological sites. In his current
role at the Department of Anti quities, Dr. Oweidi has examined numerous real ( and forged)
Jordanian export permits.
41. Georgi Ovcharov (Bulgaria), First Secretary, Police Liaison and Representative of
Bulgaria’s Ministry of the Interior to the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Mr. Ovcharov is an
expert in drug trafficking, transnational criminal networks, and international security issues. Since
2002, Mr. Ovcharov has held various positions within the Organized Crime Directorate, where
he serves as the liaison between Bulgarian police and foreign law-enforcement.
42. Burcu Özdemir (Turkey), Chief of the Unit for Combating the Illicit Trafficking
of Cultural Property within the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey.
Attachment B
159

Ms. Özdemir is an expert in cultural heritage and tourism, having held key roles in UNESCO’s
World Heritage Center since 2014 . As the Chief of the Unit for Combatting the Illicit
Trafficking of Cultural Property, Ms. Özdemir leads Turkey’s efforts to combat the illicit
trafficking of antiquities.
43. Maurizio Pellegrini (Italy), Former Director of the Department of Archeology
within Italy’s Ministry of Culture. From 1975 to 1980, Pellegrini worked as a photojournalist, and
was the sole Italian photojournalist present during the 1979 Iranian revolution. Pellegrini later
assisted the Cultural Property Circulation Office of the Southern Etruria Superintendence,
serving as a consultant on the illicit market for antiquities for the Rome Prosecutor Office.
44. Dr. Federica Pitzalis (Italy) , Archeologist with Italy’s Ministry of Culture. She
holds a Ph.D. in Archaeology from the Sapienza University of Rome with a focus on Etruscan
antiquities. Dr. Pitzalis works at the Ministry of Culture and coordinates with the Carabinieri
during on-going investigations involving looted Italian antiquities.
45. Nicole Pogantke (Germany) , Art and Cultural Property Crime of the Federal
Criminal Police Office in Germany. Ms. Pogantke investigates stolen cultural property in
Germany, to include conducting law-enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
46. Dr. Stefano Pracchia (Italy) , Archeologist with the Italian Ministry of Culture.
Dr. Pracchia has conducted fieldwork around the globe, including at Mehgarh sites in Pakistan,
as an affiliate of the Italian Institute for the Middle and Far East (IsMEO). Dr. Pracchia works
at the Ministry of Culture and coordinates with the Carabinieri during on-going investigations
involving looted Italian antiquities.
47. Angelo Ragusa (Italy), Highly decorated Warrant Officer (“WO”) of the Rome
Attachment B
160

Office of the Archaeological Section of the Carabinieri Tutela Patrimonio Culturale. Since 1991,
WO Ragusa has participated in many raids resulting in the recovery of thousands of Italian
antiquities. WO Ragusa has also participated in several joint-investigations with this Office,
including working with Colonel Bogdanos during the Iraq Museum investigation.
48. James Ratcliffe (United Kingdom), General Counsel and Director of Recoveries
at the Art Loss Register (ALR). Mr. Ratcliffe holds an M.Sc. in archaeology from the University
of Oxford as well as a Graduate Diploma in Law. In his role at the ALR, Mr. Ratcliffe leads the
ALR’s efforts document and recover stolen and looted art and antiquities.
49. Dr. Daniela Rizzo (Italy) , Former Director o f the Ufficio Sequestri e Scavi
Clandestini (Seizures and Clandestine Excavations Office) within Italy’s Ministry of Culture. As
an expert in numerous Italian criminal proceedings into Italian antiquities traffickers, Dr. Rizzo
provided her expert opinion on the thousands of Italian archaeological objects recovered during
the investigations into Giacomo Medici, Robert Hecht, Gianfranco Becchina, Fritz Burki, Marion
True, and Edoardo Almagià.
50. Dr. Brian Rose (Syria and Turkey), Professor of Archaeology at the University of
Pennsylvania and Curator-in-Charge (Mediterranean Section) at the University of Pennsylvania
Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Dr. Rose holds a Ph.D. in art history and
archaeology from Columbia University. Dr. Rose currently directs the archeological excavations
at the ancient sites of Troy and Gordion in present-day Turkey, and has written extensively on
Roman art and archeology in the Mediterranean and the Middle East (editing over 19 volumes
on the results of the Troy excavations) . For more than a decade, Dr. Rose provided pre -
deployment training for U.S. armed-forces personnel bound for Iraq and Afghanistan to
Attachment B
161

emphasize cultural heritage awareness and protection.
51. Dr. Houmam Saad (Syria) , Project Manager for the Directorate General of
Antiquities and Museums within Syria’s Ministry of Culture. Dr. Saad is an expert in Syrian
and Near Eastern archeology with a focus on Palmyra . In his role at the Ministry of Culture,
Dr. Saad leads the Anti-Smuggling Bureau and tracks looted pieces in cooperation with law-
enforcement domestically and abroad.
52. Dr. Isber Sabrine (Syria), Chair and co-founder of Heritage for Peace. Dr. Sabrine
holds a Ph.D. in cultural heritage management from the Uni versity of Girona. Dr. Sabrine is
an expert in heritage management , with expertise in the management of Syrian and Iraqi
cultural heritage during periods of conflict . In his role at Heritage for Peace, Dr. Sabrine
oversees capacity-building, training, and awareness-raising efforts to protect cultural heritage.
53. Laure Salloum (Lebanon), Senior Archaeologist with the Directorate General of
Antiquities within Lebanon’s Ministry of Culture. Ms. Salloum works at the Ministry of Culture
and has particular expertise on the Northern Bekaa Valley.
54. Dr. Emiline Smith (Hong Kong), Lecturer in Criminology, University of Glasgow.
Dr. Smith holds a Ph.D. in criminology from the University of Glasgow and an M.A. in public
archaeology from University College London . An expert in the illicit trafficking of cultural
property, Dr. Smith has conducted extensive field research in Hong Kong, China, Indonesia,
Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal and Singapore and has particular expertise on the use of free ports in
facilitating the illicit trade.
55. Dr. Rolf Stucky (Lebanon), Former Head of the Department of Classical
Archaeology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. Dr. Stucky holds a Ph.D. from the
Attachment B
162

University of Bern and has conducted numerous excavations in Syria and Lebanon. A member
of the Swiss Academy of Sciences and the Humanities, Dr. Stucky is an expert in archaeology of
the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region.
56. Ray Swann ( United Kingdom), Detective Constable in the Art and Antiquities
Squad of the London Metropolitan Police, formally New Scotland Yard. Detective Constable
Swann investigates stolen cultural property in the United Kingdom, to include conducting law-
enforcement activity involving targets of this Office.
57. Dr. Christos Tsirogiannis (Greece, Italy) , Associate Professor at the Aarhus
Institute of Advanced Studies. Dr. Tsirogiannis holds a Ph.D. in archaeology from the University
of Cambridge. Dr. Tsirogiannis has assisted Greek law -enforcement with its investigation of
Becchina, Medici, and Symes and participated in the raid of the Symes villa at Schinoussa. Dr.
Tsirogiannis works with law-enforcement globally to identify looted antiquities.
58. Dr. Elena Vlachogianni (Greece), Head of the Department of Documentation and
Protection of Cultural Goods within the Hellenic Ministry of Culture and Sports. Dr.
Vlachogianni holds a Ph.D. in classical archaeology from the University of Athens. Dr.
Vlachogianni is an expert of Greek statues, epigraphy, and pottery. In her role at the Ministry of
Culture and Sports, she works with Greek law-enforcement authorities to identify, track, and
combat the smuggling of Greek antiquities.
59. Ahmed Utaifa (Iraq) , Officer in Charge of Cultural Affairs within the Embassy
of the Republic of Iraq. In this role, Mr. Utaifa is familiar with Iraq’s cultural heritage laws and
procedures for investigating and repatriating stolen Iraqi antiquities. Mr. Utaifa holds a BA in
English Literature from the College of Arts of Baghdad University and worked for over a
Attachment B
163

decade in the areas of cultural affairs, diplomatic services, and language training for the Iraqi
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
60. Dr. Donna Yates (England) , Associate Professor of Criminology and Criminal
Law at the University of Maastricht. Dr. Yates holds a Ph.D. in archaeology from the
University of Cambridge. Dr. Yates lectures internationally and publishes widely on the illicit
antiquities trade, criminology, and the protection of cultural heritage globally.
61. Dr. Maria Yordanova (Bulgaria) , Senior Fellow at the Law Program of the
Center for the Study of Democracy, a European public policy institute based in Sofia, Bulgaria.
She holds a Ph. D. in Law from S ofia University St. Kliment Ohridski . Dr. Yordanova is an
expert in analyzing and drafting legislation and has coordinated a number of European
projects regarding human rights and international security.
62. Hind Younes (Lebanon). Archaeologist with the Directorate General of
Antiquities within Lebanon’s Ministry of Culture. Ms. Younes works at the Ministry of
Culture and coordinates with the law-enforcement authorities during on-going investigations
involving looted Lebanese antiquities.
63. Dr. Candemir Zorog lu (Turkey), Former Specialist with the Department of
Combating Illicit Trafficking within Turkey’s Ministry of Culture and Tourism. Dr. Zoroglu
holds a Ph.D. from Ankara University and is an expert in the illicit trafficking of cultural
heritage. In his role at the Ministry, Dr. Zoroglu supported efforts to combat illicit trafficking
with workshops, research, and other awareness initiatives.
