SOURCE_URL: https://steinhardtfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/contact_autumn_2007.pdf

AUTUMN 2007 3
W
hen we consider the state of Jew-
ish supplementary education, it is
difficult to suppress a profound
sense of disappointment. Images abound of
listless classrooms, unprepared teachers and
students who would prefer to be anywhere
but in a school setting. In certain ways, a dis-
mal afternoon school experience probably
does more harm for future Jewish identity
than no education at all.
Afternoon schools face an uphill battle
from the start. Parents are well aware that
their children resent being in classrooms
while their peers are out having fun. But
instead of taking an active role in their chil-
dren’s performance, they ignore it. In con-
trast to their much-lauded devotion to their
children’s progress in secular school, parents
show little interest in afternoon school per-
formance. They rarely discuss what their
children are learning, fail to monitor their
children’s progress, and turn a blind eye to
the quality of the afternoon school. It should
be no surprise that their children follow suit.
Then, of course, there is the often
shoddy quality of teaching. It has always
been difficult to get superior pedagogy in an
institution that invariably offers only part-
time employment, and it’s hard to see how
that can change without drastic measures.
Perhaps this is why for so many Ameri-
can Jews, afternoon school is not a launching
pad for future Jewish enrichment, but merely
a way station towards assimilation. For this
reason, many parents have given up on after-
noon schools completely . This would not be
a problem if the day school movement were
more popular and pervasive. But the fact that
only about three percent of non-Orthodox
Jewish children attend day schools leaves us
with little option: It is supplementary
schools or nothing.
If there is any chance to revitalize the
institution, we must rethink the way we
approach supplementary school education.
First, although Bar and Bat Mitzvahs have
become significant rites of passage for most
American Jews, the tendency of synagogue
schools to concentrate on these ceremonies
has made the age of 13 the endpoint of Jew-
ish engagement. Part of the problem is that
Bar/Bat Mitzvah education focuses on rote
memorization as opposed to Jewish teaching
and values. For so many , the ceremony has
become a final exam that requires tedious
work but that ultimately signifies a gradua-
tion from Jewish life. Meanwhile, increas-
ingly ostentatious Bar and Bat Mitzvah
parties have turned the milestone into gaudy
bacchanalia devoid of Jewish reflection.
As Bar/Bat Mitzvahs occur in the syna-
gogue, it is understandable that synagogue-
based supplementary schools focus on these
rites of passage. But that does not make it
right. Our curricula need to be reoriented
away from these ceremonies and towards the
larger narrative of our shared history and val-
ues — something I have termed “Common
Judaism.”
Second, we should employ the successes
of informal education to supplementary edu-
cation. If we identify what makes camping so
appealing where afternoon schools have
failed, we might have a chance of invigorat-
ing our schools. Camps succeed because they
foster camaraderie, they infuse joy in Jewish
experience and they offer a broad range of
activities informed but not defined by Jewish
teachings. Unlike afternoon schools, camps
are guided by the energy and dynamism of
their young learners. Overall, the holistic
Jewish environment of camps has a profound
effect on campers’ future identification as
Jews. It is time afternoon schools began to
emulate the success of camps.
Schools might experiment with offering
classes at more appealing times. But even
more important, it’s time to look into non-
classroom settings. After all, isn’t one of the
virtues of camp that it takes place outside the
typical venues of learning? This should be all
the more pertinent to afternoon schools,
which convene after students have spent
entire days in cramped desks underneath flu-
orescent lights. Indeed, the Bar/Bat Mitzvah
issue is symptomatic of a larger problem:
supplementary education has been inextrica-
bly connected to the synagogue, which for so
many in the community has become a dying
vessel. We need to get Jewish education out
of the synagogue if it is to have a hope of
revival.
Why don’t we educate our children in
family homes? This would compel parents to
take a greater interest and investment in their
children’s Jewish future. Instead of dropping
their kids off at the prisons of today’s syna-
gogue schools, they would open their homes
to teachers and young learners in their neigh-
borhoods. This approach to Jewish education
would bring families together in the kind of
grass roots community building that is the
key to a vibrant Jewish future.
Convening in family homes is just one
proposal; there are doubtless many more
ideas we should explore in an effort to revi-
talize the ways we teach our young. The
main issue is clear: Decades of afternoon
schooling are partly responsible for wide-
spread Jewish apathy . We no longer have the
luxury of inaction. Only by breaking with
current failed methods of supplementary
education will these schools have a hope of
survival. At stake is not simply a system of
education but the minds, identities and spir-
its of the next generation of Jews.
Rethinking
Supplementary
Education
by MICHAEL H. STEINHARDT
Michael H. Steinhardt is Chairman of The Stein-
hardt Foundation for Jewish Life.
